
Praise for [digital] Modeling
“This book does a great job of covering the many aspects of digital modeling. William explains 
everything in detail with full-color references and pictures. What I found most useful was his  
explanations for why he performed specific modeling tasks. This is the first book that I have read  
on 3D modeling that isn’t just a rehash of what I can find in a software manual. I’d highly recom-
mend this book to not only modelers, but also anyone looking to improve their understanding of 
production pipelines.”
—Brian Arndt, BioWare
“William’s skill as a 3d modeler is legendary. His passion for teaching and abilities are just as well 
known. The combination of his knowledge of the art of modeling, and his clear and patient style  
of teaching make this book a “must have” for anyone, regardless of their current skill level.”
—Jack “Deuce” Bennett II, owner, Creative Imagineering, Inc.
“William is an amazing teacher and one of the best designer/modelers I have ever met. His digital 
modeling book is just another in a long list of gifts from the master.”
—Nicholas Boughen, owner, CG-Masters.com
“In his trademark natural writing style, William concisely explains not only how to model but also 
how to think and solve problems like a professional. This book is an absolute must-have for those 
who wish to get a solid understanding of the digital modeling process.”
—Alan Chan, Digital Domain
“You’d be hard pressed to find a more talented or prolific artist in the industry today. William is one  
of a truly rare breed: someone who can both do the work and teach it to others. His methods have 
shaped my own practices in countless ways. I’ve learned a great deal from William, and so will you!”
—Jarrod Davis, Emmy Award–winning VFX artist
“Think of this book as THE BIBLE—not just for digital modeling but for applying a fun, profes-
sional attitude towards a career in the digital arts. I don’t think you can get a clearer picture of  
what is expected of a digital artist in a production environment than what is shared in this glorious 
tome. But don’t just take my word for it... really, you should stop reading my quote and get to page 
one already.”
—David A. Maldonado, Deluxe Digital

“With his industry insights, thorough explanations and relevant examples, William’s new book,  
[digital] Modeling, is required reading not only for those new to the industry but veterans who’ve 
come to rely on just a small subset of available tools and techniques as well.”
—Chris O’Riley, V|4 Digital
“William Vaughan is not teaching techniques as much as he is teaching the necessary mindset one 
must have for success as a digital modeler. Having been a student of William’s, in my opinion this 
book is the best learning experience possible aside from sitting in on one of his classes. From the 
very first page it is clear that his experience and passion for his craft are the driving forces behind 
this amazing book.”
—Kurt Smith, Pixomondo
“William Vaughan has the rare ability to share his in-depth knowledge of 3D modeling and the 
CG industry with others in an easy to digest way. He has trained hundreds of artists working in 
the industry and has influenced the way I approach modeling. This book is a must-read for anyone 
interested in creating digital models.”
—Ron Thornton, award-winning VFX/CG Leader and recognized industry pioneer
“I’ve had the privilege of working with William for over a decade at many training events. His ability 
to explain difficult concepts in a simple, precise manner regarding the concepts of 3D modeling and 
animation is rare and exceptional. His insight and explanation of methodology to me over the years 
has been invaluable, and this modeling guide pulls it all into one amazing resource.”
—Graham Toms, 3D educational specialist, NewTek
“Truly William Vaughan has a passion for teaching and shares that passion within the pages of this 
book. He is one of the best teachers I have had and I’m excited that he’s able to share his modeling 
knowledge outside the boundaries of a single classroom.”
—April Warren, Digital Domain

[
d
i
g
i
t
a
l
]
Modeling
William Vaughan

[digital] Modeling
William Vaughan
New Riders
1249 Eighth Street
Berkeley, CA 94710
(510) 524-2178
Fax: (510) 524-2221
Find us on the Web at www.newriders.com
To report errors, please send a note to errata@peachpit.com
New Riders is an imprint of Peachpit, a division of Pearson Education
Copyright © 2012 Pearson Education, Inc.
Senior Editor: Karyn Johnson
Developmental Editor: Corbin Collins
Copy Editor: Anne Marie Walker
Production Editor: Lisa Brazieal and Katerina Malone
Composition: WolfsonDesign
Proofreader: Roxanna Aliaga
Indexer: Emily Glossbrenner
Interior Design: Maureen Forys, Happenstance Type-O-Rama
Cover design: Aren Straiger
Cover Image: William Vaughan
Notice of Rights
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form by any  
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written  
permission of the publisher. For information on getting permission for reprints and excerpts,  
contact permissions@peachpit.com. See the next page for image credits.
Notice of Liability 
The information in this book is distributed on an “As Is” basis, without warranty. While every  
precaution has been taken in the preparation of the book, neither the author nor Peachpit shall  
have any liability to any person or entity with respect to any loss or damage caused or alleged to  
be caused directly or indirectly by the instructions contained in this book or by the computer  
software and hardware products described in it.
Trademarks 
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed 
as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book, and Peachpit was aware of a trademark 
claim, the designations appear as requested by the owner of the trademark. All other product names 
and services identified throughout this book are used in editorial fashion only and for the benefit of 
such companies with no intention of infringement of the trademark. No such use, or the use of any 
trade name, is intended to convey endorsement or other affiliation with this book.
ISBN-13: 978-0-321-70089-6
ISBN-10: 978-0-321-70089-9
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Printed and bound in the United States of America

Image Credits
Figure 1.1a used courtesy of Chris Patchell. All rights reserved.
Figures 1.2a, 9.6, and 15.11 used courtesy of Joe Zeff Design at Splashlight. All rights reserved.
Figures 1.2b, 1.2d, 2.9, and Chapter 5 opening spread image used courtesy of Worldwide Biggies. 
All rights reserved.
Figures 1.3 and 15.5a–b used courtesy of Bruce Branit. All rights reserved.
Figures 2.1 and 2.21 used courtesy of Inhance Digital. Photo by Johan Lefkowitzz. All rights 
reserved.
Figure 2.4a used courtesy of Alan Chan. Photo by Dan Katzenberger. All rights reserved.
Figures 2.4b–c used courtesy of Alan Chan. All rights reserved.
Figure 2.6b used courtesy of Rocco Tartamella. All rights reserved.
Figures 2.7 and 2.8 used courtesy of Kory Heinzen. All rights reserved.
Figures 2.13 and 2.23a–c used courtesy of Sound-o-Rama. All rights reserved.
Figure 2.24 used courtesy of Jay Schneider. All rights reserved.
Figures 2.25a–b used courtesy of Rob Powers. All rights reserved.
Figures 3.1, 3.2, 3.3a, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7, 3.10, 3.12, 3.15a–b, Chapter 4 opening spread image, 7.1,  
and Chapter 11 opening spread image used courtesy of Chris O’Riley. All rights reserved.
Figure 3.11 used courtesy of Graham Toms. All rights reserved.
Figures 4.16, 4.17, 5.15, 5.16, 5.18, 7.31, 15.7 used courtesy of FunGoPlay. All rights reserved.
Figures 5.4 and 5.11 used courtesy of Deuce Bennett. All rights reserved.
Figures 5.5, 10.1a–f, 15.3a–b used courtesy of Pixar. All rights reserved.
Figures 5.7, 5.9, Chapter 12 and 13 images used courtesy of Glen Southern. All rights reserved.
Figure 5.8 used courtesy of Lewis. All rights reserved.
Figure 5.10 used courtesy of Jon-Troy Nickel. All rights reserved.
Figures 5.12a–b used courtesy of Steve Varner. All rights reserved.
Figure 5.13 used courtesy of Elmar Moelzer. All rights reserved.
Figure 9.2 used courtesy of April Warren. All rights reserved.
Figure 15.1 used courtesy of Erik Gamache. All rights reserved.
Figures 15.2a–b used courtesy of Blind Spot Pictures and Energia Productions. All rights reserved.
Figures 15.4a–b used courtesy of The Foundation TV Productions Limited/Decode/Blue 
Entertainment. All rights reserved.
Figure 15.6 used courtesy of Baj Singh. All rights reserved.
Figures 15.8a–b used courtesy of Marv Riley. All rights reserved.
Figures 15.9a–b used courtesy of Sylvain Saintpère. All rights reserved.

This page intentionally left blank 

Many people have come in and out of my life over the years, and have helped to 
shape me into the artist I am today, but one stands out over  
the rest. Von Kwallek, one of my high school art instructors, instilled in  
me the importance of problem solving, which has carried me through my entire 
career. My teaching style can be directly attributed to Kwallek’s  
passion for education and his unbelievable ability to share his knowledge. 
Thank you, Thank you, Thank you.

Author Acknowledgments
I need to start by thanking my long-time, good friend, Deuce Bennett. Deuce 
recommended to Peachpit that I write this book and then graciously came 
on board to handle the technical editing. He also made himself available 
for countless conversations during the creation of the book, offering his vast 
knowledge of 3D. Deuce has always been quick to offer assistance in any-
thing I’ve reached out to him for and has been a great friend for many years. 
I can’t think of a better person to have had on board for the production of 
this book. 
Along with Deuce’s help, many other industry professionals and friends 
played a role in the development of this book, offering insights and sharing 
their expertise in the field. I’d like to thank all of them for their contribu-
tions. Some of the artists that played a role include:
Saham Ali, Nick Boughen, Alan Chan, Jarrod Davis, Joe DiDomenico, 
Aaron Juntunen, Jonny Gorden, Matt Gorner, Kory Heinzen, K. C. Ladnier, 
Lewis, David Maldonado, Ed McDonough, Elmar Moelzer, Angel Nieves, 
Chris O’Riley, Rob Powers, Jay Roth, Kurt Smith, Glen Southern, Lee Stringer, 
Aristomenis Tsirbas, Ben Vost, Farrah L. Welch, and James Willmott.
I’d like to thank Karyn Johnson and the entire team at New Riders for the 
opportunity to create this book and for their support in its creation. Special 
thanks to Corbin Collins for his attention to detail, guidance, and countless 
hours devoted to this project. I’m without a doubt a better writer thanks to 
Corbin’s shared expertise.

Images play a major role in this book, and I’d like to thank the following for 
either contributing images they created or worked on, and/or images they 
allowed me to use that I produced for/with them:
Deuce Bennett, Eric Braddock, Bruce Branit, Alan Chan, Ed Chichik, 
Joe DiDomenico, The Foundation TV Productions Limited/Decode/Blue 
Entertainment, Fabian Nicieza, Steve Lerner, Dave Jacobs and the entire 
crew at FunGoPlay, Frima Studio, Ed Gabel, Erik Gamache, Kory Heinzen, 
John Karner, Kari Kim, Johan Lefkowitzz and the team at Inhance Digital, 
Dan Katzenberger, Lewis, Dave Maldonado, Sam Mendoza, Steve Mitchum, 
Elmar Moelzer, Jon Troy Nickel, Chris O’Riley, Alejandro Parrilla, Chris 
Patchell, Demi Patel, Jason Pichon, Rob Powers, Serena Martinez, Kevin 
Reher and the entire team at Pixar, Marv Riley, Sylvain Saintpère, Jay 
Schneider, Baj Singh, Kurt Smith, Kevin Snoad, Sound-o-Rama, Glen 
Southern, Lee Stringer and the team of Iron Sky, Rocco Tartamella, Graham 
Toms, Steve Varner, April Warren, Worldwide Biggies, and Joe Zeff.
Although they’ve been thanked already, I’d like to give David Maldonado 
special recognition for his pep talks, unwavering support, and advice during 
the creation of this book—and Glen Southern for his guidance and contribu-
tions to the digital sculpting sections of the book. 
I’d also like to thank my business partners at Applehead Factory, Joe 
DiDomenico and Phil Nannay, for supporting this book and for their friend-
ship over the years.
I’d like to thank my wife Addie and dog Jack for waiting patiently over the 
two months it took to write the book and for understanding my absence and 
allowing me to work.
And last but certainly not least, I’d like to thank you, the reader, for your 
interest in this book. I hope it aids you in the creation of countless digital models.

About the Author
Originally from Texas, now happily residing in Philadelphia with his wife 
Addie and dog Jack, William Vaughan’s CG work can be seen in all forms of 
media over the past 20 years. He’s worked on projects ranging from children’s 
books to toys, video games, broadcast, and film, and for clients like Rolling 
Stone magazine, Hasbro Toys, and Pixar Animation Studios.
William has always had a passion for creating as well as teaching. For over 
six years, he played a major role in the evolution of the industry-leading 
software, LightWave 3D. While working for NewTek as its LightWave 
Evangelist, he helped write the manual and provided the training for CGI 
artists all over the world, authoring more than 300 tutorials and instructional 
videos. His online tutorials are required reading for anyone interested in 
learning 3D. William has been published by every major CGI magazine and 
has contributed to 17 books. However, his writing is not limited to tutorials 
and case studies. He has also written and directed several award-winning ani-
mated short films, such as Batman: New Times, X-Men: Dark Tide, and the Tofu 
the Vegan Zombie animated short, Zombie Dearest.
For several years, William was the Director of Industry Relations and Head of 
Curriculum at the Digital Animation and Visual Effects School at Universal 
Studios in Orlando, Florida. He has personally trained hundreds of students 
to become professional animators at major studios, such as Rhythm and 
Hues, Digital Domain, Weta Digital, Monolith, and EA Sports. Among his 
prized pupils are the art department at NASA’s Johnson Space Center and 
actor Dick Van Dyke.
After spending two years in New York creating content for Nickelodeon, 
SyFy, Spike TV, and others, William recently moved to focus on his Philly-
based toy company, Applehead Factory. As co-owner and Creative Director, 
he works with his business partners Joe DiDomenico and Phil Nannay on 
building brands and creating memorable characters.

About the Technical Reviewer
Jack “Deuce” Bennett II is a freelance CGI artist whose background is in 
physical special effects for motion pictures and television. Deuce has been 
working in the film industry his entire life and has such movies as Robocop, 
Lonesome Dove, and Jimmy Neutron: Boy Genius to his credit, as well as TV 
shows such as Walker, Texas Ranger. Deuce has been using computers since he 
was nine, and he started off writing his own graphic programs. He is a unique 
combination of physical knowledge and virtual know-how.

Table of Contents
	
xx
	
2
	
4
Who Can Become a Professional Digital Modeler? 
5
Who Should Read This Book? 
7
What Can You Expect from This Book? 
8
What You Should Know 
9
What You Will Need 
10
RAM  
10
CPU Speed and Number of Cores 
10
Graphics Card and GPU 
11
Two Monitors 
11
About This Book’s Approach to Software 
13
Software Requirements 
14
3D Software 
14
2D software 
15
What’s on the Disc 
15
A Final Word: Change Your Thinking 
16
Chapter Two Understanding a Modeler’s Role  
20
Production Pipelines: Stages of Production 
22
Stage 1: Pre-production 
25
Story 
25
Visual Design 
28
Storyboard 
33
Audio: Scratch Voice Recording 
35
Animatics 
37
Audio: Voice Recording 
39

Table of Contents 
xiii
	
40
	
40
	
43
	
45
	
48
	
50
	
53
	
56
	
59
	
61
	
61
	
64
	
67
	
68
	
69
	
72
Chapter Three Preparing for Modeling 
76
Tools of a Digital Modeler 
78
Reference 
78
Observation 
81
Problem Solving 
82
Gathering Reference Material 
84
Physical Reference 
84
Digital Camera 
85
Tape Measure 
86
Sketchbook 
87
Digital Reference 
89
Printed Reference 
89
Movie Reference 
90
Note on Copyrighted Material 
91
References to Avoid 
91

xiv 
Digital Modeling
	
96
	
96
	
96
	
97
	
98
	
99
Chapter Four Fundamentals of a Digital Model 
100
A Model’s Anatomy 
102
Points 
102
Vertex Maps 
103
Edges 
107
Polygonal Models 
108
NURBS 
109
Subdivision Surfaces 
112
Model Classification: Hard Surface and Organic 
113
Production Driven 
113
Attribute Driven 
114
Construction Driven 
114
Model Classification Evaluation 
114
Model Styles 
117
Photo-real 
118
Stylized 
118
Choosing a Style 
118
Chapter Five Digital Modeling Methods 
120
Build Out 
122
Point by Point 
123
Edge Extend 
123
Primitive Modeling 
124
Box Modeling 
126
Patch Modeling 
127
Digital Sculpting 
128
3D Scanning 
131

Table of Contents 
xv
Modeling with Texture and Animation Tools 
134
Texture Displacement 
134
Bones 
135
Dynamics 
136
The Importance of Mixing Methods 
138
Chapter Six Professional Modeling Practices 
140
Naming Conventions and Directory Structure 
142
Content Directory 
142
Naming Conventions 
145
Don’t Agonize, Organize  
147
Clean Modeling 
147
Polygon-count 
148
Topology 
153
Preparing a Model for Production 
159
General Production Preparation 
159
Texturing Preparation 
160
Rigging Preparation 
162
Chapter Seven Polygonal Modeling 
166
Modeling 3D Polygonal Text 
168
Vector and Raster Images 
169
Getting Started 
170
Creating the 2D Base Mesh 
170
From 2D to 3D 
174
Micro-bevels, Chamfers, and Fillets 
174
Clean Up 
177
Modeling a 3D Polygonal Object with Seams 
180
Getting Started 
182
House Cleaning 
185
Layout Foundations 
186
Final Stages 
190
Goooal!!! 
195

xvi 
Digital Modeling
Chapter Eight Subdivision Surface Modeling  
196
Modeling 3D Text with SubDs 
198
Getting Started 
198
Adding Support Edges 
199
Patching in Polygons 
201
Adding Depth 
203
Adding Detail 
204
Modeling a SubD Object 
205
Reference 
205
Getting Started 
206
Creating the Metal Spring 
209
Chapter Nine Modeling a Realistic Head 
212
Choosing a Method: Edge Extend vs. Box Modeling 
214
Using Reference  
216
Preparing the Background Templates 
217
Taking Advantage of Symmetry 
218
Modeling the Head’s Components 
219
Eyes 
219
Nose 
225
Laugh Line 
228
Mouth 
228
Jawline 
231
Ears 
232
Finishing Off the Head 
234
Chapter Ten Modeling a Stylized Character 
238
Box Modeling a Character Mesh 
240
Getting Started 
242
Detailing the Face 
247
Building the Body 
253
Give ’em a Hand 
256
Final Character Review 
262

Table of Contents 
xvii
	
264
Building a Better Product 
266
Reference: CAD Geometry, Photos, and Blueprints 
268
Getting Started: Creating Splines 
270
Spline Patching 
272
Final Details 
278
Chapter Twelve Digital Sculpting 
280
Digital Sculpting with Glen Southern 
282
Creating a Digital Creature Maquette 
284
Sculpting Legs  
286
Sculpting Arms  
288
Sculpting the Head 
289
Second Pass over the Sculpt 
292
Detailing 
294
Chapter Thirteen Game Modeling 
298
Next-Gen Game Modeling with Glen Southern 
300
Creating the Creature Sculpt 
300
Performing Retopology to Create the Game Model 
305
Creating UVs for the Low-Poly Model 
314
Generating Maps for the Low-Poly Model 
315
Color Map 
315
Bump Map 
317
Normal Map 
318
Chapter Fourteen 3D Printing of Digital Models 
320
3D Printing Overview 
322
3D Printing Applications 
328
Preparing a Digital Model for 3D Printing 
329
Using Closed Meshes 
329
Avoiding Texture or Displacement Maps 
330
Getting the Right File Format 
331
Guidelines for 3D Printing 
332
From 3D Printing to Manufactured Toy 
334

xviii 
Digital Modeling
Chapter Fifteen Getting a Job in Digital Modeling 342
Overview of the Industry and Markets 
344
Film 
344
Television 
350
Games  
353
Visualization 
356
Print Graphics 
360
Demo Reels 
361
Demo Reel Case and Sleeve 
361
Demo Reel Content 
365
Demo Reel Length 
368
Demo Reel Audio 
368
Demo Reel DVD Burning and Labeling 
369
Personal Site 
370
The Seven Deadly Job Search Sins 
374
Sin #1: Homesickness 
374
Sin #2: Greed 
375
Sin #3: Inflexibility 
376
Sin #4: Putting All Your Eggs in One Basket 
377
Sin #5: Sloppiness 
378
Sin #6: Playing Hard to Get 
378
Sin #7: Sloth 
379
Get a Job! 
380
Staying Current 
380
Skill Set 
380
Software 
381
Networking: Online Communities 
382
Staying on Top of Industry Trends and News 
384
Reel and Resume 
385
Health 
386
Advancing in Your Career 
387
Final Thoughts 
390
Index 
395

This page intentionally left blank 

xx 
Digital Modeling
Foreword
Several years ago, while I was trying to finish my first book, exhausted, 
demoralized, and with a deadline looming, my publisher told me I needed 
some sort of CG expert—some well-known public figure—to read a draft and 
write a foreword for my book. I told him I didn’t know anyone who matched 
the description, because back in those days I was just a struggling artist and 
had met only a handful of others who pursued computer animation as a career. 
You have to remember, there just weren’t that many of us in those days.  
“I have just the person,” he said. “Proton.”
“What’s a Proton, other than a positively charged subatomic particle?”  
I asked.
“Exactly,” he replied.
I was pretty puzzled at the time, but I soon came to learn exactly what  
he meant.
“Positively charged.” That’s the key. William Vaughan is one of those people 
who is able to discover the amazing in anything that possesses it and who has 
no compunction about sharing those discoveries with the world. If something 
is awesome, he lets everyone know about it. So when I received his feedback 
from the first draft, it was so positive and filled with such excitement that it  
gave me the energy I needed to finish the book and get it out there. That was   
very early in my career, and the success of that book is reflected in nearly 
everything I do professionally today.
Now here we are many years later, and I am faced with the privilege and 
problem of writing this foreword for William. My immediate urge is to write, 
without regard for the contents of the book, a glowing review so that I can 
repay William for his enthusiasm and advice over the years. But I don’t need  
to do that because the book stands on its own, without my platitudes. William 
is an artist of immense integrity, which means that he puts the best of himself 
into everything he does. 

Foreword 
xxi
Over the years, I have seen so many artists, hundreds certainly, perhaps thou-
sands, benefit from the influence of this man’s work, and I know this book is 
simply another expression of William’s love for the art—just another way he 
can share his passion with the world, just another in a long list of gifts to us.
So why should you read this book? Because passion drives excellence and 
because William is one of the most passionate artists I have ever known, so 
I know with certainty that he brings all his excellence to it. Why on earth 
would anyone not want to read that?
Nicholas Boughen 
VFX Supervisor 
Owner CG-Masters.com

[Chapter One]

Introduction
Over the past 20 years, I’ve worked in various roles as an artist, from  
traditional designer and illustrator to jobs in all disciplines of 3D production.  
Only one area has been more rewarding to me than digital modeling, and  
that is teaching.
The information in this book is an accumulation of what I have learned during 
my career, and now I would like to share it with you. From understanding your 
role as a modeler in a production pipeline, to learning professional modeling 
methods and practices, to getting a job and much more, this book gives you  
the essential tools a digital modeler needs to work in the 3D industry.
I encourage you to read every page to fully benefit from this book’s contents 
and hope it serves you well in your own career as an artist.

4 
Digital Modeling
What Is Digital Modeling?
You’ve probably picked up this book with some understanding of what digital 
modeling means, but to make sure we’re on the same page I thought I’d start 
off by defining it.
Digital modeling refers to the process of creating a mathematical representation 
of a three-dimensional shape of an object.
The result of this creation is what the industry calls a 3D model or 3D mesh. 
The 3D model of the character Tralfazz (from the indie comic series, Patchkey 
Kidz) went through the digital modeling process by starting as a 2D concept 
drawing, shown on the left in Figure 1.1. I created a 3D digital model of the 
character (center) and finished with a final 3D rendered image for print (right).
In the simplest of terms, digital modeling is 3D modeling.
You can create 3D models manually or automatically. The most common 
sources of digital models are those generated by an artist or technician using 
3D software, as well as meshes that have been scanned into a computer from 
real-world physical objects using specialized hardware.
[Figure 1.1] Tralfazz 2D concept art created by Chris Patchell (left). A wireframe mesh is generated (center) and a final 3D 
render is made (right).

[Chapter One] Introduction 
5
Digital modeling is an important component of any 3D production and is, 
hands down, my favorite aspect of a production pipeline. Throughout this 
book I explore various techniques and practices to generate a wide range of 
digital models.
Who Can Become a Professional  
Digital Modeler?
The fact that you are holding this book is a good sign that you can go on  
to be a successful digital modeler. You are already either taking steps to 
explore the world of modeling or to expand your current knowledge as a  
digital modeler. 
Once limited to careers in the science and entertainment markets, digital 
modelers have more opportunities now than ever before. The demand for 
high-quality 3D graphics and animation is on the rise, and according to the 
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) the job market for 3D artists is expected to 
grow at a rate of 12 percent through 2018 (www.bls.gov).
You see 3D graphics literally everywhere these days, and at their core are 
digital models. Digital modelers work in television and feature films, game 
design, medical illustration and animation, print graphics, product and archi-
tectural visualization, and many other markets that make up this growing 
field. I’ve had my fingers in a lot of these markets over the years, and it has 
been interesting to see that I can use the same core skills for all of them. The 
subject matter and delivery method may change, but the fundamental toolset 
remains the same. The 3D models used in Figure 1.2 (on the following page) 
are just a few examples of how digital models are being used today.
To be successful in this field, you need to become a problem solver with good 
observation skills and a desire to create things. You never stop learning in 
this field. You face new challenges with every new project, many of which 
require innovative solutions that you must discover on your own. If you get 
to a point where you stop seeing these challenges as lessons that help build 
your ever-growing skill set, it’s probably a sign that you’ve lost your passion 
for the medium and it may be time to explore other career options.

6 
Digital Modeling
3D render of the Marc Jacobs Lola bottle used 
in print advertisements.
[Figure 1.2] Four examples of 3D models.
Frame from the Kanakas 3D animated pilot.
3D Medical Pre-vis used for an editorial 
illustration.
3D render of Worldwide Biggies’ character, Bigby.

[Chapter One] Introduction 
7
I’ve been teaching digital art almost as long as I have been creating it. When 
it comes to generating digital models, I’ve been asked just about every ques-
tion there is. What kind of hardware to use, which specific techniques I apply 
to my model making, what to do about erratic sleeping habits, what kind of 
music I listen to, and just about anything else you can think of. But the most 
common question I’ve been asked by people interested in this industry is, 
“Can I become a digital artist?”
My response is always, without reservation, yes! I don’t even need to know 
anything about the person asking, either. At the risk of sounding like Bob 
Ross or Mister Rogers, I always say that you can be anything you want to be 
as long as you have a passion for it and are willing to roll up your sleeves and 
put in the time to gain the skills needed to succeed.
I’ve trained students with a wide range of backgrounds and skill sets. Some 
started with more experience than their peers, which enabled them to work 
on major productions rather quickly. I’ve also instructed students with little 
to no experience in computer graphics (CG) who, despite their limitations, 
still managed to create a career in the industry by applying themselves.  
A few years ago I instructed a student who worked as a janitor at a Florida 
high school and had a passion for movies. That passion drove him to focus 
on building his skill set to allow him to pursue his lifelong dream of working 
on feature films. He’s now happily working in California with several movie 
credits under his belt (I recently spotted his name in the credits of Marvel’s 
Thor and Captain America). 
Remember that talent is only one very small part of the equation and counts 
for nothing if it isn’t backed up by perseverance, determination, resilience, 
and practice. If you want to be good at anything, learn as much as you can 
and work at it every day until you’ve mastered it.
So, in short, you can become a professional digital modeler.
Who Should Read This Book?
Those interested in expanding their knowledge in the creation of professional, 
production-ready, digital models—including but not limited to modelers,  
animators, texture artists, and technical directors—can benefit from the  
valuable information covered in this book. 
“To follow, without  
halt, one aim: There’s 
the secret of success.”
a

8 
Digital Modeling
Use this guide if you are
 • A professional 3D modeler wanting to enhance your problem-solving 
skills and explore alternate modeling techniques.
 • A professional technical director, texture artist, or animator interested 
in other areas of the production pipeline and in using knowledge of  
digital modeling to enhance your current workflow.
 • An instructor looking for new ways to teach aspects of digital modeling 
and its role in the industry.
 • A student of CG looking to improve the artistic quality of your work 
and to learn about professional approaches to modeling before entering  
the industry.
 • A hobbyist interested in real-world production techniques and strategies.
As with the entire series of [digital] books from New Riders, this book is written 
to be clear, not condescending, and to act as a reference and guide to con-
tribute to the ongoing growth of your work.
What Can You Expect from This Book?
Although this book focuses on the art and science of digital modeling, it 
doesn’t turn a blind eye to the other roles in an animation or visual effects 
production pipeline. It is my intention not only to share with you valuable 
production-proven modeling techniques and ideologies, but also to prepare 
you for a successful career as a digital artist. 
This book is far from a rehash of information found in your 3D software’s 
manuals and Help files. It’s a compendium designed to complement your  
current skill set. You’ll learn
 • The modeler’s role in a production pipeline
 • How to prepare for a modeling session
 • The fundamentals of digital modeling
 • Multiple modeling techniques

[Chapter One] Introduction 
9
 • Professional practices
 • How to land a job in the industry
 • And much more
What You Should Know
For me to focus on the core attributes of what makes for efficient production- 
ready models and how to achieve them, I’ve made some assumptions on your 
skill level in a few areas. I’m assuming you have a fundamental understanding 
of Mac and/or Windows computers, including basic file structure protocol, 
working with peripherals, using Internet search engines, and using portable 
storage drives.
You should have a working knowledge of at least one 2D paint and one 3D 
graphics program of your choice, basic experience with 3D digital modeling, 
and a fundamental understanding of 3D space. It’s important to remember 
that this book is not designed to replace your softwares’ manuals and Help 
files. Whenever you need to use those, do so.
You don’t have to have a working knowledge of every application used in this 
book. I cover the topics in a way that allows you to apply them to modeling 
in any 3D software. 
I can’t think of a single 3D modeling application that supports every feature 
or function covered in this guide; so the more comfortable you are with the 
software you are using, the easier it will be for you to translate any tool-specific 
process to the tools available in your application of choice.
Don’t be discouraged if you feel that you don’t currently have the knowledge 
required to continue. In this digital age you can easily get up to speed by 
doing some research on the Internet. 

10 
Digital Modeling
What You Will Need
Although I spend a great deal of time in this book focusing on the funda-
mentals of 3D modeling, some sections use a project-based approach to cover 
specific principles and techniques. The easiest way to absorb this material 
and commit it to muscle memory is to roll up your sleeves and actually do the 
projects as you read. So, you will definitely want to have a computer and the 
necessary software to get the most out of this book. 
Most 3D modeling applications come in versions for both Mac and Windows, 
so whatever type of system you prefer, you should have no problem as a digital  
modeler. If you are buying a computer, make sure that its specifications are up 
to the requirements of the software you want to run. Don’t feel like you have 
to run out and get the latest and greatest monster machine, as many may sug-
gest. You might be surprised at how a modest system configuration can be all 
you need to work comfortably. That said, the more powerful the system, the 
more you can throw at it. 
RAM 
Random access memory (RAM) is where the data set you are currently work-
ing with resides in your computer. This data can be in the form of images or 
3D point data, such as models. The more RAM you have, the more data you 
can simultaneously access without having to wait for the system to load it 
from the hard disk. Loading from the hard disk is slow.
CPU Speed and Number of Cores
With today’s multi-core CPUs, computer processor speed is becoming less 
and less important. The more cores you have, the better off you are, so CPU 
speed is to be considered in relation to how many cores your computer has. 
Simply put, speed and number of cores are the main features that make ren-
dering and data processing faster.

[Chapter One] Introduction 
11
Graphics Card and GPU
A decent graphics card is an important factor for digital modelers, because 
it’s responsible for displaying your data onscreen. Because most applications 
use OpenGL (Open Graphics Library)—the industry-standard Application 
Programming Interface (API) for writing applications that produce 2D and 
3D computer graphics—a strong graphics card allows you to view your digital 
models as smoothly as possible. 
The more geometry or hi-res (high-resolution) textures, the harder your 
graphics card has to work. Having a good graphics card definitely increases 
productivity as projects become more complex. NVIDIA is a graphics card 
industry leader and has the most stable platform for the CG industry.
Another factor to consider is Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) technology. 
The industry is starting to make a shift towards GPU-based rendering, essen-
tially harnessing the power of the graphics card, which often is 50–100 times 
more powerful than a CPU for performing certain tasks. When choosing a 
graphics card, it’s best to consider the amount of GPU cores it has; the more, 
the better.
If you’re unsure of what type of system is best for you, visit one of the many 
online community forums—for example, CGSociety (www.cgsociety.org), 
3DTotal (www.3dtotal.com), or Foundation 3D (www.foundation3d.com)—
talk to artists who use these systems, research what’s available, and most 
importantly, know your options.
Two Monitors
Something I have strong opinions about when discussing workstations is the 
need for a dual monitor setup. I believe dual monitors are a must for any digital 
artist and can’t imagine accomplishing my work using just one monitor. That 
doesn’t mean you have to invest in the largest, most expensive monitors avail-
able. For years I used two modestly priced 19-inch Viewsonic monitors that 
would satisfy even a tight budget.

12 
Digital Modeling
Several extremely nice wide-screen monitors are available today that some 
might argue are just as good as using two monitors, but in my opinion, if you 
go that route, you might as well get two of them. Most studios I’ve visited 
have multiple monitors for their artists (Figure 1.3). 
A digital modeler working with just one monitor is like a draftsman working 
on an end table instead of a large drafting table. Having two monitors gives 
you more than just a comfortable workspace—it affords you the room needed 
to display multiple applications at the same time, as well as the ability to dis-
play your reference material on one screen while you work on the other.
[Figure 1.3] Digital artists 
at BranitFX take advantage 
of multiple monitors while 
working on television 
shows like Breaking Bad, 
Californication, and Fringe.

[Chapter One] Introduction 
13
About This Book’s Approach to Software
Every working artist in CG has a preferred modeling application when gener-
ating meshes. I’m willing to bet that if you randomly asked professional artists 
throughout the industry which tools they use when they create, you would 
find a distinctive mix of software that each swears by. Usually, it’s the soft-
ware that they either started out using when they were learning about CG, 
or it’s the software in which they have the most experience in. This makes 
perfect sense, but it has created something known as software wars.
Software wars are as old as the software applications, and as far as I’m con-
cerned, arguing about them is a complete waste of time. Don’t even bother 
getting into a debate with someone over which software is the best; you’ll 
only exhaust yourself justifying why your software of choice is “better.” No 
matter what is said during this argument, it is very likely that each of you will 
leave the conversation convinced that you are still using “the best” software. 
Have you ever heard the phrase, “It’s not the tool, it’s the craftsman  
(or craftswoman)”?
Take a few minutes to explore any 3D software’s online gallery, and you’ll see 
breathtaking work being created. Whether the software is free, cheap, or super 
expensive, artists are creating amazing pieces of art with it. Don’t get too 
caught up in software, because throughout your career as a digital artist you 
will most likely use various modeling and sculpting applications. Each comes 
with its own workflow, but the core fundamentals of modeling stay the same. 
That principle guides my approach to software in this book.
One of the main aspects of the [digital] series that attracted me to writing this 
book is that it doesn’t focus on using any specific software. Hence, my book 
teaches you essential skills and concepts that you can apply to modeling in 
any 3D software. 
Whatever software you own or decide to buy, be sure to read the manual. 
You need to become familiar with its tools and how that particular software 
works. You can use [digital] Modeling to help you generate professional meshes 
with those tools. 

14 
Digital Modeling
The bottom line is this: With some creative problem solving and an under-
standing of your toolset, you can accomplish anything you set out to create 
using any modeling application.
Software Requirements
Note that most applications have 30-day trial versions available on their 
Web sites. Also, several open source 3D applications, such as Blender  
(www.blender.org), are quite capable and absolutely free. A 2D paint and 
image manipulation application is also recommended.
3D Software
Although this book is software agnostic, I’ll mention particular modeling 
packages throughout, because not every application supports the wide  
range of features and functions covered. However, most areas of this book 
describe several alternate techniques to achieve a given effect, so you can 
accomplish tasks no matter which program you use. Leading 3D software  
programs I mention include
 • 3ds Max: www.autodesk.com/3ds-Max
 • LightWave 3D: www.lightwave3d.com
 • Maya: www.autodesk.com/Maya
 • Modo: www.luxology.com
 • Silo: www.nevercenter.com
 • XSI: www.autodesk.com/Softimage
 • ZBrush: www.pixologic.com

[Chapter One] Introduction 
15
2D software
A 2D paint and image manipulation application should be part of any digital 
modeler’s toolkit to create and manipulate reference material and to generate 
texture maps. Adobe Photoshop (www.adobe.com) is the industry standard, 
but if you can’t afford it, remember that there are a wide range of options 
available today, such as
 • Paint Shop Pro: www.corel.com
 • GIMP: www.gimp.org
 • Paint.net: www.getpaint.net
Many other applications are available, too, that work perfectly fine.
What’s on the Disc
Over six hours of training videos are included on the accompanying DVD 
and support the topics covered in this book. Although the examples in the 
videos use NewTek’s LightWave 3D and Pixologic’s ZBrush, the information 
covered can be easily translated to any 3D software. There are 18 videos that 
explore a wide range of modeling tools and techniques and 3 videos located 
in the ZBrush directory that show the entire sculpting process of the creature 
maquette in Chapter 12. I recommend viewing these videos once you have 
finished reading the book to fully benefit from the information covered. In 
addition to the training videos, I’ve included a video that shows 100 charac-
ter models and their topology that can be used as inspiration and reference to 
study poly flow. 
Some of the images printed in the book contain fine lines in the 3D program 
that may not show up clearly on the printed page. You’ll find high-res versions 
of the images from the book on the disc, allowing you to see more detail.
Mentioned throughout the book is the Tofu the Vegan Zombie award-winning 
animated short, Zombie Dearest. This short can also be found on the disc so 
grab some popcorn and enjoy.

16 
Digital Modeling
A Final Word: Change Your Thinking
Now that the formalities are out of the way, we’re almost ready to get to the 
meat of this book. But first I want to cover a topic that is extremely impor-
tant to your success.
When I start teaching someone about digital modeling, I usually find myself 
having the same conversations I’ve had a thousand times regardless of whether 
the artist I’m talking to has zero experience or is working in the industry. 
They all have the same desire to succeed, but in each of their paths to 3D 
mastery one thing stands in their way. Once they get past this roadblock,  
it’s all smooth going.
What is this “one” thing that you have to get past (or passed, if you are a  
student of mine)? Could it be Booleans? Polygon flow? Radiosity? A corn- 
free diet?
The answer is none of those things, although the corn-free diet makes for 
a creative answer. Actually, the one thing you need to get past is simply the 
way you think.
It’s my experience that most people have a can’t-do attitude, especially when 
it comes to learning new things. When I say most people, I’m not limiting 
that to artists new to 3D. I witness this on just about every forum online  
and at the industry shows I attend. Most people assume that things are not 
possible, they are too difficult, or special software/hardware is needed to solve 
the problem. I always suggest a different approach.
It may sound cliché, but the power of positive thinking goes a long way when 
working in this industry. Every day you’ll be asked to tackle the impossible, 
and if you go in with the attitude of can do, you’ll be able to see the task to 
completion. If your attitude is not possible, you will most likely not complete 
the task. It’s called a self-fulfilling prophecy. Robert K. Merton, the man who 
is credited with coming up with the expression, explains it this way:
“The self-fulfilling prophecy is, in the beginning, a false definition of the 
situation evoking a new behavior, which makes the original false conception 
come ‘true.’ This specious validity of the self-fulfilling prophecy perpetuates 
a reign of error. For the prophet will cite the actual course of events as proof 
that he was right from the very beginning.”

[Chapter One] Introduction 
17
Simply put, go into every new venture with a positive attitude, and you will 
be able to accomplish things you never knew you could. I get asked to do 
something I’ve never done all the time, so I always go in with the idea that  
I will be able to do it and will have that much more experience when it’s 
done. Accept the fact that you haven’t done that task, but don’t dwell on it. 
I always tell people, “I know everything I need to know to do the things I’ve 
already done.”
Even I have to admit that it sounds silly but it’s a great way to approach each 
new task. Really give thought to that statement. The next time you feel like 
giving up before you even begin, recite that phrase. Say it out loud if you 
have to. It’s very similar to one of my favorite quotes from René Descartes, 
which states, “Each problem that I solved became a rule which served after-
wards to solve other problems.” In this industry, we are not modelers, lighters, 
animators, or compositors. The best title for what our job is on a daily basis is 
problem solvers. As production artists, we are thrown problem after problem, 
and we have to devise solutions to move on to the next phase in production. 
Then when you wonder if something is possible, say, “I bet it is; I just need 
to figure out how to do it.” Do that and I believe you’ll have far better results 
than giving up before you begin.
One of the biggest hurdles for new users to overcome when problem solving 
is actually trying to use the tools currently available instead of wishing for 
the tools of tomorrow. I once had a student who wasn’t producing tell me 
that he couldn’t complete his tasks because he was waiting for technology to 
catch up with his ideas. He left me speechless! To this day he is still waiting 
for those magical tools to catch up with his unrealized ideas, whereas others 
who have the right attitude are realizing even better ones. Maybe I’ll check 
back with him in a few years to see if the tools he was waiting for were ever 
released and see if he has any of those incredible ideas left to realize. 
I like to call this magical tool the Do My Job button. You know, the button  
that you click and it creates whatever you’re currently tasked with in one 
simple step (Figure 1.4). Many people waste valuable time looking for the 
“easy” way out of their problem. Although this method sometimes leads to a 
breakthrough, usually the end result is lost time. The sooner you realize there 
isn’t a Do My Job button and that you need to put a little elbow grease into 
each project, the sooner you will be on your way to producing amazing work. 

18 
Digital Modeling
I tend to use the phrase “back in the day” all the time—which is surely a sign 
of getting older—yet I can’t help but explain to new artists the stuff we used 
to have to do to solve what seem like minor hurdles with today’s tools. Not 
having the tools didn’t stop us. When we needed a flag blowing in the wind 
and there were no cloth dynamics to be found, we simply ran a procedural 
texture through a segmented plane and called it a day, and at the end of the 
day (to use another overused phrase) what it is really about is solving each 
task with the tools and techniques that you currently have. Sure, the tools will 
improve and so will your bag of tricks, but you already have the things you 
need to accomplish today—not tomorrow!
Don’t get me wrong. I’m not saying don’t push for new tools and improve-
ments from the software developers. I push for new tools all the time. What 
I don’t do is let the tools I currently have in hand stop me. This type of posi-
tive thinking and problem solving is what has helped most successful artists 
and studios flourish. Otherwise, studios with massive teams of programmers 
[Figure 1.4] Although 
many artists search for these 
buttons in their 3D software, 
they’ve yet to find them.

[Chapter One] Introduction 
19
to write every tool needed for every job would be the only ones playing a  
significant role in our industry. What fun would that be?
It probably says a lot about me, but I usually give software programmers the 
benefit of the doubt and assume I’ve made a mistake when something goes 
wrong. It saves me a massive amount of time as I start trying to work through 
the problem as soon as it pops up. Here is a trick that has worked for me over 
the years and seems to be working for many artists working in the industry 
today. The next time you’re deep in production, and the software crashes or 
doesn’t give you the result you’re after, ask yourself, “What did I do wrong?” 
Don’t assume it is a bug in the software or blame the computer, even if it 
turns out that it is. 
I’ve found that 98 percent of the time the problem turns out to be user error. 
If your first thought is that it’s the software or hardware, you have already 
come to a conclusion without working through the problem. Before you blurt 
out the knee-jerk reaction of “I didn’t do it!” ask yourself, “What did I just 
do?” It’s hard to take the blame sometimes, but give it a try and see if your 
workload becomes easier. Just remember the term PICNIC (Problem in Chair 
Not in Computer), and you’ll be set.
As CG artists, we need to be problem solvers who are able to think fast and  
tackle any issues that are thrown our way. With positive thinking and experi-
ence, nothing is impossible. These are the tools that allow us to create lovable 
characters, amazing explosions, and photo-real environments. It’s not about 
the software or hardware. Software and hardware will continue to evolve, and 
you may find that you jump from one application to another over the course 
of your career. But the true value of your abilities is your problem-solving 
skills, not where the Boolean tool is located and what it does.
This philosophy is what has allowed me to accomplish the things that I’m most 
proud of, and it is my most valuable skill. Take advantage of your problem-
solving skills and mix in some positive thinking, and nothing will stand in 
your way. 
So now, let’s dive in!

[Chapter twO]

Understanding a Modeler’s role 
To truly master digital modeling, you must be aware of all aspects of production 
and understand how they are connected. Before I start discussing the modeling 
process, let’s explore the role of a digital modeler in a production environment. 
With a little help from some of my professional colleagues, I’ll also talk about 
how your work directly affects the other stages and players involved.
It’s all about teamwork: In soccer, for example, an individual player can be a 
skilled star and may be able to outplay many of the defenders on the opposing 
side, but his skill is greatly enhanced by his team members. They assist by making 
great passes to set up goals, defending against attacks, and working together to 
capitalize on every break to turn a game around. One player alone cannot win 
a game. Individual players may have flashes of genius, but working as a group  
and knowing the strengths of your teammates is the way to win. As players help 
enhance the stars of a team by supporting their individual skills, the team works 
together to reach an end goal.

22 
Digital Modeling
Projects that require digital modeling come in all shapes and sizes, and can 
require a team made up of just one artist or hundreds of artists. Working 
closely with and understanding the needs of your team can only elevate 
the quality of the texturing, lighting, and animation of your digital models. 
CG artists at Inhance Digital (Figure 2.1), for example, work as a team to 
accomplish the many tasks that move a single project towards a unified goal.
A successful production team is made up of skilled artists who share common 
goals and a common vision, and have some level of interdependence that 
requires them to interact with the other members of the production team. 
The deliverables of each team member may differ, but the means by which 
each gets there is the same: teamwork!
Production Pipelines:  
Stages of Production
Depending on the nature and scope of the project, you need to decide the 
path and schedule that the production will follow from the initial idea to the 
finished product. This is called a production pipeline.
[Figure 2.1] CG artists at 
Inhance Digital work as a 
team to accomplish many 
individual tasks that move 
a single project towards a 
unified goal.

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
23
You can liken a production pipeline to a car assembly line. It optimizes  
production by arranging tasks in a specific order and so that they may be  
completed before moving on to the next stage. Going back and forth between 
stages can delay production, leading to a potential missed deadline and blown 
budget, both of which are frowned upon by all players involved.
A production pipeline for most projects can be broken down into three 
stages: pre-production, production, and post-production.
These stages are then distributed among several departments, depending on  
the type of project and what the final delivery method is. No two studios 
have the same process, but the following are common departments for 
animation: 
 • Story 
 • Visual design
 • Storyboard
 • Edit
 • Audio 
 • Modeling
 • Scene setup
 • Texturing
 • Rigging 
 • Animation 
 • Effects
 • Lighting
 • Rendering
 • Compositing
Incorporating the insights of numerous industry professionals, I discuss each of  
these in this chapter, and detail how a modeler works with these departments.
If you’re the only person working on a project, you are responsible for carry-
ing the workload of all departments for all three stages of production. Larger 
projects require the collaboration of multiple players, blending the talents 
and skill sets of the team to produce what would otherwise be a daunting task 
for an individual. It’s important to note that no matter the size of the team or 
project, you will need a strong production pipeline.
Although every project will go through all three stages of the production 
process, not every project that you generate digital models for will require all 
components. A 3D print graphic may not require rigging and animation, for 
example, whereas real-time 3D games typically do not require the rendering 
and compositing of image files.

24 
Digital Modeling
To give you the general concept of where a digital modeler fits into an aver-
age project, I’ll use the common production pipeline of an animated short 
as an example. Figure 2.2 shows a graphical representation of this type of 
production pipeline.
[Figure 2.2] An animated 
short’s production pipeline 
involves many stages 
before its final delivery. 
This graphic shows where a 
digital modeler fits into the 
big picture. 

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
25
I’ve called on the expertise and words of several industry professionals whose 
personal advice is printed throughout this chapter. You may not understand 
all the terminology they use, and that’s OK. If you don’t now, you will by the 
time you’ve finished reading this book. I encourage you to revisit this chapter 
after you have completed the other chapters, even if it is just to see how much 
more you know about these topics. 
Stage 1: Pre-production
The pre-production stage is the process of preparing all the elements 
involved in a production and is the foundation of the project—the blueprint 
of the entire animation. The story and visual look of a project is developed 
at this stage, as well as the overall planning of the production. Any shortcuts 
taken at this stage of the game can directly affect whether a project will be a 
success or not. 
Story
After the initial concept has been approved or decided upon, writers develop 
the story in the form of a script or screenplay. Story is critical. It’s my opin-
ion that the success of Pixar films is directly influenced by the fact that it is 
a story-driven animation studio. The highest production values cannot save 
a project with an inadequate story. Without a solid story, there are only ele-
ments thrown randomly at the screen, leaving the viewer confused, bored, 
and in most cases, unsatisfied. 
In all the stories that I’ve helped to write, including the award-winning animated 
short Tofu the Vegan Zombie: Zombie Dearest (www.tofutheveganzombie.com/
movie), I’ve found it very useful to use sticky notes during this process to 
construct a timeline based on key moments in the story. Each sticky note has 
story points that make it easy to change the order within the timeline. When 
you’re satisfied with the order, you have a solid outline to begin writing your 
script. Figure 2.3 is a snapshot of the script from Tofu the Vegan Zombie: 
Zombie Dearest.

26 
Digital Modeling
Industry Insight Alan Chan
Writer/director Alan Chan shares his thoughts on the story development 
process:
Having worked on feature films such as Green Lantern, Alice in Wonderland, 
and Beowulf over the years, I’ve always kept my focus on staying true to the 
director’s vision.
Before it exists anywhere else, the story lives in the director’s head. A good 
director should have the entire movie already playing in the theater of the 
mind, and the director’s job is, quite simply, to transpose what he sees in his 
mind onto the screen. Having directed indie features and award-winning 
short films, I can tell you that this is easier than it sounds.
The first step in this process is the development of the screenplay. When 
we developed the screenplay for our short film Postcards from the Future, 
we knew only that we wanted to share the wonder and inspiration of space 
exploration with the audience from a human perspective. From this we 
developed the perspective of the storyline, which was to tell the story from 
the point of view of an engineer sending video postcards to his wife back on 
Earth. It is from this seed of the idea that we then develop the world that our 
story will inhabit. Since this world does not yet exist, it is up to the modeler 
to build it. Figure 2.4 shows a basic breakdown of a shot from Postcards, 
including the virtual set created by a digital modeler.
[Figure 2.3] Story is 
everything. Without a strong 
story, a project is doomed 
from the start. 

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
27
[Figure 2.4] Director Alan Chan  
confers with actor Robb Hughes on the  
set of Postcards from the Future.
A 3D virtual set was created  
by digital artists…
…and composited together for  
the final shot.

28 
Digital Modeling
As a director and visual effects artist, I’ve had a chance to experience the 
production pipeline from various positions on the production chain. My role 
as a director requires that I work closely with the modeling and visual devel-
opment team to create a world that holds true to the spirit of the story.
The modeler’s role in this context is to help the director design and shape 
the characters and the stage on which the story will take place. To do so, the 
modeler must understand the needs of the story and ensure that the models 
fit together in look and spirit to create a believable world for the director to 
work in.”
Visual Design
The director works closely with the art director to develop concept art for all 
elements in the production. Working under the art director’s supervision, 
concept artists in the Visual Design department create multiple versions of 
these elements, which usually include characters, props, environments, and 
any asset that will need to be created during the production stage. Figure 2.5  
shows just a portion of the material artists created for the award-winning 
Teddy Scares animated short (www.teddyscares.com/movie).
[Figure 2.5] The 
production crew worked 
from an extensive collection 
of resources on the Teddy 
Scares animated short, 
including the collectible 
plush bears of each of the 
main characters.

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
29
Visual designs are usually in the form of traditional sketches and paintings, 
as well as clay sculptures, often referred to as maquettes. These designs begin 
loosely and are refined over time, and turned into model sheets for the mod-
eling and texture departments. Figure 2.6 shows examples of a model sheet 
and maquette from the film Zombie Dearest.
Industry Insight Kory Heinzen
Kory Heinzen is a visual development artist for TV, film, and games. Figure 2.7  
(on the following page) shows an example of how Kory might visualize a 
scene in a movie. He has this to say about visual design:
A visual development artist can go by many names, including production 
illustrator, concept artist, sketch artist, color stylist, or even viz-dev artist for 
short. No matter what we are called, it is our job to bring into the visual 
world what has only been described in a script.
When a scene is in the early days of pre-production, or the ”blue sky” phase, 
where there are no crazy ideas and there are lots of artistic exploration and 
research. That’s the honeymoon.
[Figure 2.6] A model sheet of the character Addie from Zombie Dearest was passed off to the modeling artist as reference 
(left). A physical maquette of Addie was sculpted by toy sculptor Rocco Tartamella as additional reference.

30 
Digital Modeling
There comes a point where some practical 
things need to happen in order to actually make 
a movie. Character designs need to be finalized, 
sets and props need to be designed, and color 
and lighting theories have to be conceived and 
approved. There are a lot of ducks to get in a 
row before things can go into production, and 
it’s our job to help the production designer, art 
director, producers, and director answer the big 
questions before anything starts.
Films can be green-lit or sent back into develop-
ment hell. Production budgets can be increased 
or decreased, characters can be cut or made  
into stars, and entire sequences can be thrown 
out or expanded; all of this is based on what  
we illustrate.
When working on the Shrek and Madagascar series 
of films, if I could turn my concept-to-onscreen 
ratio into a batting average, I would have been 
sent to the minor leagues. But that’s not the 
point. Meticulously designing a set for three 
weeks is still cheaper than sending a bad idea 
into production where dozens or even hundreds 
of people will work on it. Our ideas are expend-
able; it’s up to us to never run out of them. 
Simply put, changes are a normal and expected 
part of production. Ideally, changes are mini-
mized, but there is just no way to avoid them in 
the creative process. Knowing this will save lives 
or at least your sanity.
[Figure 2.7] This location study from Kory’s animated  
project Retro-Active is an example of the first visual stage  
of a production.

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
31
Once a movie is moved into production, the art department is still working 
ahead of the other departments, feeding them more specific designs that 
are needed. Typically, characters at a stage like those in Figure 2.8 are the 
first to go into production.
In my experience, characters are the hardest to do and take the longest to 
get approved. There is often a close collaboration between the character 
designer, modeler, rigger, and texture artist during this point in the process, 
with frequent input from the director. The transition from 2D to 3D is not 
always smooth.
There are some designs, especially “cartoony” or stylized ones, that can 
prove to be nearly impossible to achieve in 3D. Modeling straight from a 
drawing can be a disaster. Once perspective is introduced, proportions 
change and what looked good on the page is no longer appealing. A gifted 
modeler that can translate the feeling of a design is invaluable. 
[Figure 2.8] Two character 
concepts from Retro-Active.

32 
Digital Modeling
Sometimes there are modelers in the art department. These half-designer/ 
half-modelers can work on designing sets or help create rough assets for 
previsualization or animatics. One thing to keep in mind if you find yourself 
in this type of position is to know how your model will be used. Typically, film 
assets can be amazingly detailed. But for pre-vis and set design, I approach it 
more like creating a game asset where I rely more on textures than geom-
etry for the details. This keeps the models light for quick changes and helps 
to increase the interactive speed for the animatic artists. Once the cameras 
and the designs are locked, the models can be passed on as reference for the 
final models.
When designs are ready to be passed on, most likely there will be some sort  
of kick off meeting, formal or informal, where the art directors or directors  
explain the ideas behind the set and what they hope to see. Modelers receive 
a “model pack” for a set or location. Individual modelers are assigned props 
and environments to create. The art department will have broken out props 
and set designs—pages and pages of illustrations of everything associated 
with a particular location from the biggest building to the smallest grain of 
sand. Although there has been a handoff, this is by no means the last you 
will see of the art director or concept artist. In some studios, you will interact 
with the art director exclusively or sometimes the artist who did the original 
design. You will work closely with them to bring the designs to life.
Having worked on games like Uncharted and Uncharted 2  and in TV and 
film as a concept artist and art director for over 15 years, I can tell you that it 
never stops being a magical experience when I see a design of mine given 
dimension by a skilled modeler. Seeing that first turnaround of something as 
simple as a minor prop still sends a bit of electricity down my spine. The best 
relationships you can forge at a studio are when you are working with other 
artists who just seem to “get it.” Ask questions and always be willing to make 
it better.

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
33
Storyboard
With the script approved, the director will work with story artists to continue  
to flesh out the story in the form of storyboards, or sequences of images that 
help previsualize the story. Figure 2.9 shows a storyboard sequence from the 
animated Sifaka World pilot. The storyboarding process, in its form today,  
was developed at the Walt Disney Studio during the early 1930s.
Storyboards are more than just sketches of what is described in the script. 
They play a role in how shots are framed and can help set the pace of the 
entire animation. I often direct artists to refer back to the storyboards during 
a production to ensure that they don’t stray too far from the original goal. 
Figure 2.10 is a photo of me talking over the opening shot with one of the 
crew, taken during the production of the animated short Runners. Some of 
the best elements of any story are conceived during this stage of production. 
Skipping the storyboarding stage can prevent you from further refining the 
story and can delay production. 
[Figure 2.9] The storyboards created for the Sifaka World pilot became the blueprint for the team to work from.

34 
Digital Modeling
Industry Insight Joe DiDomenico
Joe DiDomenico, art director at Applehead Factory, shares some insight on 
storyboarding:
First and foremost, my job is to aid the director, to see his vision become  
a reality.
When a team of artists is working on an animation, it is impossible to get 
started animating from the script alone. Animation relies heavily on the  
storyboard process: These drawings help to organize the story and match 
the visuals to the scenes within the written script. A storyboard is a visual 
shot-by-shot representation of a script, created in a series of panels that 
show the concept of the sequence of action, staging, and camera shots. 
Beyond what is written, a storyboard artist fleshes out what isn’t on the 
page. I become a writer, artist, and actor all in one. I add visual puns in 
expressions and actions. I create action in a story when the script is vague. 
Storyboards help to cut production costs by giving production teams a 
[Figure 2.10] Storyboards 
are very similar to comic 
books, and in the case of the 
Runners animated short, we 
actually used the Runners
comic book as our original 
storyboards. 

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
35
better way to understand fights, stunts, the timing of a comedic gag,  
special effects, and anything else that involves costly and complicated  
parts of a production.
I put together something that looks like a comic book of the entire film, 
scene by scene. This art becomes the basis of the whole production process 
that will follow. A storyboard is really just a foundation—a 2D blueprint. It 
isn’t exactly how the movie is made, but it becomes a guide for what a scene 
may look like before it’s animated. 
Some people confuse storyboards with a series of illustrations. It’s important  
to understand that storyboards speak more to the content within the frame 
than the drawing itself. My job isn’t to “render” each frame, but instead try 
to capture a moment. I need to consider the framing or length of the shot, 
the angle of the shot, and if there is any movement involved. Usually, color is 
unnecessary for 99 percent of all boards (unless you are in advertising). 
Also, having too much attachment to a sequence or to any one drawing 
makes for a bad storyboard artist. Everything changes; your best ideas can 
be thrown out at the drop of a hat. Because of that, when working in this 
medium, it is important to be able to draw quickly. 
It is also extremely important to know the ins and outs of film terminology 
as a storyboard artist. You need to know the difference between a cut-in and 
a cutaway, to avoid crossing the line, and to know the psychology of differ-
ent camera angles.
In storyboarding the biggest assets are the ability to draw quickly and 
equally as important, clearly. This job is simply one of visual communication.
Audio: Scratch Voice Recording
Before moving on to the animatic phases of pre-production, temporary voices 
called scratch tracks or scratch voices are recorded by the audio department. 
These are just stand-in voices performed by any willing member of the pro-
duction crew. 
Scratch voices provide the director and editor with placeholders for the final 
dialogue. They can also be useful in testing how shots play out with audio 
before committing to final dialogue and the pacing of scenes.

36 
Digital Modeling
Although scratch voices are almost always replaced later in production, 
sometimes they don’t need to be. If the director enjoys one of these early per-
formances enough, the scratch voice could end up being used in the final. 3D 
artist Greg Young, shown in Figure 2.11, recorded a scratch track for one of 
the characters in Runners and later went on to do the same role for the final 
performance used in the movie.
One of my favorite examples of scratch track casting is Pixar’s Ratatouille  
for which Lou Romano, a production designer at Pixar, provided the scratch 
voice for Linguini. Later it was decided that he would be cast as the char-
acter. Lou wasn’t alone. Peter Sohn, a storyboard artist and animator for 
Ratatouille, was asked to do a scratch track for the character Emile (Remy’s 
brother), and the directors liked it so much they decided to keep it in the movie. 
[Figure 2.11] 3D artist 
Greg Young recording a 
scratch track of one of the 
characters for the Runners
animated short.

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
37
Animatics
Using previously approved storyboards and scratch tracks, an editor works 
directly with the director to create a story reel, or animatic. An animatic is  
basically a 2D preview of the entire film. The pacing of the story and the story  
itself are still being refined at this time. The entire movie can then be screened 
in this format to ensure that all of the story elements work as a whole.
Animatics allow the director to experiment and work out any issues with the 
story before things get costly. Animation is a time-consuming and expensive 
process, and this phase of production allows for all levels of changes at little 
or no cost. It is important to know that if a movie doesn’t work in this raw 
2D format, no amount of CG polish will help.
Once the 2D animatic has been approved and locked, layout artists begin 
constructing a 3D animatic while working alongside the director. This is 
yet another level of the story that is refined to ensure that the project has a 
strong foundation to build on before production begins.
The layout artist places and animates a 3D camera and works with low-
resolution, temporary models called proxy models. Figure 2.12 shows a 3D 
animatic scene using proxy objects as placeholders for the animated short 
Zombie Dearest. Depending on the production pipeline, these proxy models 
are either created by the layout artist or artists in the modeling department.
[Figure 2.12] This 3D 
animatic scene from Zombie 
Dearest shows an example 
of several proxy objects.

38 
Digital Modeling
Industry Insight Aristomenis Tsirbas
Aristomenis Tsirbas, director and founder of MeniThings, offers more insight 
on animatics:
This is where the 2D story reel is given a new dimension (literally) and 
becomes the template for 3D production. From my experience working both 
on my own films and for other directors, there are essentially two ways you 
can approach animatic modeling: stand alone or integrated.
The stand-alone approach is typically used in pre-visualization houses and 
large productions with separate animatic divisions. Here modelers work from 
the production designs to create models and environments that are light 
enough to be manipulated in real time with the director present. The modeler 
needs to be fast, and the results need to look good and read clearly. But 
since these models won’t be used in production, the modeler is free to take 
shortcuts and spare things like micro-bevels and proper topology flow. The 
best layout modelers know how to cheat expensive things like smoke and 
water, and need to be open to frequent and often radical changes on the fly. 
Also needed is a decent grasp of basic rigging and texturing since animatic 
teams are often small and value artists with multiple skill sets. The key here is 
speed and flexibility. Since this is still technically the story stage, everything 
is up for change, so the modeler needs to keep up with this hectic but very 
creative part of the pipeline.
The alternative is a method I use for many of my projects. It involves an  
integrated approach where each model is essentially the first pass of the final 
asset. In other words, whatever model is created for the animatic is carried 
over and continued to be worked on into production. This way the animatic 
models, environment, lighting, and camera all represent the groundwork for 
each final shot. This approach requires all the skills of the preceding method 
with the exception that all animatic models must have clean, continuous 
geometry that can be polished to final production quality. It represents a bit 
of extra work, but in the long run can save huge amounts of time because 
modeling work isn’t done twice.
In either case this can be the most enjoyable and creatively rewarding form 
of modeling, since it affords the artist the ability to produce more models in 
less time with less fussing over the small stuff.

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
39
Audio: Voice Recording
At the voice recording stage of production, the story and animatics have 
been locked, and the producer and director should already have actors cast 
for all the voices.
As shown in Figure 2.13, each actor is recorded separately—although I have 
found that it is helpful to schedule the voice talent recording so that the actors 
can interact with each other before they perform.
For the Teddy Scares animated short I directed, it was fun having Rick Baker, 
Clive Barker, and Linda Blair all in the same place for a short time before  
the recording took place. It gave them a moment to relax and meet the  
other players.
Once recorded, the voices are later assembled into the edit so that the timing 
can be locked, and the audio files are delivered to the animators. 
These recordings directly influence the timing in the scenes and help drive 
the performance the animators will create in the final frames of the animation. 
It can be extremely helpful to record video of the voice recording sessions 
to help aid the animators when they are trying to capture the characters’ 
expressions at key moments.
[Figure 2.13] Actor Dave 
Shoemaker records final 
audio at Sound-o-Rama in 
Orlando, Florida.

40 
Digital Modeling
Stage 2: Production
The production phase of the project is where final elements of the animation 
are initially created based on the work developed by the pre-production crew. 
It is the production crew’s job to stay true to the blueprint in place and to 
maintain the director’s vision. It’s also where the digital modeler comes into 
play in most production pipelines.
Modeling
You didn’t think I’d ever get to you, but here we are. Although you’ve had to 
wait your turn, believe me, it’s definitely worth the wait. The longer it takes 
to get to this stage of production, the more likely you will be generating digi-
tal models for a successful project.
Modelers work under the art director and/or a modeling supervisor to generate  
the 3D models for all elements of the project based on the model sheets
(refer to Figure 2.6) created by the visual design department. 
Modelers are responsible for the delivery of production-ready meshes (also 
called 3D models) that are ready to be rigged and textured by the other 
departments. This involves open communication between departments to 
ensure as little back and forth as possible takes place. Having a model sent 
back to the modeling department due to issues with the mesh can delay 
the production, which in turn could lead to a missed deadline. Figure 2.14
shows the entire cast of Zombie Dearest modeled and ready for the other 
departments to take over.
Depending on the type of work or studio you want to be involved with as  
a modeler, you may be required to handle multiple stages in the pipeline. 
Some studios don’t have a modeling department. Instead, they have technical 
directors (TDs) that create the models and then see them through to articula-
tion (rigging). As TD, you may also be required to generate UV maps (2D 
texture coordinates for points) for the texture department, weight maps (a 
value that defines a bone’s influence on a point) for the rigging department, 
and selection sets (which store a single state of a point, either selected or  
not selected) for the effects department.

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
41
Industry Insight Glen Southern
Glen Southern, 3D artist specializing in creature and character creation  
and the managing director and creative director at SouthernGFX Limited, 
explains how a 3D modeler is an essential part of any CG production 
pipeline:
The 3D modeler is one of the pillars that supports any CG project. To be  
successful in the role, a modeler needs to be flexible, adaptable, thick-
skinned, assertive, a team player, and much more. As one of the primary  
creative roles in most pipelines, the modeler generally takes his steer from  
a 2D concept artist who has usually created a set of images defined by an art 
director. Whether it is for games, film, or TV, the modeler is generally given 
very specific turnaround images, or accurate side, top, and front profiles to 
match. It then falls on the modeler to accurately create the required model. 
Depending on the size of the team, the modeler could also be asked to give 
the model a set of UV coordinates and possibly even create all the required 
texture maps.
[Figure 2.14] The Zombie 
Dearest character models 
were modeled and prepped 
before they went to the 
next stage in the production 
pipeline.

42 
Digital Modeling
With advancements in modeling software, a lot of modern digital modelers  
are required to sculpt a model to a high level of detail in programs like ZBrush 
or Mudbox. They may then have to re-create the entire model again with 
better polygon flow for animation using retopology tools. Whether the  
project dictates that you start a model by box modeling a base mesh or 
sculpting a high-frequency mesh, you must always be thinking ahead and 
problem solving on multiple levels.
Taking feedback and criticism from art directors and technical directors is 
a skill in itself. When you are an integral part of a pipeline, you will at some 
point have your work critiqued. It is important to keep in mind that you don’t 
always receive positive feedback. What you may think is a fantastic piece 
of work may have missed the mark in some way and may need revising. In 
extreme cases the work will need to be shelved and something new created 
in its place. This is perfectly normal in most projects. The skill comes in taking 
the feedback onboard and understanding why the changes were necessary. 
Asking the right questions before ever beginning to model can minimize 
issues like this, but changes do happen regularly on live projects.
Also, well-planned and laid-out 3D models are easier to unwrap in a UV 
package. If your model is a mess of badly laid out polygons, it may look 
OK when subdivided, but when you unwrap it, there could be problems. 
Another important stage further down the line is the rigging of a character. 
As a 3D modeler, it is essential that you have a solid understanding of good 
topology, primarily because good topology allows a rigger to efficiently rig 
and weight a model for animation. Creating amazing-looking models is one 
thing; creating amazing looking characters that deform well and have all 
their joints working correctly is quite another. The best 3D modelers can all 
rig. This gives them the understanding of where to put accurate edge loops.
Although the 3D modeler begins early on in the production pipeline, good 
communication between the different disciplines is essential. As I’ve men-
tioned, the modeler sits between the concept artist and the artists doing 
the texturing and the rigging. Technical directors and programmers will also 
have a say in a model’s creation; they will be handling things like dynamic 
cloth, hair, muscles, liquids, fur, particles, and lighting. The modeler needs 
to have good communication skills, and this is where being a team player is 
crucial. If you don’t keep those lines of communication open, there will be 
bottlenecks and you really don’t want to be the cause of that delay.

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
43
Rigging
Once models have been created and approved by the director, the assets 
move to the rigging department where character technical directors or rigging 
artists design and create rigs (bones and controls) for characters and any 
other model that requires any form of animation or effect.
If modelers have delivered efficient work, they have given full support to the 
rigging department and, in turn, will have helped keep the production on 
schedule and within budget. The rigging artist does justice to the modeler’s 
work by giving the animators the tools to turn a statue of an object into 
something that can move and react to its environment. Figure 2.15 shows 
an example of a rigged character with both body and face controls for the 
animators to pose the mesh with.
[Figure 2.15] This rigged character 
gives animators control of the body 
(top) as well as the face (bottom) with 
easy-to-use controls.

44 
Digital Modeling
Industry Insight Kurt Smith
Kurt Smith, a rigging artist at Pixomondo explains rigging further:
As a rigging artist working on shows like Terra Nova, my role is to create  
the hidden mechanics that drive the models animated by the animation 
department. As a rigger in a production pipeline, my goal is to quickly and 
efficiently create powerful and highly responsive rigs. An important part 
of what I do is talking with the animators to make sure that they have the 
functionality they will need to animate. These conversations ensure that the 
model is deforming and moving in the way it was designed to.
During any production, I am in constant contact with the other departments. 
Good communication is essential to the success of any production. This is 
especially true when the rigging department works with models. Dealing 
with modeling changes, ensuring that the model has working topology, and 
that the rigging department will be able to achieve good deformation on 
the model means the modeler and rigger must be communicating back and 
forth as much as possible. 
Two key areas a modeler should be mindful of are clean topology and a 
proper base pose.
Clean topology: It is crucial that a model has excellent topology before it 
is delivered to the rigging department. This means that the modeler must 
have an understanding of what makes for good poly flow and has an acute 
attention to detail. Having an accurate understanding of anatomy and how 
muscle structures work (in both humans and animals) is an extremely useful 
tool in a professional modeler’s toolkit. Without good poly flow, the model 
will never deform properly regardless of how much time and effort the rigger 
puts in to make up for an inefficient mesh. 
A modeler can help the rigging department achieve good deformations 
in more ways than having a working polygon flow. There are some simple 
adjustments that can make a model a rigger’s dream to work with. Avoiding 
stars (a point with five or more polygons connected to it) in areas that have a 
wide range of motion is desirable for good deformations.

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
45
In hinge joints, such as the elbows and knees of a character, if the “rule  
of three” is modeled so that the outside edges are angled wider where  
the bend occurs (the inside of an elbow) and thinner on the opposite end  
of he joint (the outside of an elbow), the deformation and intersection  
in those areas becomes better without much effort on the modeler or  
rigger’s part.
Proper base pose: It is also extremely important that a modeler under-
stands what makes a good base pose to send to the rigging department. 
The model should be resting on the ground plane, centered on the origin, 
and facing forward. For characters, the base pose that is most often used 
for rigging is the T-pose, although a rigger might ask for the relaxed pose 
instead. It is important to have a discussion before committing to one setup 
or another.
Having a good base pose also means the modeler must make sure that the 
scale of the model is accurate before handing it off to the rigger. If a base 
pose is out of place or scaled incorrectly, the rig may have a broken rotation 
axis or bad deformation and may be extremely difficult for the animators to 
pose as a result, thus slowing down the entire pipeline.
Anyone interested in modeling for animation should have a basic knowl-
edge of the rigging process. Modelers with an understanding of rigging will 
be able to diagnose and avoid potential problems as soon as they begin a 
model, which saves time and effort, and speeds up any production pipeline 
they are a part of.
In closing I’d like to add that it is just as important for a modeler to have an 
understanding of rigging as it is for me as a rigger to have an understanding 
of animation. To be honest, I think every artist should have an understanding 
of the entire production pipeline, as it will only make them better at their craft.
Scene Setup
As soon as models begin getting approved, either layout artists or set decorators
will start populating the 3D animatic scenes with the final elements based on 
the concept art and animatics generated by the other departments. This is 
more than just a paint-by-numbers process; these skilled artists use a keen eye 

46 
Digital Modeling
to generate densely populated environments. Figure 2.16 shows an example 
of finished models being placed in one of the locations in the Zombie Dearest
animated short. 
Set decorators take a modeler’s environmental models and give them a purpose.
Industry Insight Ed McDonough
Ed McDonough, digital artist at Rhythm + Hues Commercials’ boX unit, 
talks about set decoration:
As a layout artist, my responsibility is to take the models that are created for  
the environment (including buildings, vehicles, plants, and any prop items) 
and set them up to make the storyboard background come alive as much 
as possible in 3D space. My goal is to populate the scenes with objects that 
help make the backgrounds more believable, but not too distracting from 
the main action of the shot. This is done by either adding or adjusting details 
and props to help fill gaps in the scene or guide the eye to where you want 
the viewer to be looking. The addition or alteration of even one single rock 
could change the entire feeling of a shot in the sequence.
[Figure 2.16] This image 
shows the set decoration 
underway for Professor 
Vost’s lab in Zombie Dearest.

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
47
Using the storyboards and animatics as reference, I create a list of assets 
that are needed to mimic the initial animatic. Working with the model-
ing team, I populate the scene with all the necessary objects. This process 
goes through many phases during the progression of the project, including 
model adjustments or additions, taking into account any additional camera 
choreography changes that may show an alternate view of the set. The envi-
ronment gets pieced together while trying to be as economical as possible 
with poly-count (the quantity of polygons that make up a 3D model). This is 
accomplished with the help of the modelers by supplying low-poly objects 
for some items in the far background along with models with multiple levels 
of detail (determined by the distance from the camera) that are able to be 
swapped out with the final meshes.
While working on the cinematics for the game Saboteur, the team was able 
to start out with some of the video game assets that were then converted for 
our use in the scenes. This helped by letting us start with all low-poly objects 
in the scene, and then after determining where the action would take place 
—including all the camera angles—the modelers were able to clean up the 
models and textures as needed to fit them into the environment. This was 
also the time to up-res any models or even remodel them for higher resolu-
tion using the original models as scale reference. 
It has been my experience that layout artists tend to wear a lot of different 
hats throughout production, especially in smaller teams. This enables them 
to model, texture, and animate above and beyond the traditional set design 
responsibilities. Multitasking works well because the layout artist already has a  
vast knowledge of the sets and the props that occupy the area. While working 
on scene layout during the Crackdown 2 trailer, I was also able to model and 
texture background assets to help fill the scenes, as well as create the camera  
choreography. The modelers supplied me with the main assets that were 
then propagated into the scenes. Before finishing the setup of the scene, the 
camera was positioned to show what areas of the environment needed more 
focus. It was very advantageous to be able to jump back and forth between 
roles, which made it more efficient for the fast turnaround of the trailer.
Communication between layout artists and modelers is a must. The layout 
artist may need a new model or an adjustment to a model at a moment’s 
notice. Since at any time in production a new item could be required, the 
modeler’s speed, time management, and efficiency are great resources.

48 
Digital Modeling
Texturing
Using meshes generated by the modeling department, texture artists bring 
these cold, gray assets to life with detail and color.
Texture artists enhance the surfaces of models by generating texture maps from 
photographs, creating shaders that mimic real-world materials as well as custom-
ized textures that can only come from a creative imagination. Figure 2.17
shows Tofu from Zombie Dearest (an animated short) receiving skin details 
courtesy of an image painted in Photoshop and applied using a UV map.
These highly skilled artists have mastered the art of observation. They have a 
keen eye for detail and the ability to reproduce materials based on the refer-
ences they have been provided by the visual design department—or that they 
have gathered based on the direction they have been given by the director 
and art director.
[Figure 2.17] Tofu gets his skin details courtesy of an image painted in Photoshop and applied using a UV map.

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
49

Industry Insight Angel Nieves
Angel Nieves, now 3D Lead at MTM, has the following advice about texturing:
One of my many responsibilities at Hi-Rez Studios was working as a texture 
artist. This involved a variety of tasks, including:
•   Unwrapping and laying out UVs
•   Breaking out the mesh into multiple surfaces
•   Outputting ambient occlusion and normal maps 
•   Painting texture maps for the various attributes of each surface
•   Finalizing the textured mesh for the production
As a texture artist, I check every model for n-gons—polygons with five ver-
tices or more. I also check for stray vertices and polys. Both can cause prob-
lems when unwrapping and later problems for the rigging, animation, and 
rendering departments. If any of those errors are found, the model is sent 
back to modeling to be fixed before texturing gets started.
Once a model is unwrapped and laid out, a texture artist begins the texture 
painting process: Diffuse, specular, reflection emissive, normal, and so forth 
are painted, and then a material is made out of every texture map. 
Clean topology is essential for the texturing process as it gets rid of guess 
work concerning where to separate the mesh for unwrapping, which helps 
reduce or completely eliminate stretching and distortion in a model’s texture. 
Mechanical meshes like robots, helicopters, and tanks are good examples of 
where a modeler can assist the texture department. Those kinds of assets 
usually have parts that a modeler has to duplicate and place correctly on  
the model. 
It is more efficient for the modeler to unwrap one nut and bolt and then 
duplicate it as necessary than to have the texture artist unwrap each nut and 
bolt in the whole model, one at a time. If a modeler plans ahead for tasks like 
this, he can shave hours and sometimes days off of a texture artist’s work-
load, which is always welcomed. 
I would say to anyone who wants to become a professional digital modeler 
that it is essential to have UV unwrapping skills. Even if you don’t create 
the UVs, it will give you insight on how the texture artist will proceed when 

50 
Digital Modeling
unwrapping the mesh. It also helps with replicated geometry, which directly 
affects the job of the texture artist. 
It is fundamental that communication between a modeler and texture artist 
is open and frequent throughout production; working together to find solu-
tions allows both artists to be more efficient with their workloads. It saves 
time, money, and lots of unneeded headaches for every artist in the pipeline, 
and the resulting modeled assets will be at a higher level of quality.
Animation 
Without a doubt, animators are the rock stars of the animation industry. 
Modelers should be their biggest fans, because the animation department 
breathes life into a modeler’s otherwise lifeless mesh. The animation depart-
ment, working with the handiwork of the rigging department, takes the  
assets generated by the modeling department and give them motion to tell 
the story.
Animators match the digital model’s actions to the animatic and audio pro-
vided by the editor under the watchful eyes of the animation director and 
the director. Figure 2.18 consists of three frames pulled from an animated 
sequence of Addie delivering dialogue in Zombie Dearest.
Just like the other artists within the production, animators work from refer-
ence materials like stills, video, and real-life observation such as studying  
the movement of people or animals. They not only deliver a character’s 
movement, but the character’s emotions as well, providing the illusion of life. 

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
51
[Figure 2.18]  
An animated sequence of  
Addie in Zombie Dearest.

52 
Digital Modeling


Industry Insight Johnny Gordon
Johnny Gorden, founder and animation supervisor at Zero Gravity 
Entertainment, explains animation further: 
By the time a model reaches the animation department, it’s been through a 
few check points and possibly back to the modeling department a few times 
already; so you might think that it’s clear sailing from here. However, there 
are still some issues that present themselves in animation that are difficult to 
detect any earlier.
The rigging team has checked the model, put it through a number of test 
poses, and tested facial expressions, but animators don’t always play by  
the rules. 
As an animator, I often want the model to move in a way that the rigging team 
never imagined. This will inevitably create unforeseen problems, whether it’s 
a pose that pushes the limits, an extreme facial expression, or a combination 
of facial expressions that weren’t designed to go together.
It is useful to understand what the different stages are for animating a scene: 
•   Stage one is the layout, which is either done by a dedicated layout team 
or by the animation team. This stage usually uses temporary models, or 
stand-ins.
•   Stage two is the blocking stage. This is usually done with low-resolution 
representations of the models that can be posed quickly, or specially  
created segmented models that are parented to the joints. 
•     This enables the animator to work efficiently and play the scene at full 
speed. Because the final models aren’t being used, problems aren’t usually 
encountered in this stage.
•   Depending on the needs of the production, the director or animation 
supervisor may require a check of the blocking using the final models 
before signing off to identify any problem areas as early as possible. The 
results of this check may identify some problems in the model or rig that 
need fixing.

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
53
•   Stage three is facial animation and lip sync. This is often where the first 
problems are seen. The animator will create an expression that is too 
extreme or combines expressions that weren’t tested together, and the 
model will tear or deform badly. 
•   Stage four is the final pass, including secondary animation, offsetting the 
timing of motions, and a final check to make sure there are no intersections. 
Usually by this stage, a few problems have already been caught, but a few 
more may be identified.
When problems appear during animation, the director or animation supervi-
sor will decide whether to modify the animation to accommodate the limits 
of the model or rig, or to revise the model or rig. 
Whether or not a modeler communicates directly with the animators can 
depend on the size of the production. Usually, if the model is to be revised, 
it is first sent to the rigging team to check whether it’s the model or the rig 
at fault. If the model still needs revision, it will go back to the modeling team.
In some productions, the animation team will only go to the rigging team 
when there are problems. That way the rigging team can determine whether 
it’s the rig or the model causing the problem, and only bring in the modeling 
team when necessary. 
Effects
An effects artist creates all the non-model elements in an animation. These 
include things like hair fibers; elemental effects like water, fire, and smoke;  
as well as fabric dynamics. Figure 2.19 shows an image sequence that an 
effects artist created of a Hummer being crushed by a robot character from 
the award-winning, animated short Spoonman. Many details had to be worked 
out to get the car’s hood to cave in and the windows to blow out, making it  
a perfect task for a problem-solving effects artist.

54 
Digital Modeling
Effects work is usually based on a performance-driven motion or event. To 
have the most impact, effects need to be lit a specific way as well. For these 
reasons, constant communication with the lighting and animation depart-
ment is a very important part of this process. 
Effects artists are elite problem solvers that help transform a mundane visual 
into the unforgettably spectacular experience.
[Figure 2.19] This sequence from Spoonman is an excellent example of a type of shot an effects artist would be tasked with.

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
55
Industry Insight Jarrod Davis
Emmy Award–winning, visual effects artist Jarrod Davis adds:
At the most basic level, an effects artist is responsible for animating all of 
the “other” things in a scene. It’s the stuff that the primary animators don’t 
handle—things like simulated effects for cloth or debris, smoke, fire, dust, or 
even water spray from a boat. Also included are effects that are added to the 
primary subject after the animation is finalized, like feathers or fur. 
When working as an effects artist on shows like Firefly, Battlestar Galactica, 
and Eureka, the best gift I could receive from a modeler was nice, clean 
geometry. Like every other stage in the production pipeline, effects artists 
deal with departments both upstream and downstream from them. But 
there are a few areas that set effects apart and make it very reliant upon a 
modeler’s skill and attention to detail.
Cleanliness: Often, the effects department will be called upon to take an 
asset and smash it to digital bits. And even though a model may have gone 
through the rigging and animation processes without problems there, slicing  
and dicing it into a thousand pieces can very easily expose hidden flaws. A 
good, clean poly-flow and efficient geometry with no extra or hidden stray 
pieces are a major boon to the effects artist.
Efficiency: I mentioned this before, but it’s worth mentioning again, because 
much effects work revolves around simulation—often of particles, fluids, or 
other dynamics that can be extremely computationally intensive. The more 
geometry the computer has to push through the calculation, the longer 
the process takes. Now, you don’t want to cut corners, but making sure that 
only what’s actually needed is modeled is something you’ll want to build up 
experience with. Also, the effects department will sometimes request low-
polygon “hulls,” simplified objects to use in simulations where the full level  
of detail for interaction is not required. Being able to make a low-polygon 
version of your master asset is another skill worth mastering.

56 
Digital Modeling
Consistency: The simulations that the effects department handles are 
often physically based. This means, among other things, that units matter. 
Explosions that are 5 inches across behave very differently than those  
that are 50 feet across, and it will show in the work. Most modeling depart-
ments will require it, but even if yours doesn’t, be in the habit of building 
your items to scale whenever possible. There’s rarely a downside, and the 
major upside is that it will behave much better in every way, especially in  
an effects simulation.
The better a modeler understands how the mesh will be used by the effects 
department, the more efficient and clean the digital models will be, which 
makes for happy effects artists.
Lighting
In most pipelines, the lighting technical directors pull all of the elements from 
the pipeline to finish off the scene before they actually begin placing lights 
into the environment. Lighting plays a massive role in the final look of the 
production, setting the mood, color, and atmosphere of each shot. Figure 2.20  
shows a scene from Teddy Scares (an animated short) in which a lighting 
technical director is placing lights.
Lighting artists ensure that there is a consistency in lighting between shots, 
and that the final look of the animation matches the director’s vision as 
defined by the visual design department.
The lighting department also works closely with the rendering and composit-
ing departments to ensure that their elements are properly prepared for the 
next stage of production.

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
57
[Figure 2.20]  
Lighting artists work in 
several display modes 
to place lights, including 
wireframe (top) and an 
interactive real-time  
preview (bottom).

58 
Digital Modeling
Industry Insight Nicholas Boughen
A VFX supervisor at Method Studios, Nicholas Boughen shares his insight 
on lighting:
As a lighting artist, I have two areas of responsibility: technical and aesthetic.
My technical responsibilities involve:
•   Ensuring that the desired elements of the scene are properly illuminated
•   Fulfilling the requirements of time, place, and weather
•   Ensuring continuity with other shots in the sequence
My aesthetic responsibilities include:
•   Setting or supporting mood
•   Assisting composition through lighting, such as determining viewer focus 
through variations in light intensity across the image
The true artistry comes through combining both the technical and aesthetic 
into a clear, powerful composition.
In my role as a visual effects/lighting supervisor, I deal with the modeling 
team almost every day. In the lighting department, lighting artists will some-
times discover errors or glitches in geometry that may not have been obvi-
ous at the modeling stage, such as light leaks, flipped normals, or edges that 
need a microbevel (a small beveled edge connecting two surfaces). Since the 
asset is public, it is not up to the lighting artists to make repairs; it must go 
back to modeling so they can make the fix and publish a new version to the 
studio. After this comes the lighting TD. The lighting TD is in charge of break-
ing down a shot into render layers, ensuring that the shot renders properly 
and within production specifications, such as render times and RAM usage. 
The lighting TD may ask for a model to be split up in certain ways to accom-
modate different render passes, such as mattes and holdouts. 
The interaction between lighting and modeling is constant and fluid as we 
work together to create perfect shots.

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
59
Rendering
Render wranglers, also referred to as queue managers, take the approved final 
shots and break them out into individual passes that will allow compositors 
full control to refine the final look of the sequences. They then generate 
the final renders of all the combined passes for each shot, taking advantage 
of multiple render nodes (processors) that make up a render farm. Without 
these forgotten soldiers, there would be no movie. Figure 2.21 shows just a 
small portion of the render nodes used at Inhance Digital to pull off amazing 
work on time and within budget.
Industry Insight Farrah L. Welch
Render artist Farrah L. Welch provides an inside look at her time within the 
rendering pipeline on Battlestar Galactica:
My core responsibility was to break out approved shots into individual 
passes and render them out for the compositors to reassemble. 
This started with replacing proxy geometry, lighting, and effects with the 
correct and final versions, and optimizing the scene so it would render as 
[Figure 2.21] A close look 
at a few of the nodes that 
make up the render farm at 
Inhance Digital.

60 
Digital Modeling
quickly as possible without monopolizing the render farm. From there, 
I would break a shot into render layers, anticipating what the composi-
tors needed in order to have maximum control over the final product. This 
included multiple diffuse, specular, reflection, refraction, effects, and matte 
passes for different lights and elements in the scene. Taking shot priority into 
account, I had to make sure that passes rendered correctly and in a timely 
manner, especially since a single shot could have 30 or more passes. I also 
maintained communication with the compositing department to facilitate 
corrections and make sure it had everything it needed to complete the shot 
as directed by the VFX supervisor.
I had to confer with the artists, compositors, coordinators, and supervisors to 
make sure that shots I was responsible for ran through the pipeline smoothly 
and on time. Each artist’s role in the pipeline directly influenced my job on a 
daily basis, including the modeler. It was important for geometry to be clean 
and ready for production without holes, polygons on polygons, and other 
problems that would cause render errors, slowing down production and 
costing valuable stack time. Mesh density was very important as well. If the 
geometry was unnecessarily dense, render time would be too high, slowing 
down the entire pipeline. This often resulted in having to spend time cutting 
up models and removing detail unseen by the camera. If a model was faceted 
in-camera, lacking adequate detail, or had obvious UV seams, I would then 
either have to stop my work and take the time to fix it or send it back for repair. 
All of these situations put a bottleneck in the pipeline and slow down pro-
duction. Ideally, to minimize this bottleneck, models that will be reused 
again and again should have low, medium, and high-resolution versions  
with nurnies (small technical details added to break up the surface of an 
object to add visual interest) that are easily removable. Also, good naming 
convention is key! If someone has already spent time cutting up a model  
and removing detail, it needs to be saved in the correct location with an 
appropriate name so another artist doesn’t waste valuable production time 
reproducing another version. Continuity between these versions is very 
important as well. If you have a low-res model and high-res model in back-
to-back shots, they’d better look the same! You can’t have a viper with battle 
damage in one shot and see it without a few seconds later. If you create 
high-quality models from the start and communicate effectively, you will 

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
61
save valuable production time and make the others on your team happy by 
creating less work for them.
As a render artist, communication between different departments is essential. 
Stage 3: Post-production
Post-production is the part of the process that may take the longest due to 
the refinement of all of the aspects of the final product. Although this is the 
last step in the production of an animation, it is key to a project’s success.  
Images get enhanced by compositing, the sound track and dialogue get 
tighter, and the edit gets tweaked for the most effective presentation of story 
and pacing. This is the point of the project that can make or break it and 
should not be taken lightly. It is what the production team loses the most 
sleep over. 
Compositing
Compositors start work towards the end of the production process, combining 
the rendered elements created by the render artists into a finished sequence. 
Most professional compositors have an understanding of color theory and 
an artistic eye. This allows them to enhance the lighting and color of the 
shots, maintaining the established look from the director and visual design 
artists, but refining it with a final layer of polish. Figure 2.22 shows shots 
from Zombie Dearest receiving this final layer of polish by applying color cor-
rection, using an ambient occlusion pass to help add realism to the shading 
of an object, and taking advantage of depth passes to add depth of field and 
environmental effects.

62 
Digital Modeling
[Figure 2.22] Compositors 
add the final tertiary details 
to each shot, including 
things like color correction 
(top), using an ambient 
occlusion pass to help add 
realism to the shading of an 
object (middle), and taking 
advantage of depth passes 
to add things like depth 
of field and environmental 
effects (bottom).

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
63
Industry Insight Lee Stringer
Lee Stringer, Emmy Award–winning visual effects supervisor, shares some 
insight on the role of a compositor:
These days, compositing includes many new tasks. Gone are the days of  
simply combining several elements to create the final image. Yes, that’s still  
a major part, with live action green-screen footage being combined with 
computer generated locations and effects elements. More and more com-
positing is used to actually light and texture many of those CG images.
Having a good eye for color is key. Color correction is a major part of the 
compositor’s job and although it’s always ideal to have the textures of all the 
CG elements adjusted to the environment they will be rendered in, this can 
be tweaked much quicker in a comp. 
A great example of how compositing can be used within an all-animated film 
or TV series is the workflow used on Star Wars: The Clone Wars. In Lucasfilm’s 
pipeline, just about all the lighting is actually done in the compositing stage. 
When a scene is lit, no real consideration is given to the color of the light and 
little to its intensity. (Only the position and direction of the light are adjusted.) 
Instead, the scene is generally lit with three lights giving the key (example: 
sun), fill (opposite of the key), and bounce (under fill), and then rendered 
with each light set to red, green, and blue respectively. Once in the comp, 
these three lights can be quickly separated, and each light can be colored 
with its brightness adjusted almost in real time. Additional passes provide 
rim (edge) lighting in a similar way along with environmental lights. Not only 
can the lighting be adjusted and refined far quicker, but one render pass can 
provide three separate light passes. It’s a very efficient workflow but requires 
much more attention in this stage of the pipeline. This same technique 
can also be used with live-action productions and was used on the new 
Battlestar Galactica series.
Advances in software are opening even more control for the compositing 
stage of production with the new use of normal maps generated at render 
time (this shows us the direction each pixel is facing). It’s even possible to add 
new lighting in the comp phase. Also, mattes can be generated to isolate just 
about any component, enabling the compositor to adjust all the properties 
from color to specular highlights or reflection.

64 
Digital Modeling
By far the biggest change in the compositing phase for modelers these days 
is the ability of compositing programs like the Foundry’s Nuke to load 3D 
objects into a comp. With an accurate camera track also loaded, the compos-
itor can not only move items around in a 3D space (very handy for stereo-
scopic projects), but also project new textures or matte paintings onto that 
geometry. Generally, these 3D objects are of lower detail than the ones used 
earlier in the pipeline. This technique is being used to great effect at Energia 
Productions on Iron Sky where landscapes that would require extensive 
modeling and texture painting can be built fairly quickly and then painted 
on, adding detail, once in the shot.
With these advances in technology and the changes in production pipelines, 
it’s now more important than ever for a compositor to have open lines of 
communication with the rest of the team. It’s also the best time for someone 
interested in creating the final look of a shot to get into compositing.
Audio
In most cases audio engineers work simultaneously with the rest of the crew by 
starting to develop the music and sound effects as early as the animatic has 
been locked. These masters of sound open up a whole new level of awesome 
into an animation. 
I’ll explain the importance of good audio in an animation by pointing out 
that sound contributes 50 percent of what makes an animation a success or a 
disaster. I’ve been fortunate to work with talented sound designers throughout 
my career, and one such audio guru, K. C. Ladnier, owner and lead sound 
designer of Sound “O” Rama, has helped several of the projects I’ve written 
and directed become award-winning animations.

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
65
Industry Insight K. C. Ladnier
K. C. Ladnier is shown in Figure 2.23 working on the audio for the Zombie 
Dearest short.
Read K. C.’s thoughts about how sound relates to an animation production 
and to the work of a digital modeler:
I was first exposed to sound design for animation at Walt Disney Studios  
in 1982.
Early models (characters) were simple and hand drawn—interesting but just 
pictures. If the character artists were fortunate, they had access to sound 
recording and editing equipment. If the character artists were very fortunate 
[Figure 2.23] Sound designers 
play an extremely important role 
in the production pipeline by 
opening up a whole new level  
of detail into an animation. 

66 
Digital Modeling
(or good), they were able to add music. It was not uncommon to see a char-
acter artist lurking around with a sound recorder, searching for something 
to record that would transform the character into something more than just 
pictures. Sadly, over time, I have seen less and less of the character artist’s 
involvement with sound.
The ear is a terrible thing to waste.
The ear is connected to the brain from which the mind receives informa-
tion that it processes and uses to make decisions about the world we live in. 
For eons humans have relied on this ability as a survival tool. Smart people 
tell me that the brain has many amazing abilities, including one where it 
combines multiple sound reflections like those that occur inside a cave or 
racquetball court. Sounds that arrive at the ear and are within a certain time 
interval of each other are combined into a single sound. The single sound is 
sent to the mind. This gives humans much greater ability to determine the 
location of predators or prey and to communicate in an ambient environ-
ment. The result is a much greater chance of survival. 
The brain is constantly processing sound arrivals and sending information to 
the mind, even when you are asleep. You are completely unaware of this yet 
it happens in every theater that has adequate atmosphere. 
My job as sound designer is to provide the brain with sound that makes 
sense and adds to the telling of the story. I use sound and music to lead your 
mind and your emotions. This increases the likelihood that you will experi-
ence suspended disbelief in the theater. 
Let’s say a modeler makes a character that wears a swinging chain and has 
flat feet that slap onto a marble floor. If I show you this animated character 
with good sound design, the information sent from your brain to your mind 
will be completely different from one presented with bad sound design. 
With good sound design, the brain sees with your eyes that the chain is 
made of links and has motion. With your ears it knows the chain emits a 
metallic rattling sound. This information is passed on to the mind, and you 
think: check, one metal chain. 
Everything makes sense. 

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
67
Then the brain reports that the flapping sound and the image of feet hitting 
the marble floor appear to go together. The mind takes in all this information 
and might decide that this character is a duck. Oh! There is a quack sound, 
yes, must be a duck. 
Without good sound design, the mind is not sure about anything. The chain 
emits no sound. Is it made of cotton? Is it in a vacuum? I don’t know! And  
that is the information that gets passed along from the brain to the mind, 
lowering the likelihood that you will experience suspended disbelief in  
the theater.
This is the dynamic that flows through great productions. It flows between 
the group of artists that makes the pictures and the group of artists that  
makes them live. The more thought and imagination that is put into a digital 
model when it is created, the more life can be given to it using sound design 
and music.
Final Edit and Delivery
With all of the elements in the edit, the director, working with the editor, fine 
tunes the movie before putting it to bed. Figure 2.24 shows editor Joseph 
Schneider putting the final edit together for an animated clip. Although much 
of the refinement in the edit of an animated piece happens during the creation 
of the animatic in the pre-production stage, the director and editor may still 
need to tweak the film for many reasons. Sometimes shots that seemed nec-
essary in the animatic may have to be cut out for reasons of either pacing or 
budget. Once all of these issues have been resolved (or maybe time just runs 
out—it happens) and the sound track is finalized and added to the edit, the 
film is finally complete and ready for mass consumption.

68 
Digital Modeling
Evolution of Production Pipelines
Although the basic structure of production pipelines is usually the same,  
the pipelines are different depending on a studio’s idea of what the most  
efficient setup will be to produce the type of work it sets out to deliver. In 
most cases, pipelines evolve over multiple productions based on experience 
gained from past productions, keeping the components that work and remov-
ing or replacing the elements that were the weakest. Over time, a studio’s 
production pipeline becomes solid and efficient for that particular studio’s 
way of working.
Every once in a while, pipelines take a massive leap in evolution that can 
forever change how a studio or the industry as a whole approaches a produc-
tion, introducing new stages and/or positions and departments. 
Two perfect examples of this type of pipeline evolution are the virtual art 
department and the stereo department.
[Figure 2.24] Editors work 
closely with the director 
to put final tweaks on the 
project. They are also the 
final artists to work on a  
movie, giving it a final polish.

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
69
Virtual Art Department (VAD)
The virtual art department (also sometimes called virtual art direction) is now 
a fully recognized area under the jurisdiction of the ADG (Art Directors 
Guild) and is widely accepted as a major new area of the craft of filmmaking 
and television production. 
Conceived by Rob Powers and his team of digital artists for James Cameron’s 
Avatar, the virtual art department enables a unique, real-time, interactive 
system that combines different technologies for virtual production. This 
efficient workflow gives a director a real-time workspace, allowing for the 
flexibility to make important changes on the fly—something every director 
dreams of in movies that require heavy use of CG elements.
As live characters on the motion-capture stage are being shot, a director  
can see CG representations of characters and environments in real time and 
in-camera, and they can be used for composition and blocking. Figures 2.25 
and 2.26 show two examples of this setup in action.
[Figure 2.25] The virtual camera, virtual environment, and performance-captured actors all combine to provide the  
immersive virtual production experience.

70 
Digital Modeling
Artists working in the virtual art department are responsible for creating  
low-poly environments, props, and occasionally characters that serve as a 
foundation for final assets. These representations can vary widely, ranging 
from gray-shaded primitives for rough layout to modeled environments  
complete with detailed textures and matte paintings. 
This new time-saving system is so efficient that it’s being adopted by many 
studios working on productions such as The Adventures of Tintin, A Christmas 
Carol, Mars Needs Moms, Jack the Giant Killer, and many more. 
Industry Insight Rob Powers
Rob Powers, virtual art department supervisor and virtual art director in the 
ADG, shares his firsthand experience of working in the virtual art depart-
ment on Avatar:
With the industry’s first virtual art department on James Cameron’s Avatar,  
I was in a position of problem solving in areas that had never been previously  
attempted. The bleeding edge requires quite a bit of “out of the box” thinking 
[Figure 2.26] The virtual art 
department process allows 
for virtual location scouts 
and shot blocking very early 
in the modeling and design 
phase of production.

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
71
and a willingness to approach problems with an open mind. The VAD is 
essentially a very fluid and flexible hub where many departments on the 
product can collaborate in a real-time “sandbox” to achieve the most com-
pelling final result in the completed film, television show, or video game.  
It allows everyone to work out all types of potential problems long before 
they become critical, and the VAD workflow can often change a production 
for the better through this collaborative discovery process.
The impact of the VAD workflow on modelers and the area of asset creation 
in general is profound. To facilitate the required flexibility and interactivity  
required by the virtual production process, VAD modelers must think of many 
different challenges that might face a director on set and build in to the assets 
as many options as possible. For example, where previously a pre-vis workflow 
may have just modeled a tree, the VAD modeler would break a hero tree 
down to its most basic components and design a hierarchy to allow maxi-
mum flexibility on the set. The tree trunk, branches, roots, and leaves would 
all be carefully considered and flexible enough to give the director the creative 
freedom on set to actually redesign the tree for a shot.
All of this would also have to be done within the constraints of a real-time 
display engine so it requires a fairly high level of creativity to maintain the 
integrity of the production design provided by the art department while 
keeping polygonal counts and overall data optimized. A modeler must also 
deliver “clean” assets consisting of tri or quad polygons only. Delivering an 
asset with n-gons (polygons with more than four sides) can often create 
shading errors and causes extra overhead for the render engine. 
At its core, the VAD process applies a real-world director’s camera perspec-
tive to all phases of design, development, and modeling. This simple but 
important new approach has a huge impact on the final resulting assets. 
Assets created with the VAD process are more specifically geared toward the 
director’s intent and are more “camera-ready” than they would have been 
with traditional approaches. Using asset creation software with a strong, 
integrated render engine and an included texture baking workflow, like that 
offered in NewTek’s LightWave software, allows the artist to “bake” in beauti-
ful lighting and textures, which go a long way toward increasing the visual 
impact of the virtual assets.

72 
Digital Modeling
Another very unique aspect of the VAD modeling process is the art of  
manufacturing 180 degrees of a setting not represented fully in a concept 
painting. Of course, the key locations will often provide many angles, but 
more often than not, there are a significant number of sets or locations that 
have only a single-angled concept painting as the guide. Working with a 
virtual art director, the VAD modeler must invoke the look and feel or “spirit” 
of the concept art, but often actually creates many new assets that are not 
already designed. This can often prove to be quite a challenge, but also 
offers a very high level of creative freedom for those modelers who have a 
knack for design. The final result transforms a single-angle concept painting 
into a full 360 degree virtual environment or set that is ready for the director 
to shoot on.
The virtual art department process and virtual production workflows are 
really like a merger of real-time gaming technology with film and television 
production. This new, innovative resulting workflow enhances overall team 
collaboration, facilitating the director-centric production process that has 
guided film and television production for over a century.
Stereo Department 
Stereoscopic 3D is a technique used in production that creates or enhances 
the illusion of depth in a 2D image. It’s important to understand that it is an 
illusion—a trick of the eyes. Two images of the same subject, each from a dif-
ferent position, are used, which when wearing special glasses, trick the brain 
into merging these into one. 
Stereo artists convert 2D films into blockbuster 3D experiences, as well as 3D 
assets into stereoscopic 3D. Although both methods achieve (mostly) the 
same result, the processes behind creating these images are very different. 
In CG films like Up, How to Train Your Dragon, and Battle for Terra, the 
characters and situations all exist in a digital 3D space. This 3D space is 
calculated in Z-depth (the third dimension toward and away from you when 
looking down at a flat X and Y axis) and can be represented in a second eye 
by either using the Z-depth information to convert the film or by adding a 
second camera and rendering out that second eye. Figure 2.27 shows a scene 
from Zombie Dearest being converted to stereo 3D.

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
73
In 2D to 3D conversions of live-action films that were not shot with two 
cameras, the Z-depth information has to be artificially created by an army of 
rotoscoping (tracing over live-action film movement frame by frame), depth, 
and compositing artists. 
[Figure 2.27] This shot uses a single-camera stereo setup using a grid-shaped null to measure convergence 
(the focal point of the shot).

74 
Digital Modeling
Industry Insight David Maldonado
David Maldonado, depth artist at Stereo D, has had the benefit of working in 
both stereoscopic methods and shares some of his experience:
While working as a depth artist on the 3D versions of Thor, Captain America, 
and the fifteenth anniversary version of Titanic, I had to approach Stereo D’s 
proprietary procedure of 2D to 3D conversion with a certain amount of deli-
cacy. I had to be mindful of this new way of presenting film, respecting both 
the creators of the films’ visions as well as the eyes of the potential audience. 
Although stereoscopic viewing has been around for a long time, this new 
method of presenting it hasn’t and is still in a stage where it needs to prove 
its worth to the general populous. 
We have to make the stereoscopic viewing experience not only comfortable 
to the eyes, but also an enhancement to the movie-going experience. New 
methods of presentation are developed every day, and it helps when those 
who are developing these methods have a legion of cooperative artists 
behind them to help make these experiences possible. 
There are specific challenges that the roto artists, depth artists, edge clean-
up artists, and stereoscopic compositing artists face every day, and no  
one department is more important than another. We all have to work as a 
cohesive unit to make sure that the film gets delivered on time, and that  
can only work if we remain in constant, respectful communication. 
When I worked on the 3D conversion of the animated feature Battle for Terra, 
I was part of a team that was going into each shot’s scene and adding an 
additional camera that would be the second “eye.” Setting this second cam-
era in a place that truly enhanced the original vision of the shot while being 
mindful of how much or how little things were popping out of the screen 
plane was an exciting challenge and important to the success of the film. 
Each shot was populated by several digital models with baked-in animations, 
preset lighting, and visual effects. Knowing the proper naming conventions 
and paying attention to studio protocol was just as important as setting up 
each shot, and an attribute you learn to value in your coworkers.
In the end, it doesn’t matter which method of stereoscopic is being used 
to present the material. The audience doesn’t care how it got up there, the 
audience just wants to see something amazing, and it is up to the stereo art-
ists to make that experience possible.

[Chapter Two] Understanding a Modeler’s Role 
75
You should now have a better understanding of the production pipeline and 
where a digital modeler fits into the big picture. Although you may only 
have interest in modeling, I have found that the more I learn about the other 
aspects of production, the more efficient my models become. Another benefit 
that most artists don’t think about is the development of their professional 
reputation. The more aware you are of your place in production and how you 
interact with everyone involved, the better chance you have of doing a good 
job and getting more work based on positive word of mouth. As huge as this 
industry may seem to you now, in reality it is very small, and news travels fast 
within it. Keep that in mind with every project you lend your talents to.

[Chapter three]

preparing for Modeling
Throughout my career, I’ve tried to pass on my knowledge and experience to 
as many people as are interested. It’s my philosophy that no information is too 
priceless for me to keep locked away for my use only. I love when new artists 
ask questions, because it gives me the opportunity to share any and all tips and 
tricks—many of which I wish I had known when I was learning how to model. 
I am asked questions of all sorts, ranging from networking (“How do I use my 
artwork to break into the industry?”) to the technical (“How do I drop my 
selection in Photoshop?”). The questions neophytes ask of me all follow a con-
tinuous theme, and whether they are aware of it or not, the real question they 
are asking is: “How do I make my work look like what the pros are doing?”
Every artist who wants to make it in the industry has asked this question. I’ve 
done it, my colleagues have done it—heck, the reason you are reading this 
book is probably because you’ve also asked it. 
My answer to this question (and its various forms) is always the same, and it 
will completely blow your mind. Here it is:
Use as much reference material as possible and hone your observational skills. 

78 
Digital Modeling
Not exactly what you were expecting, huh? But yes, that is the mind-blowingly 
simple trade secret of the pros. It’s what separates a hobbyist from a profes-
sional. Remember that the sooner you come to the realization that there is 
no magic “Do My Job” button, the sooner you can start down the road of  
creating professional CG work.
The biggest problem I see for new artists is a lack of reference and observa-
tion. It immediately shows up in their work. Not only is it obvious to me, but 
most importantly, it’s obvious to those doing the hiring. To help you avoid 
this common problem, let’s take a closer look at using the tools of a profes-
sional digital modeler to prepare for modeling.
Tools of a Digital Modeler
When most modelers think of the term tool, it’s usually in the literal sense. 
They think of the many options of the modeling tools in their chosen appli-
cation—tools like Edge Bevel, Extrude, and Lathe. But the true tools of a 
professional digital modeler can be broken down into three important tools 
that are not a part of any package: 
 • Reference 
 • Observation 
 • Problem solving
Using and honing these three fundamental tools will allow you to raise the 
quality of your digital modeling from hobbyist to professional standards. Let’s 
explore these tools in greater detail. 
Reference
Good reference material coupled with attention to detail is the key to any 
successful project. Professional artists use any and all resources they can to 
attain the level of quality they produce in their work. Using reference is 
like using a cheat sheet in school—except the teacher doesn’t care! Not
using real-world reference for modeling is like washing your clothes without 
laundry detergent. It’s like Batman fighting crime without his utility belt, or 
a person mowing the lawn with scissors. You get the idea. To put it simply: 
Using reference makes your job easier, period. 

[Chapter Three] Preparing for Modeling 
79
Don’t fall victim to your faulty memory. Although eyewitness accounts can 
aid in the conviction of guilty parties, they can also lead to the conviction of 
the innocent. Artists that work from their “photographic” memories usually  
end up with mediocre work at best. You cannot imagine all of the little details 
that go into making up the simplest of items, such as the screws shown in 
Figure 3.1. Take note of the Phillips head on these screws and the shapes 
that make up the inset area. Without good reference, there’s no way you 
could make up the fine minutiae, and those details would be overlooked.
One of the first modeling projects I usually start off new modelers with is 
to work with real-world items, like a standard key. Figure 3.2 shows a few 
examples of keys. It’s interesting to watch new modelers as they realize just 
how detailed the shape of a key can be, and that it isn’t just a flat, extruded 
shape. As I stated earlier, their work made it quite obvious to me which  
students chose to use reference and which ones didn’t. I can’t say this enough: 
To make something look real, you need to reference something real.
I used to give my students weekly practical modeling quizzes that required them 
to create a model in a certain amount of time using the reference material 
that I supplied. It always amazed me how many students would leave the 
material unopened and proceed to model without ever using the reference! 
This would happen even after they listened to me go on and on about the 
importance of reference material. I don’t think I need to describe in detail 
how inaccurate their models were.
[Figure 3.1] Good reference material 
provides details that your memory leaves 
out, like the details in the head of this screw.
[Figure 3.2] This photo shows the intricate 
details that make up common keys.

80 
Digital Modeling
It’s very important that you constantly reference the material so that you 
never lose sight of what you are trying to create. Professional artists use  
reference material for every project they work on. This includes everything 
from photo-real work to highly stylized work. Even when I’m designing and 
modeling cartoon-style characters, I always have reference on the screen and 
at my desk. For example, when I was working on a cartoon version of Praying 
Mantis for Animation Factory, I contacted Chris O’Riley, a friend who has an 
amazing collection of insect photos he’s taken over the years. Fortunately, he 
had some great images he’d taken of a praying mantis. I displayed them on my  
reference monitor while I worked on the character to make sure I captured 
the qualities that make that insect look the way it does. I also added elements 
to the model that I didn’t even know about before studying the photos, and 
these extra details added to the overall personality of the character.
Figure 3.3 shows the 3D model and one of the photos I worked from. You can 
check out some of Chris’s other photos on his site (www.chris3d.com/photos).
[Figure 3.3] No matter what style you plan to work in, 
reference plays a substantial role in the success of a 3D 
model. The photo of the praying mantis (left) provided 
details for the stylized 3D model (right).

[Chapter Three] Preparing for Modeling 
81
Even when making something abstract or completely from your imagination, 
it’s generally a good idea to base it on real-world objects so that the audience 
can relate to them easily. Industry veteran and director of Postcards from the 
Future, Alan Chan, once told me to not think of it as creating whole new 
worlds, but to think of it as repurposing different parts of reality to paint what 
you see in your mind’s eye. When working in a more realistic style, it’s impor-
tant to pay attention to all the small details but not to get caught up in them. 
	
It’s not enough to just have a collection of reference material. You need to 
increase your observational skills so that you can study and compare what 
you’re working on with the reference you have. Your job is not only to match 
the reference, but to also figure out what makes the reference look real. Don’t 
just duplicate the object; duplicate what makes it look like the object.
Observation is a continuous process of learning. It should never be skipped. 
In the case of digital modeling, the model becomes a “problem,” and you can 
use your observational skills to come up with an answer. The reason there are 
so many inferior digital models in the 3D community is that the artist has 
solved the problem without ever truly understanding what the problem was. 
It’s like trying to assemble a plastic car model kit without the instructions, not  
ever knowing what kind of car you are building, what color it should be, or  
most importantly, why you are building it in the first place! The finished model  
will only ever be the potential of a great one, doomed to be forever unfinished. 
Before you ever launch your favorite 3D software, you need to think about what  
it is you’re going to model and fully understand it. Ask yourself questions about 
your subject so that you can formulate the problem and devise a solution. 
Some questions you might ask include:
 • What is the scale of the object? 
 • What is the object made of (wood, metal, living tissue)?
 • What is the surface of the object like (rough, smooth, sticky)?
 • Is the object seamless or is it composed of sub-objects?
 • Does it have cracks and fissures?

82 
Digital Modeling
 • How does the object’s surface interact with light?
 • Does it have an organic or hard-edged shape?
 • Where do parts meet or overlap?
 • Are there hidden recesses?
 • What is the volume of the object?
 • Has the object been damaged, or is it in pristine condition?
 • Is the object symmetrical or asymmetrical?
 • What is the mass of the object? Is it that of a balloon or a boulder?
 • How does it interact with its environment? 
 • How would the object behave in gravity?
 • Is the object manufactured by man or born in nature?
You can never ask too many questions about your subject, and each subject 
matter will probably lead to different questions that you’ll want to have 
answers for. To model a character, I’d want to know the character’s name, 
how old it was, where it was from, whether it was an introvert or an extro-
vert, and whether it prefers Ginger or Mary Ann. Some of those questions 
may not apply to observing a vehicle, but asking how the vehicle articulates, 
its mode of mobility, or its fuel source could be important.
Learning to observe your subject matter can transform you into a better  
digital modeler and is a requirement for professionals.
Problem Solving
Reference and observation are crucial in deciding exactly which tools and 
techniques to employ during the modeling process. Digital modeling is simply 
the process of solving visual problems and the art of devising a strategy that 
you will use to see the model from start through to completion.
Visualization
Want to model quicker and more efficiently? Simply see it modeled before it 
happens. One great technique that I learned when I was a teenager on the 

[Chapter Three] Preparing for Modeling 
83
school’s track team was the power of visualization, which means envisioning  
the race in your mind (and your success) before performing at the actual event. 
Professional athletes use visualization to see the basketball going through the 
hoop, the bat connecting with the baseball, the perfect pass being thrown 
between defenders, or the soccer ball being kicked out of reach of the goalie’s 
hands without missing the goal.
This may sound like a silly and complete waste of time, but it’s not. It simply 
works and is a powerful problem-solving technique. Another great benefit of 
visualization is that you can hone your skills throughout your day, even when 
you’re not in front of a computer.
Find a quiet space, preferably away from the computer. Take some time leading  
up to the modeling session and visualize yourself constructing the mesh. When 
visualizing, be as specific and detailed as possible. Imagine yourself sitting at  
your workstation and launching the software. Imagine creating the first ele-
ment all the way to the last. Spin the model around to take a good look at how  
true you stayed to your reference. The more specific you can be with the details, 
the more calm and confident you’ll be when you actually start modeling. 
Visualization is the process of creating a blueprint of how you go about mod-
eling, and this preplanning will go a long way toward making efficient use of 
your time.
Another technique for increasing your problem-solving skills is something  
I call modeling pilates. Yes, you read that right—modeling pilates. I’ve done it 
for years and continue to do it to this day. All you need to do is look at the 
environment around you, select any object you see, use your observational 
skills, and work out how you might construct it in 3D. You may never actu-
ally build that object, but the fact that you’re giving your brain a mental 
workout will increase the speed at which you’ll be able to develop solutions 
for modeling challenges. Do this throughout the day when you’re commuting 
to work, waiting in line at lunch, or anytime that you have a free moment.
Practice, practice, practice
Of course, there is the old advice for any art form: practice, practice, practice. 
It may be cliché, but the simple fact is that it’s true. The more modeling experi-
ence you have behind you, the more prepared you will be for what’s to come. 

84 
Digital Modeling
You now know the secrets of creating stunning digital models. Always 
remember that the first step of any new production is to gather reference 
material. Then you need to study the reference and make mental and written 
observations so that you can develop modeling solutions and apply them to 
your work. 
Gathering Reference Material
Knowing that you need good reference material, the next step is gathering 
as much of it as possible. You can never have too much. So where do the 
professionals get their reference material? Let’s explore the most common 
resources.
Physical Reference
The best source for good reference is usually sitting right in front of you.  
If you’re trying to model a realistic lamp, simply grab one from your home or 
office and take it to your workstation. Figure 3.4 shows a few of my anatomy 
figures that I constantly reference when modeling both realistic and stylized 
characters.
Now I know this one will be hard for some, but you may need to leave your 
workstation to gather reference material. I can’t tell you how many times I’ve 
seen artists working on re-creating something in the real world that may be 
just outside their door, yet they never get up to go look at it firsthand. I’ve 
also seen character modelers trying to work out the polygon flow of a char-
acter’s hip without getting out of their chair and moving their leg or asking 
someone nearby to get into a particular pose to get an idea of the way that 
area might deform.
There are a few other tools you can use to aid you in collecting reference, 
and every digital modeler should have them at their side as often as possible.

[Chapter Three] Preparing for Modeling 
85
Digital Camera
A digital camera will blow away any human’s ability to remember details. 
Digital cameras have come a long way over the years, and the best thing 
about their evolution is price. You may even have a perfectly good one in 
your phone. 
You don’t have to get the latest and greatest camera to get good reference 
material. I’ve purchased several cameras over the years and will still use the 
Canon PowerShot that I bought in 1999 when I leave my newer camera at 
work. I use my phone’s camera when I’m in a pinch. Although I envy some  
of my friends’ high-end cameras, I typically stick with point-and-shoot cameras  
because I usually just need clear reference images, and I’m not using the camera 
in the same way a professional photographer would. I do find it interesting 
[Figure 3.4] Anatomy 
reference is key to any 
digital character modeler 
wanting to produce quality 
meshes.

86 
Digital Modeling
that most of the artists I know in the industry have a high-end camera and 
have taken up photography as a hobby. This can be very valuable when it 
comes to rendering your work; knowing how a camera works should never  
be overlooked.
Although a camera can help you obtain a great deal of information to work 
with, there are a few more tools that I would suggest as well.
Tape Measure
A perhaps surprising must-have tool is a standard tape measure (Figure 3.5). 
The information you can get with one can sometimes be even more useful 
than the photos you take with your camera. If you want to model something 
as accurately as possible, you should record its dimensions. A tape measure 
can’t be beat in this regard. You can even include the tape measure in  
your photos for later reference, as the measurement of the antique chest 
in Figure 3.6 shows. Some tape measures are quite small (and even fit on 
keychains); most usually have a convenient belt clip—so you have no excuse 
to be without one.
[Figure 3.6] Including a tape measure in 
your reference photos can be a great way  
to determine the scale of a reference  
object later.
[Figure 3.5] Tape measures are a must-
have item for every digital modeler.

[Chapter Three] Preparing for Modeling 
87
By including the tape measure in the actual photo, you can use it as a way 
to measure items in the image by comparing it to the size of the tape mea-
sure. I’ve also used business cards, credit and ID cards or even money for the 
same reason. If you know that a standard business card is 2 inches tall by 3 1⁄2
inches wide, credit cards and IDs are 2 1⁄8 inches by 3 3⁄8 inches, a U.S. dollar 
bill is 2 7⁄12 inches tall by 6 1⁄6 inches long (Canadian bills are 6 inches long  
by 2 3⁄4 inches tall), or that a one cent coin is 3⁄4 of an inch across, you can 
easily figure out how large an item is in comparision placed next to it in a 
photo. Figure 3.7 shows an automotive carburetor. The business card placed 
in front of it gives you an idea that this carburetor is about 10.5 inches long. 
This is a handy trick that has helped me avoid having to go back on location 
to get measurements after I’m back at the studio.
Sketchbook
You’ll also want to have a sketchbook or notebook and a writing utensil to 
record as many notes as you can. A smartphone can also give you the ability 
to take notes (or dictation) without needing to carry a pen and sketchpad 
(and some apps even allow for full-color sketches). Details to make note of 
[Figure 3.7] Placing a 
business card in a photo is 
an easy way to determine 
size later.

88 
Digital Modeling
will differ from reference to reference, but get down as much information as 
you can. Some specifics to make note of may include
 • The dimensions you collected with the tape measure
 • The number of sides the item has 
 • The type of material the item is made out of
 • Whether the item looks new or old 
 • The time of day when you took photos of the item 
If you don’t have a camera, you can do rough sketches to refer back to 
when you’re back in the office. I do this every week on my commutes from 
Philadelphia to New York. People on the train seem to take issue with you 
firing off photos of them, but I’ve never had anyone complain when they’ve 
seen me obviously sketching them in my sketchbook. Some of my favorite 
character designs have been based on sketches from my commute. Figure 3.8
shows a few quick sketches of some interesting-looking commuters from my 
morning trips to New York City.
[Figure 3.8]  
Rough sketches can make 
for great reference material 
when you’re unable to get  
a snapshot with a camera.

[Chapter Three] Preparing for Modeling 
89
Digital Reference
What if you can’t get your hands on the item you need to re-create, even to 
take a picture? The next best resources are reference images that others have 
made available to everyone. You have a ridiculous amount of resources at 
your fingertips thanks to the Internet. You can find images of just about any-
thing online if you know where to look. My biggest online resource for refer-
ence gathering is Google (www.google.com). Within seconds, you get a large 
collection of reference images without ever leaving your seat.
Another great tip I picked up from artist Jamie Clarke when I was visiting 
the crew at Zoic years ago is to use Ebay (www.ebay.com) to collect reference 
images. Sounds like a strange idea, right? It is actually a brilliant one that has  
proven to be invaluable. When people try to sell something on Ebay, they 
usually take loads of large pictures of it from many different angles. I intro-
duced Ebay to my searches a couple years ago, and it has made a massive 
impact on my ability to gather good reference of any given item. 
Printed Reference
You can still gather great reference material at the bookstore, even though 
they are a dying breed. Libraries can also supply a wealth of material for just 
about any subject matter. Most of the artists I know have large libraries of 
books and magazines at their houses or studios. One of my friends—a digital 
modeler who owns a tattoo shop—has an impressive collection of books that 
I usually get caught up in when I visit.
My personal collection of books and magazines has become so large that it 
can be found all over the studio at Applehead Factory. A portion of my col-
lection is shown in Figure 3.9. I look for any reason to grow my collection, 
because I have learned over the years that good reference books come in 
handy on almost every project, especially my anatomy books.

90 
Digital Modeling
Movie Reference
Movies are also great sources for reference. With the growing collection of 
clips on sites like YouTube (www.youtube.com), it’s now easier than ever to 
pull great clips together for reference. It’s also extremely important to have 
a wealth of knowledge of movies in general, because directors and supervi-
sors reference them all the time. Do your homework on this one, especially 
because all it requires you to do is watch movies. Being able to communicate 
with directors or supervisors is incredibly important to your job, and getting  
a film reference (particularly a very obscure one) will give you a leg up on 
the competition, possibly even making you their go-to artist. This seems 
to be a weak area for many of the new artists coming into the industry. I’m 
always shocked when I’m talking to someone in this field who has not seen 
the movies that have helped shape this industry. Star Wars: The Clone Wars
CG supervisor, Lee Stringer, and I were teaching a class a few years ago, and 
no one in it knew who the legendary stop-motion animator Ray Harryhausen 
was. How can you think you can master your craft if you haven’t studied how 
the greatest artists did it? 
[Figure 3.9] You can never 
have too much reference 
material. Most artists I know 
have impressive book and 
magazine collections to pull 
from.

[Chapter Three] Preparing for Modeling 
91
Copyrighted Material
An extremely important judgment needs to take place when it comes to 
using reference material and whether it’s okay to use copyrighted material as 
reference for your digital models.
In this case, copyrighted material includes photographers’ photos, artists’ 
illustrations and paintings, movies, and animation, as well as someone else’s 
concept or likeness.
Although digital modeling is quite different from traditional art, the same 
copyright laws apply when working from copyrighted material.
Basically, if you’re only using someone else’s material as reference, you can 
simply collect the information you need and apply it to your digital model. 
On the other hand, if you intend to essentially re-create a specific image in 
3D, you need permission from the copyright holder of that material.
There is a big difference between using an image for reference and copying 
the image. Think of it like this: If you show others the reference material  
and an image of your model and they say the model is clearly based on the 
reference material, assume it’s a derivative use of the other person’s work,  
not just a reference use. Simply put, if your model looks “exactly” like the 
copyrighted material, you’ve broken the copyright laws.
Many copyright-free resources are available online that you can pull from 
if you are questioning whether or not you should use a copyrighted image. 
3D.sk (www.3d.sk) has been a favorite of mine for years; it has more than a 
quarter of a million royalty-free images available for instant download.
Disclaimer: The information given here is based on U.S. copyright law and 
is given for guidance only; you’re advised to consult a copyright lawyer on 
copyright issues.
References to Avoid
With the wealth of amazing reference materials available to a digital modeler, 
you should know that there are some you should stay away from beyond the 
copyrighted material I discuss in the preceding section.

92 
Digital Modeling
Inadequate reference
Common mistakes modelers make when gathering reference are selecting 
images that lack detail. Their imagination fills in the missing element, which 
in turn means they are no longer working from reference but their interpreta-
tion of the reference. Which image in Figure 3.10 gives you a better idea of 
the details that make up the engine of the boat? Personally, the image with 
the boat in the water tells me more about the environment than the boat.
Try to find reference material with clear detail and that is easy to explore. 
Photos taken from newspapers or photocopied pictures are notorious for not 
having enough detail.
Having a blurry image is also one of the worst types of references you can use. 
It distorts the shape of an object and makes it difficult or even impossible to 
differentiate details. Figure 3.11 shows an example of how a blurry image 
makes it difficult to work out specific details on this toy truck.
It may seem obvious, but I’ve seen many an artist trying to work from  
thumbnail-size reference images. Just as with blurry or low-detail images, if  
you can’t make out the detail, you’re no longer working from reference; instead, 
you’re just working from your interpretation of the reference. Figure 3.12 is 
a perfect example of an image you’d want to avoid because it’s too small. 
[Figure 3.10] The boat in the image on the left is too far away to gather proper details, whereas the engine details in the 
image on the right are very clear, making it ideal for reference material.

[Chapter Three] Preparing for Modeling 
93
Illustrations
Illustrations created by the visual design department for the project you are 
working on should be good reference, but you should avoid using art created 
by others artists as reference for your own work. It’s like making a photocopy 
of a photocopy. Eventually, some attributes will get lost in translation, and 
you’ll be relying on another artist’s interpretation of the subject matter. 
Figure 3.13 shows a 2D sketch of a horse by Graham Toms. Although it 
appears to be true to life, it’s still his interpretation of reality. You’d be better 
off working from a photograph of the real deal.
[Figure 3.11] Blurry images don’t provide 
enough information and should be avoided 
when gathering reference material.
[Figure 3.12] Small images don’t provide 
adequate details and should be avoided.
[Figure 3.13]  
Illustrations aren’t ideal 
reference material unless 
they were created either 
by or for you.

94 
Digital Modeling
If I were going to model a horse, I would probably have ten or more real 
horse photos open on my secondary monitor instead of someone else’s inter-
pretation, no matter how accurate it may appear to be. Also, keep in mind 
the information covered earlier in the “Copyrighted Material” section.
Digital models
For reasons similar to avoiding illustrations as reference, using another  
artist’s digital model as reference, such as the CG strawberry in Figure 3.14,  
is probably not the best road to travel. First, you have to assume that it’s 
copyrighted material; second, once again you are relying on that artist’s  
interpretation of the subject matter.
Photos with extreme lighting conditions
Whether the shadows in an image are hiding details or the lighting is blowing 
out or clipping the material (losing image detail due to maximum brightness), 
bad lighting conditions can ruin an otherwise perfect reference image. Look 
for images that show even lighting. Remember that these images don’t need 
to win awards—your model work does.
[Figure 3.14] Chris O’Riley 
created this amazing 3D 
strawberry model, and 
although it appears to be 
accurate, you’d be better  
off working from a photo.

[Chapter Three] Preparing for Modeling 
95
Figure 3.15 shows the same teapot photo taken using both ends of the bad 
lighting spectrum. Both distort the important details that make up the shape 
of the object. Modeling from either of the images would result in a 3D model 
that isn’t 100 percent accurate.
Note that if you’re the one taking the photos, the best time of day to get even 
lighting outside is just as the sun is coming up and just as it’s going down. 
At those times, the sun isn’t high enough to cast those pesky harsh shadows. 
You avoid strong shadows and get a nice even light over everything, which is 
exactly what you’re looking for in good modeling reference.
[Figure 3.15] The bright teapot 
has areas that are clipping and 
blending into the background.
The darker image has areas 
that blend into the shadows. 
Both are far from ideal to  
work from.

96 
Digital Modeling
Preparing Reference Material
Once you have all of the reference material you feel you need for a modeling 
project or you’ve simply run out of time to gather it (which is usually the case 
for me), you’ll want to prepare the content.
If your reference is a physical object, make sure it’s in an ideal spot where you  
will be working. You don’t want to have to get up every few minutes to go 
examine it for details, because it will most likely break your concentration 
and workflow, which leads to an inefficient use of your time. Most digital  
artists I know prefer to work in a dark environment, but make sure your  
physical reference is well lit. Being able to glance over at the reference and 
back to your model without even turning your head is ideal. 
When dealing with images, the following sections suggest some common 
tasks you may want to perform before you launch your 3D software.
Scan or Transfer
Even though you can place books, magazines, and photographs at your 
workstation, I’ve found it to be more efficient to have them onscreen (this is 
another time when a second monitor comes in handy). That usually means 
scanned. The higher the resolution at which you scan your reference material 
the better. As a general rule, 300 dots per inch (dpi) usually does the trick. 
Good resolution allows you to zoom into areas for closer inspection of details.
If you’ve captured your reference photos with a digital camera, transfer them 
to your system. Believe it or not, I’ve seen artists using their tiny LCD screen 
on their camera to view their reference while they model! At that point, it 
doesn’t matter which resolution you used to take the picture, because you are 
viewing it at postage-stamp size. Put it up on a big screen so you can get a 
good look.
Adjust Color and Levels
Using image manipulation software, such as Photoshop or Paint Shop Pro, you  
should adjust the images’ color balance and levels to optimize their quality.  
Often, an image that is too dark can be salvaged with a few tweaks to Brightness 
and Contrast or Levels. Some artists prefer a lower contrast and/or a grayscale 

[Chapter Three] Preparing for Modeling 
97
image for backdrop images they plan on modeling on top of, because it can 
be easier to read a model’s wireframe when displayed over the images.
Avoid overprocessing (making too many adjustments to) your images while 
editing them, or they may fall into the references-to-avoid category. It’s also 
a good idea to save any and all changes to a new file so that you can always 
return to the raw source file when needed.
Rotate, Size, and Crop
If the camera was tilted when you took the photo and the object you are 
modeling is crooked, it is good practice to rotate the image and level the 
object to straighten it as much as possible. Although most 3D applications 
have this option built in, it’s usually quicker to handle it before ever opening 
the 3D program.
Rotating and sizing your images is extremely important when preparing mul-
tiple views of the same object. For example, I always prepare the front and 
side images when modeling a human head from reference, making sure they 
are the same size and that they line up with each other. Figure 3.16 shows 
reference photos that I prepped for a CG model of my friend Sam. 
It’s usually OK to size down an image, but you want to try to avoid sizing up an  
image larger than its original size. There is a safe tolerance for sizing up photos  
without losing too much quality, but it’s a fine line—so be careful not to destroy 
[Figure 3.16] Taking the 
time to align reference 
images in the beginning 
will speed up the modeling 
process later.

98 
Digital Modeling
on otherwise perfect reference image. It’s usually best to just zoom in and out 
of the picture without ever having to scale the image permanently. 
You can also crop your reference images to display only the required details 
you need from that particular image, which will not only decrease the file 
size, but you’ll avoid having to zoom in each time you access the image.
Composite
A task that I’ve done for years that I find very useful is to composite reference 
images into one large image. Merging these images allows you to quickly load 
one image onto your second monitor without needing to load several separate 
images and organize them each time you prepare to model. Figure 3.17 shows 
the composite I created for the modeling session of Sam.
[Figure 3.17] Compositing multiple images into one large image is an efficient way to work with multiple references.

[Chapter Three] Preparing for Modeling 
99
Rename and Organize
Renaming and organizing are steps most artists skip in their race to start 
modeling. By default, most digital camera naming conventions are those 
of a mindless robot. Which name best describes an image: 2079033 or 
Sammy_Head_Front?
Giving proper naming conventions to your reference material will make 
them easier to recall at a later time. You should also save them in organized 
directories. Taking shortcuts with your reference’s naming and organization 
may save you time up front but will always come back to bite you in the  
digital rear later on.

[Chapter FOUr]

Fundamentals of a Digital Model
Before we go too far down the rabbit hole, I want to introduce some of the  
elements of digital models and the terms you’ll encounter throughout the book. 
If you have some experience already, you may be inclined to skip this section, 
but I recommend you at least skim through it just to make sure we’re on the 
same page. You can think of this chapter as a refresher course of 3D models 101.

102 
Digital Modeling
A Model’s Anatomy
Digital models can be broken down into three types:
 • Polygonal models are made up of a collection of points, edges, 
and polygons.
 • NURBS surfaces consist of a network of curves with smooth surfaces 
between them.
 • Subdivision surfaces are similar to polygonal models because they are 
made up of points, edges, and polygons but also share some of the ben-
efits of NURBS surfaces, placing them into their own category.
In this section I explain some of the terminology used in the creation of all 
three types of digital models.
Points
A point, also called a vertex (plural: vertices), is the lowest-level component 
that makes up a 3D model. Each point exists in 3D space with a specific X, Y, 
and Z coordinate. Because points alone do not have height, width, or depth, 
they cannot be rendered.
When two points are connected, a line is drawn. When three points are  
connected, they can become corners of surfaces on a model called a polygon. 
Without points, there would be no polygons. A triangle, for example, con-
sists of three points and one polygon, as shown in Figure 4.1.
[Figure 4.1] The three 
points (shown here in pink) 
define the shape of the 
triangle and its placement 
in 3D space.

[Chapter Four] Fundamentals of a Digital Model 
103
Multiple polygons can share the same points when used on a contiguous
(seamless) mesh. The tessellated sphere in Figure 4.2 shows individual 
points being used to define the multiple polygons that make up the object.
Vertex Maps
Every point in an object stores information about its position and rotation, 
although you normally don’t access the rotational values of an individual 
point. Points also have the ability to store a variety of additional information 
using vertex maps. Simply put, a vertex map is information saved to a point. 
The most common types of vertex maps include:
 • Texture (UV)
 • Weight
 • Morph
 • Color
 • Selection
[Figure 4.2] Polygons that 
share a common edge also 
share points to define their 
shape.

104 
Digital Modeling
Texture (UV)
Texture, or UV, maps store texture placement information and are the most 
common vertex map. UV mapping adds two extra coordinates to the points 
in your object; those on the U (horizontal) and V (vertical) axes, running 
horizontally and vertically through the flat plane of the texture map, on which 
you can paint your texture. UV coordinates are a 2D representation of 3D 
space. They set up a relationship between a two-dimensional image and the 
three-dimensional surface the image will be applied to.
Points can have as many UV maps assigned to them as you’d like. Figure 4.3  
shows three UV maps that were created for the Spiderbait character that you 
can download from my site at www.pushingpoints.com/2011/07/spiderbait-rig.
[Figure 4.3] Three separate 
UV maps were assigned to 
the points that make up the 
character mesh on the right.

[Chapter Four] Fundamentals of a Digital Model 
105
Weight
Weight maps store a single value, usually between -100 and 100 (although 
in some instances lower and higher values are possible). The most common 
use of a weight map is for defining a bone’s influence on a point when rigging
(placing bones and controls to allow a model to be deformed for animation). 
Figure 4.4 shows positive weight values applied to the points that make up 
the character’s jaw. When the weight map is assigned to the jaw bone, the 
points will move when the bone moves. This allows for seamless organic 
meshes to deform in localized areas.
[Figure 4.4] Weight values 
assigned to points in the 
mesh (top) can be assigned 
to a specific bone (bottom) 
during the rigging process.

106 
Digital Modeling
There are far more uses for weight maps than rigging. For example, you can 
use weights to mask a surface when texturing, influence dynamic simulations 
over an object, aid during the modeling process, and do much more.
Morph
Morph maps store offset information (alternate XYZ values) for a point’s  
position and are commonly used for creating morph targets for animation. 
Figure 4.5 shows several morphs applied to the base mesh. Each morph relies 
on multiple points being moved to new coordinates, and that information is 
saved to each vertex.
Similar to weight maps, morph maps have a variety of uses during the model-
ing and texturing processes.
Color
Color maps hold values for Red, Green, Blue, and Alpha (RGBA) color infor-
mation. I often use color maps on my character models to add color variation 
to the object’s surfaces, like adding blush to a character’s face. Figure 4.6
shows an example of using a color map to add a five o’clock shadow and some 
color to a character’s face.
[Figure 4.5] Morph maps 
are commonly used to 
create facial poses for 
animation.
[Figure 4.6] A color 
map was applied to the 
character’s face (right) to 
give the appearance of a 
five o’clock shadow.

[Chapter Four] Fundamentals of a Digital Model 
107
Selection 
A selection map, also referred to as a selection set, stores a single state of a 
point—either selected or unselected. Selection maps allow a modeler to 
recall a selected group of points quickly and can be extremely useful for 
defining which points will be affected by dynamic simulations. 
Edges
An edge is a one-dimensional line that connects two points in a polygon. 
Another way to describe edges would be to say that they are the line segments 
that border a polygon. A triangle, for example, has three edges, three points, 
and one polygon, as shown in Figure 4.7.
Similar to points, multiple polygons can share the same edges when used on 
a contiguous mesh. The tessellated sphere in Figure 4.8 shows individual 
edges bordering the multiple polygons.
Edge weights
Edge weighting increases or decreases the sharpness of an edge between two 
subdivision surface (SubDs) polygons, allowing for harder or softer corners 
without additional geometry being added (Figure 4.9). The main issue with 
edge weights is that there is no universal, widely supported format that allows 
you to transfer edge weights from one 3D application to another. In today’s 
[Figure 4.7] The polygon in this image consists of 
three edges, shown here in pink.
[Figure 4.8] Each polygon shares common edges in  
this mesh.

108 
Digital Modeling
mixed software pipeline, this can be a showstopper. Most modelers I know avoid 
edge weighting and opt for additional geometry to accomplish the same end goal. 
Polygonal Models
Polygons, often shortened to polys and commonly referred to as faces, are 
geometric shapes consisting of a number of points that define the surface of 
a 3D object. A polygon is what you actually see in a render, and a typical 3D 
model will consist of hundreds or thousands of polygons (Figure 4.10).
[Figure 4.10] This head 
mesh consists of over  
6000 polygons.
[Figure 4.9] Edge weighting 
has been increased to 100 
percent to the four edges  
on the top of the SubD  
object on the left to produce 
harder edges.

[Chapter Four] Fundamentals of a Digital Model 
109
Although some 3D applications allow the creation of one- and two-point 
polygons, it’s more common that a polygon be made up of at least three points. 
Three-point polygons are commonly called triangles or tris. Polygons made up 
of four points are called quads, and a polygon that has more than four points is 
usually referred to as an n-gon. The term n-gon means a polygon with n sides, 
where n is the number of the polygon’s sides. For example, a polygon with six 
sides is a 6-gon. Examples of a triangle, a quad, and an n-gon are shown in 
Figure 4.11.
NURBS
A Non-Uniform Rational B-Splines (NURBS) surface is a smooth mesh 
defined by a series of connected splines, which are polynomial curves. This 
smooth surface is converted to polygons at render time, so NURBS surfaces 
can contain an arbitrary number of polygons. NURBS can be converted to 
polygons or subdivision surfaces and are useful for constructing many types 
of organic 3D forms because of the minimal nature of their curves. NURBS 
geometry is smooth by default and doesn’t need to be subdivided to “become” 
smooth like polygon geometry does.
Non-Uniform refers to the parameterization (defining the parameters) of the 
curve. Non-Uniform curves allow, among other things, the presence of multi-
knots (a sequence of values that determines how much and where the control 
points influence the shape), which are needed to represent Bézier curves. 
[Figure 4.11] Polygons 
come in all shapes and sizes. 
The triangle (left) consists 
of three points, the quad 
(middle) is made up of four 
points, and the n-gon (right) 
is made up of 24 points.

110 
Digital Modeling
Rational refers to the underlying mathematical representation. This property 
allows NURBS to represent exact conics (such as parabolic curves, circles, 
and ellipses) in addition to free-form curves. 
B-splines are piecewise (a function that changes) polynomial curves (splines) 
that have a parametric representation. Simply put, a B-spline is based on four 
local functions or control points that lie outside the curve itself.
The best way to understand NURBS is to see them in action. Figure 4.12
shows multiple examples of the splines that define the NURBS surfaces.
[Figure 4.12] Each of these three NURBS surfaces are defined by a series of splines, shown 
to the left of each object.

[Chapter Four] Fundamentals of a Digital Model 
111
NURBS are most commonly used in computer-aided design (CAD), manu-
facturing, and engineering. Although they were once used heavily for organic 
objects (see the forthcoming section “Model Classification: Hard Surface and 
Organic”) in the film and broadcast markets, subdivision surfaces have since 
replaced them in almost all instances in movies and television.
Splines
A spline is a curve in 3D space defined by at least two points. The most com-
mon spline used in digital modeling is the Bézier curve. Bézier curves are used 
to model smooth curves using far fewer points than a polygonal model would 
require. Control points make up the curve and can be used to dramatically 
manipulate the curve with little effort. Also, splines are resolution indepen-
dent, unlike a polygonal mesh, which can appear faceted when you zoom in 
close enough to a curved surface.
Splines in 3D applications can be likened to vector curves in software such as 
Illustrator, Flash, and Photoshop. Splines are similar to NURBS in that they 
can create a “patch” of polygons that extends between multiple splines, form-
ing a 3D skin around the shape (Figure 4.13), a feature which is extremely 
useful when modeling. Unlike NURBS, the splines must be converted to 
polygons before rendering.
Splines are also useful in many other modeling techniques, including but not 
limited to, extrusion (adding depth to a flat surface) and cloning (duplicating) 
along a spline and deforming a mesh based on the curves of a spline. 
[Figure 4.13] The four 
splines on the left were 
used to patch the polygonal 
mesh on the right.

112 
Digital Modeling
Subdivision Surfaces
Subdivision surface (SubD) is a refinement algorithm that creates a smooth 
curved surface from a coarse polygonal mesh (also called a base mesh). This 
process takes the base mesh and creates a smooth surface using the original 
vertices as control points, also referred to as the control cage. Figure 4.14
shows the polygonal mesh (left), the control cage (middle), and the resulting 
SubD mesh (right).
The number of polygons, or subdivisions, generated from SubDs can be adjusted 
to a varying level of density, and complex smooth objects can be created in a fast 
and predictable way from simple base meshes, as shown in the character model in 
Figure 4.15. This makes SubDs a popular option for most digital modelers.
[Figure 4.14] Subdivision 
surfaces allow you to work 
with a very light and simple 
polygonal mesh to create 
smooth organic shapes.
[Figure 4.15] This character was created with a very simple polygonal mesh (left).  
 But with SubDs applied (middle), a smooth, high-poly mesh was generated (right).

[Chapter Four] Fundamentals of a Digital Model 
113
Model Classification:  
Hard Surface and Organic
When 3D was still in its infancy, digital modelers were usually put into one of 
two distinct groups based on the type of meshes they constructed. Although 
the lines have become blurred, these groups still exist today and play a role in 
how modelers define themselves in the industry. Also, the distinction of the 
types of meshes a modeler creates makes it easier for studios looking for talent 
to find the right digital modeler for their specific modeling needs.
Every 3D mesh can be grouped or classified as either a hard surface or organic. 
What’s the difference? What defines an object as hard surface? What defines an  
object as organic? So many objects nowadays seem to blur the lines between 
the two. How would you make a distinction between these classifications?
What may come as a surprise is that if you ask 20 professional digital model-
ers what the difference between these two classifications is, you’ll receive 20 
different responses. I did just that before writing this section of the book and 
was quite surprised at some of what I heard.
How can something so seemingly clear-cut bring about so many different 
ways to classify a 3D model? Before coming to a conclusion, let’s explore the 
most common responses.
Production Driven
Many artists felt that a model would be classified by how it would be used in 
a production. A static object, such as a stone statue, gas pump, or street sign, 
would be considered a hard surface object, whereas objects that would deform 
or animate, such as an animated human character, flag, or animal would fall 
into the organic category.
The same item could be classified two different ways depending on what 
the object is called to do for the shot/project. A statue is made of stone and 
doesn’t usually deform; therefore, it is a hard surface object. But if it becomes 
a moving statue, as in the world of Harry Potter, it is organic.
Although a gun has moving parts that can be animated, it is still a rigid 
object, which makes it a hard surface object, unless of course, someone with 

114 
Digital Modeling
super human strength comes along and bends (deforms) the barrel—then it 
becomes organic.
If the mesh is going to deform in some way, it needs to be modeled differently 
and it should then be classified as an organic object.
Attribute Driven
Some believed that it was a model’s attributes, or what an object looks like, 
that defined whether it was hard surface or organic. So if the mesh had flowing 
“organic” curves where any shape could smoothly transform into any other, 
like a character, ornate piece of furniture, or a sleek sports car, it was an 
organic mesh. 
Hard surface objects would be defined as meshes typically involving tight edges 
or simpler shapes joining together with distinct edges, even if the shapes were 
soft or sleek, like guns, power tools, and retro robots.
Also, if the object’s surface attributes were that of stone, metal, or glass, it 
would fall into the hard surface category, whereas objects made up of living 
tissue, like animals, plants, and people, would be considered organic.
Construction Driven
One artist defined the two by focusing solely on the modeling aspect. Objects 
that require a more “organized” topology could be classified as an organic 
mesh and easily created using “organic” modeling tools and techniques. He 
believed that organic meshes tend to have more polygons and could benefit  
from SubDs more than hard surface objects. Hard surface objects don’t require 
an organized, semi-regular topology and could be created with fewer polygons 
with less concern about the object’s underlying mesh.
Model Classification Evaluation
Although each of these schools of thought has valid arguments and may work 
for a particular artist, we simply can’t classify an object based on how it is 
constructed, will be used in production, or by its appearance. To do that would 
cause confusion, because every object could find its way into each category.

[Chapter Four] Fundamentals of a Digital Model 
115
Take, for example, my dog Jack. He’s a chocolate lab, which is classified as 
being part of the Canidae family. For the most part, Jack acts like your average  
dog, wanting to eat, play, and sleep most of the time. He does, however, show 
attributes of a cat at times, and every now and then he will scratch at the 
ground after he urinates, like a cat pawing at its litter box. Although this is 
common in cats, it doesn’t make Jack part of the Felidae family.
Organic modeling goes beyond the fact that the shape of the model is rounded. 
Many hard surface objects have organic shapes, like cars, cell phones, and 
robots, whereas organic objects can have rigid shapes like rocks, insects, and 
crustaceans. Industrial design has moved more towards organic shapes over the 
years, and the entertainment industry is taking things that were traditionally 
hard surface, static objects and deforming them in animation—having gas 
pumps dance in commercials, for example.
Also, modeling something to perform well when animated is just good mod-
eling technique and shouldn’t determine whether something is hard surface 
or organic. For example, look at a mesh sculpted in ZBrush, or modeling with 
metaballs or voxels. You can create something very organic, but these model-
ing techniques will make the model nonconducive to animating. Would that 
then be considered hard surface modeling? Of course not. 
Most modelers don’t limit their tool and technique use based on whether a 
model is organic or hard surface. Generally, they use good modeling tech-
niques, which include building a model that’ll hold up if deformed, even if 
it’s not intended to, and apply those same techniques regardless of whether 
the model is hard surface or organic. 
You hear the terms hard surface and organic modeling all the time in the  
3D modeling community, and artists are often defined as one or the other.  
If you make mostly characters meshes, you are an organic modeler. If you 
make more architectural or mechanical objects, you are a hard surface mod-
eler. I usually describe myself as an organic character modeler, but it is simply 
not that straightforward, because I create products and vehicles that are 
defined as hard surface too.

116 
Digital Modeling
So back to the point: What’s the difference between hard surface and organic 
models, and how do we define the two? I suppose, essentially, there is no dif-
ference at all, and it is a question of semantics. For the purposes of this book 
(and based on my personal philosophy), I use the following distinction: 
Characters, creatures, plant life, and more naturalistic environments are 
organic models, and architectural environments, vehicles, and mechanical 
products are hard surface. This is very loose as a definition, and as I’ve tried 
to emphasize, the lines between the two are indeed very blurred. 
Hard surface
Hard surface objects are anything man-made or constructed. Architectural 
structures, vehicles, robots, and anything machined or manufactured could 
fall into this category. The robots from FunGoPlay’s Grid Iron Gladiators 
(www.fungoplay.com), shown in Figure 4.16, would fall into the hard  
surface category.
[Figure 4.16] Although these robots have smooth organic shapes, they still fall into the 
hard surface category.

[Chapter Four] Fundamentals of a Digital Model 
117
Organic 
Organic models are subjects that naturally exist in nature. This would include 
humans, animals, plants, trees, rocks, boulders, terrains, clouds, and even 
lightning bolts. The nonplayer characters that roam the world of FunGoPlay 
(Figure 4.17) would be considered organic models.
Model Styles
As with a model’s classification, a mesh usually has a specific style associated 
with it. A style refers to a specific philosophy, goal, or look. Realism, impres-
sionism, abstract expressionism, and surrealism are common styles found 
in traditional art. Although a digital model could easily fall into any of the 
traditional art styles, the 3D industry usually places them into one of two dif-
ferent model styles: photo-real and stylized.
[Figure 4.17] These characters from FunGoPlay would be classified as organic models.

118 
Digital Modeling
Photo-real
When a model depicts an object with realistic accuracy, the term photo-real is 
applied. Digital artists use photographic reference and their observation skills 
to transfer the realistic properties to the details that make up their models.
It’s important to understand that the subject matter is not required to be a 
real-world object, like a car, human, or architectural structure. Models of 
robots, dragons, and other fictional subjects can also be modeled in a photo-
realistic style using real-world reference as a guide.
Stylized
When a digital model consists of artistic forms and conventions in a non-
realistic style, it is referred to as a stylized model. Simply put, a stylized model 
is one that is not photo-real. Cartoon characters and environments are classic 
examples of stylized models.
The best stylized modelers I know still gather and use just as much real-world 
reference material as a photo-real modeler. The only difference is how they 
interpret it and apply that information to the model.
Choosing a Style
Although many artists would argue otherwise, I don’t find either style of 
modeling to be more difficult than the other. Both styles require the same 
attention to detail, and the same care needs to be put into the poly-count 
and topology of the mesh. At the end of the day, the only real difference 
between the two styles is where the points are arranged on the model, as 
shown in the head models in Figure 4.18.

[Chapter Four] Fundamentals of a Digital Model 
119
Most artists gravitate towards a particular style. I prefer creating stylized  
models and creating meshes that have otherworldly proportions and attributes, 
but I also tackle photo-real models on a regular basis. My modeling toolset 
and techniques don’t change depending on the style of the mesh I’m tasked 
with. Digital modelers’ goals should be to hone their observational skills and 
to have the ability to work across styles. 
Learning to work in both styles will only enhance your ability in the  
style of your choice and will open up more opportunities to you as a profes-
sional modeler.
[Figure 4.18] Each of these head models consists of the same elements, but only the head 
on the far left would be classified as photo-real.

[Chapter FIve]

Digital Modeling Methods
An interesting fact in the digital modeling world is that no two artists use the 
same techniques when creating a digital model, even when the two modelers 
are working from the same reference material, producing the same final mesh. 
Consider this example: When I had classes of thirty students working on the 
same robot model, I never saw any two working with the same method. This 
just goes to show that there is no set way to work, and that artists are free to 
work with whatever method(s) they feel most comfortable with.
When first introduced to 3D software, I began creating digital models by build-
ing everything using common primitives like boxes, spheres, discs, cones, and 
so forth. Using this primitive modeling method, I was always able to successfully 
create just about anything I was tasked with, but I still felt there had to be a 
better approach for the organic meshes I was making. 
© Disney/Pixar

122 
Digital Modeling
I began exploring alternate modeling methods and eventually discovered 
box modeling, which I then dubbed the Holy Grail of modeling. Adding box 
modeling to my bag of modeling tools opened up all sorts of new possibilities 
that forever changed the way I tackle creating digital assets. If adding one 
new technique could make such a difference to my modeling efficiency, what 
other techniques existed that I wasn’t aware of? I continued to learn as many 
techniques as I could to hone my skills as a digital modeler. Over the years 
I’ve discovered that each modeling technique I pick up inevitably paves the 
way to solving a multitude of modeling challenges, big and small. 
Getting locked in to a particular way of working is easy. However, it’s impor-
tant to understand that limiting your toolkit can come at the price of  
modeling efficiency. I never felt I reached my maximum potential as an art-
ist until I armed myself with a wide array of modeling techniques. With this 
arsenal, choosing the right tool for the specific task at hand has become a 
matter of instinct. 
In this chapter, I cover the most popular techniques used to generate digital 
models, providing insight on their strengths and most common uses. Adding 
these techniques to your modeling toolkit will give you more options to pull 
from when your next big modeling challenge pops up. 
Build Out
The build out approach to modeling is the oldest method of digital model-
ing and is still widely used throughout the industry. This technique involves 
constructing the tertiary details of a model from the very first polygon cre-
ated. Once one portion of the mesh is complete, you simply build towards 
another area of the model and continue this process until the entire mesh is 
constructed.
For many, the build out method is the easiest modeling technique to grasp.  
It is a great method for both new and seasoned users to build everything from  
stylized to realistic models. The two most common modeling tasks performed 
by artists using the build out method are creating realistic head models and 
performing retopology (the process of rebuilding the topology of an object). 
Using a preexisting mesh consisting of millions of polygons—usually created  
in a sculpting program such as Mudbox (www.autodesk.com) or ZBrush 

[Chapter Five] Digital Modeling Methods 
123
(www.pixologic.com)—the process of retopology creates a lower-poly, clean 
model that deforms properly when animated.
Two primary techniques fall into the build out category: point by point and 
edge extend.
Point by Point
The technique’s name says it all. With the point by point technique, you 
start by generating points to define the shape of the mesh you want to pro-
duce and then create polygons from those points. I know a few modelers that 
use this technique to model all their low-poly models for games. I find point 
by point to be the fastest way to generate custom letterforms for 3D text and 
logos when a font is not available. Figure 5.1 shows a custom W that was 
created by placing multiple points, selecting those points, and generating a 
polygon from the selection.
Edge Extend
The edge extend method of modeling usually starts with the creation of a flat 
polygon created either using the point by point method or by using a primi-
tive object. Once the flat polygon has been created, an edge is selected and 
extended to produce a new polygon. This step is repeated until the entire 
mesh has been formed. Digital modelers use this method to create just about 
any subject matter, including vehicles, weapons, and more. The most com-
mon use of this technique is the creation of a realistic head. Figure 5.2 shows 
the edge extend method used to create a boot with an embossed design, start-
ing with a single four-point polygon.
[Figure 5.1] Placing  
individual points to use to 
create polygons is the oldest 
form of digital modeling.

124 
Digital Modeling
Primitive Modeling
Primitive modeling, in simple terms, is combining multiple primitive geomet-
ric shapes (like boxes, spheres, discs, and so on) and modifying their shape to 
form the desired final object. Figure 5.3 shows a few examples of the most 
common primitives.
All 3D software packages offer a wide range of tools to manipulate and com-
bine custom shapes from primitive objects, making this method of modeling 
very popular with digital modelers. Although artists have used this method 
of modeling to create an endless variety of models, its primary use is on hard-
surface, mechanical meshes like the scout robot in Figure 5.4, which was 
created by Deuce Bennett for military visualization. 
If you look at the items around you in your environment, you can start to see  
how you might model a majority of them using primitive geometry. Most tables, 
shelves, and even your keyboard and monitor could be created from simple 
boxes. When I first started modeling, I constantly thought about how I would 
model whatever was in front of me using nothing but primitive objects. 
Although I work with several modeling methods, primitive modeling still 
plays a major role in the construction of my polygonal models.
[Figure 5.2] Creating the 
embossed pattern on this 
boot would have been a 
challenge with other meth-
ods. Using the edge extend 
technique, I was able to  
create the pattern in a  
few minutes.

[Chapter Five] Digital Modeling Methods 
125
[Figure 5.3] These com-
mon primitives can be 
found in most if not all 3D 
software available today. 
From left to right: box, ball 
(sphere), disc (cylinder),  
and cone.
[Figure 5.4] This robot, created for military visualization, was constructed from primitive 
geometry. The two components on the left could be made from multiple boxes and discs.

126 
Digital Modeling
Box Modeling
The box modeling technique can be likened to primitive modeling, because 
the first step in the process of box modeling is starting with a primitive 
shape—usually a box (hence the name). Instead of using multiple primitives 
to generate the final mesh, the digital modeler “grows” additional geometry 
from the single primitive to create an entire seamless mesh. This additional 
geometry is created by extending or beveling individual or groups of poly-
gons, giving the artist more geometry to help shape the model.
Although working with subdivision surfaces isn’t required when box model-
ing, the two are usually used in tandem. Box modeling is an extremely fast 
way to create complex, smooth objects from simple base meshes. Modelers 
use box modeling as a way to quickly create a low-poly, rough, polygonal base 
shape and then apply SubDs to smooth out the shape, all the while using the 
original polygonal mesh to control the overall shape. 
Box modeling is most commonly used to create organic meshes, although art-
ists use it to create everything from weapons to vehicles. Figure 5.5 shows 
two models I created for Pixar’s animated short film Partly Cloudy using the 
box modeling method. I made the shoulder pads from several box primitives, 
and the helmet started off as a sphere primitive.
Box modeling is without a doubt my go-to modeling method for creating 
character models. Figure 5.6 shows a cartoon animal head being box mod-
eled. I prefer to start with a box so that I begin with as few polygons as possible 
and only add additional geometry when needed. With that said, I never dis-
count the other primitives and have found them quite handy at times.
[Figure 5.5] These two 
assets created for Pixar’s 
Partly Cloudy were created 
using the box modeling 
technique.
© Disney/Pixar

[Chapter Five] Digital Modeling Methods 
127
Patch Modeling
When it comes to patch modeling, whether you’re creating them using NURBS  
(Non-Uniform Rational B-Splines) or polygon patches from splines, the pro-
cess is relatively the same. Using curves, you create a wire cage to define the 
surface of an object. The surfaces created between the intersecting curves are 
known as patches. These patches are controlled by the points that make up 
the curves and are commonly called control points. When multiple patches 
are combined, you can create complex organic shapes with minimal curves. 
Figure 5.7 shows an example of NURBS defining the surface of a bottle.
[Figure 5.6] Starting from 
a box, this cartoon animal 
head takes shape quickly 
using only a handful of 
modeling tools.
[Figure 5.7] The simple  
set of curves shown on 
the left defines the NURBS 
surfaces that make up the 
bottle (right).

128 
Digital Modeling
NURBS patch modeling is commonly used in computer-aided design (CAD) 
and manufacturing. The best vehicle modelers I know use spline patch mod-
eling, almost exclusively. Figure 5.8 shows an example of a car model created 
by my friend Lewis (www.lewis.tomsoft.hr) using spline patch modeling to 
generate a SubD mesh. Don’t let these examples limit your use of this power-
ful modeling method. Digital artists use patch modeling to create characters, 
clothing, and more. I’ve used patch modeling to create everything from the 
membrane in bat wings to the hull of a boat.
Digital Sculpting
Although all digital modeling is, in a sense, digital sculpting, the name has 
been recycled for the newest method of modeling to be introduced to 3D  
artists. Digital sculpting is a method of modeling that is the closest an artist 
can get to traditional sculpting. 
With the ability to use millions of polygons, a modeler manipulates a base 
mesh using a brush-based system that allows for the creation of photoreal-
istic, highly detailed meshes that weren’t possible until recently. The base 
mesh can be anything from a simple ball primitive to an object consisting 
of any number of polygons. Figure 5.9 shows a digital creature maquette 
sculpted by Glen Southern (http://southerngfx.co.uk). He created this mesh 
in a fraction of the time he would have needed to model it with traditional 
polygonal modeling methods. 
[Figure 5.8] Splines were used (left) to create polygonal patches (middle) that were used to  
generate a base mesh. This mesh served as the base to create this detailed muscle car (right).

[Chapter Five] Digital Modeling Methods 
129
Once limited to organic subject matter, digital sculpting has recently 
evolved, allowing digital modelers to easily create all manner of models, 
including hard surface. One of the reasons digital sculpting is so attractive, 
besides the ability to achieve high levels of details easily, is the freedom an 
artist has when it comes to the meshes’ topology. No consideration to the 
layout of polygons is needed when digital sculpting, leaving the artist’s focus 
on the shapes, not the underlying geometry.
This method of modeling is used throughout the 3D industry, and you’ll see it 
in feature films, illustrations, prototyping, and more. It has virtually replaced 
traditional sculpting in the toy industry and has completely changed the face 
of the gaming industry. The high-poly meshes are used as source material to 
enhance low-poly models used in real-time games with the use of normal 
maps. This mapping option uses pixels containing the high-res mesh data 
to fake the lighting of raised and recessed areas on a surface, which allow 
for low-resolution game models to display the details of a high-poly sculpt. 
Figure 5.10 shows the elements that were generated by Jon-Troy Nickel 
(www.kalescentstudios.com) to create a next-gen game model.
[Figure 5.9] Starting from  
a primitive sphere, this  
creature maquette was 
sculpted using millions of 
polygons, producing fine 
details that would be dif-
ficult to accomplish with 
other modeling methods.

130 
Digital Modeling
[Figure 5.10] The details 
shown in the high-poly  
digital sculpt (top) are 
mapped onto the low- 
resolution mesh (middle) 
using a normal map (lower-
right corner).

[Chapter Five] Digital Modeling Methods 
131
3D Scanning
3D scanning allows for the collection of surface data from a real-world object. 
This recorded information is then converted into a digital mesh, usually 
consisting of millions of points (vertices). It’s the 3D equivalent of a flatbed 
scanner, or a camera for capturing 2D images. Everything from small tradi-
tional sculpts, whole bodies, buildings, and even landscapes can be scanned. 
This technology is used throughout the 3D industry for markets like medical 
visualization, film, games, industrial design, and more.
3D scanners are available in small desktop units, such as the NextEngine 
3D Scanner (www.nextengine.com), to large scanners like the Whole Body 
Color 3D Scanner by Cyberware (www.cyberware.com), which can scan an 
entire person, capturing not only the surface shape, but the color information 
as well.
Once limited to only a few different technologies, there are now many options 
available for 3D scanning. The variety of scanners available today can be 
placed in one of two categories, contact scanners and noncontact scanners: 
 • Contact scanners require the scanner to physically touch the object 
being scanned. The MicroScribe G2 (www.emicroscribe.com), shown in 
Figure 5.11, is an example of a contact scanner. 
[Figure 5.11] The car’s  
surface data is captured  
by using the tip of the  
articulated arm to trace  
over the contours of a  
physical object.

132 
Digital Modeling
To capture the dimensions of a car, for example, you simply take the tip 
of the arm and trace points along the outside of the car’s body. Sensors 
at each joint in the arm are used to calculate the precise 3D position of 
the tip at any given point. The recorded information is then translated 
into data points and processed by your 3D software, and a 3D mesh appears 
on your screen. The 3D model can then be manipulated using any of 
the modeling tools you prefer. One benefit of contact scanners is that 
they can capture surface data from objects made up of any material type.
 • Noncontact scanners, also called active scanners, emit light, X-ray, or 
ultrasound to capture the surface data of the object being scanned. The 
light or radiation emitted from the scanner is reflected off the object 
being scanned and sent back to the scanner, recording the distance of 
the surface.
Although noncontact scanners are more popular than contact scanners, 
one key limitation is that noncontact scanners have difficulty scanning 
reflective and transparent objects. This can sometimes be overcome  
for objects that are expendable by spraying the object with white or 
light gray paint. Objects that are one of a kind or irreplaceable can be 
dusted with white powder that is easily removed after the scanning pro-
cess is complete. 
The artists at Varner Studios (www.varnerstudios.com) use a noncontact  
3D scanner that uses light to capture surface data from traditional 
sculpts. The scanners Varner uses are a Minolta Vivid Laser scanner 
and a Steinbichler Comet 5 White Light scanner. The captured data is 
converted into a digital mesh and further sculpting is done to the model 
using digital sculpting programs, such as ZBrush and Freeform. Figure 
5.12 shows a clay sculpture created by Steve Varner being scanned by 
the in-house scanner and the resulting digital model.
X-ray computed tomography (CT) produces volume data in the form of  
2D slices that can be stacked together and converted into a digital mesh 
using specialized software, such as Volumedic (www.volumedic.com). 
This process is called image-based meshing and produces extremely accurate 
models. Volumedic is mostly known as a tool for medical illustration and 
visualization but is also used extensively in neuroscience, biology, and 
the Earth sciences. I’ve used Volumedic to generate medical illustrations, 

[Chapter Five] Digital Modeling Methods 
133
and for several years it has been instrumental in the creation of Zoic’s 
Emmy award–winning visual effects for shows like CSI: Crime Scene 
Investigators and National Geographic Channel’s Inside the Living Body, 
among others. Figure 5.13 shows CT scan data being used to create a 
digital mesh of a skull using Volumedic.
[Figure 5.12] Using a 3D scanner, Varner studios takes advantage of its 30-plus years’ experience of traditional toy sculpting 
to create digital meshes. The physical sculpt (left) is scanned with the 3D scanner, producing a digital mesh (right).
[Figure 5.13] The volume data rendering from CT scan data (left) can be automatically converted into a polygonal mesh 
(right) using Volumedic.

134 
Digital Modeling
Modeling with Texture and  
Animation Tools
Many 3D programs with modeling capabilities also have the ability to per-
form other areas of production. You can take advantage of the tools normally 
designated for texturing and animation to aid in the modeling process.  
There are a wide variety of tools to pull from. Some of the popular tools  
digital modelers have adopted for modeling are texture displacement, bones, 
and dynamics.
Texture Displacement
Using images and procedural textures to drive mesh displacements can be 
extremely useful modeling tools, allowing for the creation of detailed geometry 
with very little setup time. When applied to a 3D object, textures can displace 
the geometry, manipulating the points that make up the model into an endless 
variety of shapes. Figure 5.14 shows a simple SubD plane with several differ-
ent procedural textures being used to displace the mesh.
I’ve used texture displacement to model realistic landscapes, rolling ocean waves, 
and more. I recently used this technique to create details in a character’s hair 
for the FunGoPlay (www.fungoplay.com) virtual world. A procedural texture  
was used to displace a simple hair mesh, producing the hairstyle the art direc-
tor was looking for and making light work of what could have been a more 
[Figure 5.14] The subdi-
vided plane (left) can take 
on many different shapes 
when procedural textures 
are used to displace the 
points within the mesh (right).

[Chapter Five] Digital Modeling Methods 
135
challenging task to model traditionally. Figure 5.15 shows the character 
with and without the procedural texture applied.
When a modeler uses texture displacement to manipulate an object’s surface, 
it allows animators to work with a low-resolution mesh when animating and 
then increase the object’s polygon density before applying the displacement 
at render time. Animating with a lower-resolution object speeds up viewport 
playback, allowing the animator to work faster. 
Bones
The standard method of animating a seamless 3D mesh is the use of a skeleton 
rig, which consists of a series of virtual bones that are similar to their real-world  
counterparts. This hierarchy of interconnected bones is assigned to a mesh  
and deforms it based on each bone’s position, scale, and orientation. Although 
bones are usually set aside for rigging meshes for animation, I’ve used bones in  
my modeling toolkit for several years to speed up complex tasks, such as deform-
ing a wire, hose, or tube around a complex shape. Figure 5.16 shows a ribbed 
hose that was rigged with bones and posed to conform to the shoulder pads of  
a robot character. Using bones allowed natural bends in the hose that would 
have required far more time to accomplish with traditional modeling methods.
[Figure 5.15] The details 
in this character’s hair were 
easily created using a proce-
dural texture to displace the 
geometry. The model in the 
middle shows the base hair 
mesh without displacement.

136 
Digital Modeling
Dynamics
In 3D software, dynamics collectively refers to any physics-based simulations 
that enable you to animate virtual objects with realistic physical movements.  
This can range from soft deformable objects (soft body), like hair and cloth, to  
rigid simulations (rigid body), such as a glass shattering or a building crumbling. 
Digital modelers can take advantage of these powerful simulations to aid in 
the modeling process. For example, you could create a segmented flat plane 
and run a dynamics simulation on it to create a sheet draped over a table or 
bed, producing natural folds and wrinkles with the click of a button. 
I employed dynamics to model a microphone that was used on a Ludacris 
album cover (Battle of the Sexes). The microphone itself was quite trivial, 
but the woven mesh posed a major challenge. Using dynamics, I took what 
could have been a nightmare modeling assignment and turned it into a few 
minutes’ worth of work. I created a flat woven mesh and used cloth dynamics 
to conform it to a spherical shape. This made the perfect, wire-woven mesh 
needed to top off a microphone model. Figure 5.17 shows the process of 
using dynamics to create the wire-woven mesh on the microphone.
[Figure 5.16] The ribbed 
hose (right) was rigged with 
bones and posed to easily 
conform to the shape of the 
robot’s shoulder pads.

[Chapter Five] Digital Modeling Methods 
137
[Figure 5.17] A flat woven mesh was modeled (left), 
draped over a collision object using cloth dynamics  
(middle), and then used as the wire mesh on a  
microphone model (right).

138 
Digital Modeling
The Importance of Mixing Methods
Don’t limit yourself to just a few modeling methods. Every professional digi-
tal modeler I know gravitates to a particular method of modeling for the 
majority of the meshes each is tasked with, but each modeler is quick to use 
other methods when needed. The more techniques you become proficient in, 
the more efficient you will become.
Adding new methods to your toolkit will not only broaden your ability to 
solve problems, it will improve your ability with the methods you are already 
familiar with. For example, I found that I became faster at box modeling a 
character head after I became proficient with the edge extend method. 
Also, none of these modeling techniques is mutually exclusive, and they  
can actually be extremely complementary. When modeling a given object, 
you don’t have to choose one and only one method to use on the entirety  
of that object. 
I’ve always looked at every model as just a collection of simpler shapes. The 
robots in Figure 5.18, for example, are made up of several different com-
ponents. Each part is trivial to create on its own. When you’re comfortable 
connecting different shapes together, you can model each shape separately 
using the method best suited to that shape and then combine all the shapes 
into the single final object. 
For example, you could use spline patching to generate a portion of an object 
and then merge the resulting polygonal patches into a different section of the 
object that you used the point by point build out method to generate. You 
could then take that object into a sculpting program to add finer details and 
then use the edge extend build out method to handle the retopology. 
When you’re comfortable with several modeling techniques, you can choose 
the most efficient method not only for a given object, but for each part of a 
single object as well.

[Chapter Five] Digital Modeling Methods 
139
[Figure 5.18] These objects may look complex, but they were created from a collection of 
simple parts combined to create complete robots.

[Chapter SIx]

professional Modeling practices
Becoming a professional modeler requires more than just a knowledge of 
points, polygons, and the various modeling techniques. Modelers must be 
organized, pay attention to details, and gain full control over the mesh. 
Polygon count, flow of the geometry, and other attributes of an object should 
be dictated by the modeler, not the software or tools used to create the mesh. 
Knowing proper object preparation for the other departments in the pipeline  
is another skill often overlooked and is what separates a professional from  
a hobbyist.
This chapter focuses on the important skills most digital artists overlook:  
naming conventions and directory structures, clean modeling, and preparing  
a model for production. Mastering these skills is essential to a successful  
career as a digital modeler.

142 
Digital Modeling
Naming Conventions  
and Directory Structure
All the artists I know have their own way of labeling and organizing files.  
When working alone, you can work any way you choose, and in most cases 
the production will run like a well-oiled machine. However, when working 
with a group, failing to use the same naming conventions and directory struc-
ture will bring production to a grinding halt every time.
I’ve worked on quite a few productions where the team wasted hours trying 
to locate files in order to move on to the next stage of production. The art-
ist responsible for the files either chose a poor name or location for the files 
in question. Currently, I’m working in New York on a production where one 
of the artists, let’s call him Cesar, insists on saving files to his local desktop 
instead of the project content directory on the server. We’ve yet to break him 
of this bad habit that has diminished the efficiency of our team. Even giving 
Cesar the nickname “Desktop” hasn’t seemed to work.
My friend Lee Stringer uses the “hit by a bus” scenario to explain to artists 
the importance of organization on a production. If you were hit by a bus on 
your way to work tomorrow, would your team be able to pick up where you 
left off to finish the job? Lee’s really not that callus towards his coworkers, 
but it is an easy way to help explain the importance of good naming conven-
tions and directory structure. (Note to self: Find out if Lee has ties to any 
local bus companies.)
Content Directory
One of the most difficult areas of production for a new artist to grasp is a  
studio’s content directory structure, especially if the artist has never worked 
on a project with a team of any size. 
Don’t let the name fool you. Content directory structure is merely another 
term for the organization of the folders where your project’s assets are saved. 
They’re quite easy to manage, make common sense, and will definitely make 
your job easier. Having a central location for all assets and a system that 
everyone follows allows the entire team to know where all assets are located 
without ever having to ask.

[Chapter Six] Professional Modeling Practices 
143
Something I used to do that helped instill good directory structure in my 
students was to load that week’s deliverables for critique directly from the 
project’s directories. If the file wasn’t in the correct place, they’d receive a 
zero for the week. It didn’t matter if the students’ assets were the best in the 
class. If the work wasn’t in the right location, it was as if they had never done 
it. Needless to say, they usually didn’t make that mistake twice. Although 
that may seem harsh, it’s a lesson better learned in school than at a studio on 
a production. 
Content directories in action
Let’s step through the process of setting up a directory structure for a new 
project. Imagine that I just landed a toy commercial with Applehead Factory 
for its popular Teddy Scares line of stuffed bears. I need to create a master 
directory for this project and want to stay as organized as possible—not just 
for the current production, but for years to come. Because I hope to get more  
work from the company in the future, I’ll create a directory named Applehead.
In the Applehead folder, I’ll create a subfolder named Teddy_Scares. To 
stay even more organized, I’ll create a subfolder named CG_Content in the 
Teddy_Scares folder. This is where I will tell my 3D applications to look for 
all items associated with this project.
So why don’t I just save all the files in the root of the Applehead folder? If 
I plan on working with Applehead on future projects, I want to be able to 
organize each project separately and avoid any confusion between projects. 
That makes sense, but why not just save all the 3D object files in the root of 
the Teddy_Scares folder?
If this project is like any of the other projects I’ve worked on, I’ll probably 
have files that are not used by my 3D applications but are important to the 
project. These files can be almost anything, such as reference images, story-
boards, documents about the project, and so on. 
It’s easier to track down 3D content if I keep the files separate from every-
thing else. I’ve used a CG_Content folder for many years, and it seems to 
prevent confusion among the other artists working on the project.

144 
Digital Modeling
Before I ever open my 3D software, my directory structure looks something 
like this:
\AppleHead
\Teddy_Scares
 
 
\Documents
\CG_Content
\Reference
\Storyboards
Unless I’m only required to create objects for the project, I’ll need subdirec-
tories to stay organized. I’ll add directories for any other file types needed in 
the production. A common project folder that I work with starts off looking 
something like this:
\AppleHead
\Teddy_Scares
 
 
\Documents
\CG_Content
 
\Animations
\Dynamics
\Envelopes
\Images
\Motions
\Nodes
\Objects
\Previews
\Rigs
\Scenes
\Sounds
\Surfaces
\Reference
\Storyboards
[ n o t e ]
Documents, Reference, 
and Storyboard folders are 
optional but extremely useful.

[Chapter Six] Professional Modeling Practices 
145
Many of the projects I work on only call for Objects, Scenes, and Images 
folders. You’re not required to use a set number of directories per project, 
and each project will need a specific setup. If you start each production with 
a clearly defined directory structure, you’ll be setting a strong foundation for 
your project. But remember that it’s only foolproof if all the artists on the 
team save their files in the appropriate location. 
One of the biggest showstoppers is when an artist is working on a portable 
drive or in the wrong content directory. You don’t want to be that artist. 
You’ll be amazed at how much more efficient the project becomes when no 
one is asking where a particular file is located. 
Naming Conventions
You know how to set up a directory structure that will keep you organized 
and keep your production humming along, so it should be smooth sailing 
from here, right? Well, close. Naming conventions are equally as important. 
Bad naming conventions are another production showstopper. Naming con-
ventions should apply to anything that can have a name: folders, images, 
objects, scenes—everything! A few years ago while working on a project with 
a team of artists who were under a tight deadline (is there any other kind?), 
we were going through the edit and one of the artists started screaming at 
me because I had used the “wrong” object in one of the shots. We loaded 
the last scene that I had worked on, and the object in question was called 
Carrot_016_Final.LWO. That sounds like the right file for working on a 
“final” shot, right? Well, it turns out that the artist wanted me to use the file 
called Carrot_013_UseThisOne.LWO. 
Both are horrible names. I’ve seen worse, but let’s not go there. Almost every 
project you work on will involve other artists, and most if not all like their 
own naming conventions. The best bet is to standardize the naming conven-
tions at the beginning of the project. The tricky part, as always, is having 
everyone follow the rules.

146 
Digital Modeling
Naming directories
When naming directories, use a logical title that is pertinent to the content. 
If you’re working on a model of a carrot, a good name for the folder would be 
Carrot. If the carrot model is just one vegetable of many that will be used on 
the project, maybe the Carrot folder should be located in a Vegetables folder. 
So the directory structure might look like this:
\AppleHead
\Teddy_Scares
 
 
\CG_Content
\Images
\Objects
 
\Vegetables
 
 
\Carrot
\Scenes
If other artists went looking for a model of a carrot, they should find it 
without having to ask where it is. Are you starting to see how good naming 
conventions come into play? I could get hit by a bus tomorrow, and my team 
members would still be able to make deadline. But how would they know 
which carrot object to use once they accessed the Carrot folder?
Naming objects
When naming your object files, you should use the same logic used for folders 
with one addition: version numbers. I’ve seen all sorts of naming conventions 
used in production, but none is more efficient than using version numbers. 
Using the carrot example, the first model you make is named Carrot_001. After  
you’ve worked on the model for 10–15 minutes or feel you’ve made significant 
progress, save a new version named Carrot_002. The latest version of the 
object should have the higher number tacked on at the end of its name.
If you went looking for a carrot model that I created, you’d know that the 
last file in the folder, the one with the highest number, would be the cor-
rect one to use. If everyone uses this naming convention, there will be no 
confusion, and you will save massive amounts of time not having to decide 
whether you’re using the right files.

[Chapter Six] Professional Modeling Practices 
147
Another good practice when naming folders or objects is to avoid using 
spaces. Spaces can easily be overlooked, and some applications have issues 
with spaces for areas like animation when using mathematical expressions. 
Opt for an underscore (_), which is much easier to see and doesn’t cause 
issues later down the production line.
Don’t Agonize, Organize 
Organization is a required job skill in the industry and should not be taken 
lightly. Many would argue that organization is more important than any  
software knowledge or computer skill. Lack of organization is the one prob-
lem that I’ve seen bring a production to a screeching halt more than any 
other issue. 
Good naming conventions and directory structure not only help during pro-
duction, but they can be a lifesaver if you ever have to return to the produc-
tion files in the future. I’ve often had to pull files from archives that I worked 
on eight or more years prior. With good organization, you can jump right 
back into the files with little or no hassle.
Whether you’re working on a project alone or with a large team, good nam-
ing conventions and directory structure are a must. Take the time in the 
beginning to build an organized foundation, and you will save everyone 
involved not only time, but an enormous number of headaches. It’s all com-
mon sense, but you’d be surprised (or maybe you wouldn’t) at how uncom-
mon organization can be among artists. 
Clean Modeling
Not all models are created equal. Professional digital modelers create meshes 
that are far more superior to hobbyists, by keeping a model’s wireframe in 
mind during the modeling process. Artists that deliver clean models are in 
high demand and quite rare. 
Think about it this way: It’s wise to be concerned about hidden details when 
purchasing a home. You want to make sure the house is built on a good foun-
dation and has a solid underlying structure that will withstand weather, time, 
and 120-pound chocolate labs named Jack. Like all good houses, 3D models 

148 
Digital Modeling
should not only look right on the surface, but they should also have a strong 
foundation, which makes surfacing, rigging, and animating much easier.
On any online CG forum, you will encounter artists asking to see wireframe 
images of the models other artists post. This is mainly due to the fact that 
most professional 3D artists won’t call a model excellent or finished unless it 
has a clean wireframe.
Two core attributes define a clean model: polygon-count and topology. An 
artist who pays careful attention to these details is more likely to create meshes 
that deform well when animated and are not overly complex, which saves on 
production time in all departments of the pipeline.
Polygon-count
In the simplest of terms, polygon-count—usually just called poly-count—refers 
to the quantity of polygons that make up a 3D model. It’s important for artists 
to be aware of and gain control over their meshes’ poly-count to reach mastery 
of digital modeling.
Why count polygons? 
The fewer polygons you have in your mesh, the easier it is to work with 
throughout a production. Fewer polygons equal fewer points, which means 
fewer points to weight and assign to bones. It’s also easier to create UV tex-
tures on a low-poly, clean mesh.
Probably the most obvious reason to be mindful of a model’s poly-count is 
the effect it has on rendering, both offline and real time: 
•  Offline rendering is used for film, broadcast, print, and other markets.  
It affords artists higher-quality rendering options—such as the ability to  
use shaders (a set of algorithms that determines how 3D surface proper-
ties of objects are rendered) of unlimited complexity—than real time 
but requires the rendered frame or sequence of frames to be saved to an 
image format. These prerendered images are displayed at a later time, 
which allows artists to create images with as high a quality as time 
allows. Offline rendering also allows the use of CPU-intensive effects 
and can take advantage of massive render farms (clusters of computers) 
working together to calculate thousands of complex images. Simply put, 

[Chapter Six] Professional Modeling Practices 
149
the more complex something is, the less likely it will be possible to pro-
cess it in real time.
 • Real-time rendering refers to the process where the images are gener-
ated on the fly with a goal of displaying them to the viewer as fast as 
possible. It’s primarily used by the gaming market. Image quality is 
traded off for interactivity, and shortcuts are used to quickly generate 
the displayed images. An example of this is your 3D modeling software’s 
viewports displaying a 3D model.
It is important to create optimized meshes with the lowest possible number of 
polygons to improve rendering performance using either rendering method. 
Digital modelers who are mindful of their meshes’ poly-count respect the 
entire production process and understand how their models directly or indi-
rectly affect everyone involved.
How do you count polygons?
Many artists misunderstand how to properly determine a model’s true poly-
gon count. It’s important to understand that all render engines at their core, 
both offline and real-time, work with triangles or three-point polygons. 
Real-time render engines need the geometry to already be converted to 
three-point polygons because all modern graphics cards work only with these 
simple polygons. Most offline render engines can perform a conversion to  
triangles at render time.
So really, poly-count refers to a model’s triangle count. A mesh that consists 
of 120 three-point polygons has a polygon count of 120. However, a mesh 
containing 120 four-point polygons actually has a poly-count of 240 when 
converted to triangles (two triangles are produced when a quadrilateral is 
bisected). 
N-gons can be the trickiest, because they can be very misleading. A single 
polygon with more than four points can range anywhere from as few as 3 tri-
angles to as many as 1,200 or more.
Figure 6.1 shows an example of three meshes, each made up of different 
polygon configurations. The ball on the left consists of 1,280 triangles, the 
ball in the middle consists of 1,536 quads (3,072 triangles), and the flat plane 
on the right consists of one 128-gon (126 triangles). It’s easy to overlook 

150 
Digital Modeling
the fact that the true poly-counts of the middle and right objects are much 
higher than they first appear. Always remember to count triangles when 
determining the mesh’s poly-count.
Another mistake artists often make when counting polygons is that when 
they are dealing with SubD objects, they forget that the SubD cage doesn’t 
truly represent the object’s polygon density. I’ll use the panda character in 
Figure 6.2 as an example. Although the panda was created with 1,942 SubD 
polygons, that’s a total of 31,072 polygons when set at a subdivision level of 
four, which converts to 62,144 triangles at render time. There’s quite a differ-
ence between 1,942 polys and 62,144. 
[Figure 6.1] The image 
on the left shows the three 
meshes in their original 
state. The image on the 
right shows the three 
meshes as a render engine 
would see them— con-
verted to triangles.

[Chapter Six] Professional Modeling Practices 
151
What defines a good polygon count?
Artists should always strive to use as few polygons as possible while still 
maintaining the proper shape to achieve their modeling objective. Simply 
put, good poly-counts are optimized poly-counts.
Most game artists have mastered the art of poly-count because they are lim-
ited to the amount of polygons they can use for their game engines. Every 
polygon has to have a purpose, and any unneeded geometry is removed. We 
can learn a lot from this process even when we are working on higher-polygon 
models for film, broadcast, and other markets. 
How many polygons should you use?
When it comes to digital modeling, how many polygons should be used is 
probably the most asked question. What’s the answer? Well, it depends. It’s a 
bit like asking how much paint you need to cover a wall. How big is the wall? 
What color are you painting with, and will it need multiple coats to paint 
over the existing color? More details are needed to give a proper answer.
A clean mesh doesn’t necessarily mean a low-poly mesh, or the model might 
not end up with the detail you need to get realistic shapes. The trick is to use 
only the geometry you need to get the detail you want and only have detailed 
geometry where you need it. I refer to this technique as having localized detail. 
[Figure 6.2] Don’t let objects created with subdivision surfaces mislead you when counting 
polygons. This panda character made up of 1,942 SubDs is actually 62,144 triangles at  
render time.

152 
Digital Modeling
Let’s use a human hand as an example. The hand, which has complex joints 
that deform in multiple areas, needs much more geometry than the forearm, 
which has a much simpler shape and requires little deformation. There is 
no reason to have the same poly-count for the forearm as you would for the 
hand. You can use localized detail to manage the distribution of your poly-
count to optimize the mesh. Figure 6.3 shows the polygon layout for a hand 
transitioning into the forearm of a character.
An important factor in determining how much geometry to use when model-
ing is to know what the object will be used for. A few good questions to ask 
about the model in this regard include
 • Will the object always be in the distance, or will it get inches from 
the camera?
 • Will it be in a well-lit area, or will it always be in shadow?
 • Will the object only be seen from one angle or multiple angles?
[Figure 6.3] With the use of 
localized detail, the forearm 
can be created with less 
geometry while still provid-
ing proper density for the 
hands.

[Chapter Six] Professional Modeling Practices 
153
The more you know about the model’s intended use, the easier it is to deter-
mine the proper poly-count. Objects that are seen up close are sometimes 
referred to as a hero object and require far more detail and polygons than 
objects that sit off in the distance.
You wouldn’t want a rock made up of 20,000 polygons if it will always be 
20 yards from the camera. This may seem obvious, but I’ve helped optimize 
models worse than that for movies.
Another consideration is having multiple versions of the same object, each 
at a different poly-count. I usually label them as Hero or Primary, Secondary, 
and Tertiary. This gives you the ability to swap out a model for an appropriate 
level of detail and poly-count when a situation calls for it.
To address the original question of how many polygons you should use, my 
answer is to use as many polygons as needed, but not one polygon more than 
that. The cardinal rule of professional modeling is less is always more. Albert 
Einstein said it best: “Everything should be made as simple as possible, but 
not one bit simpler.” 
Topology
In modeling terms, topology, also called polygon flow (or just poly flow), refers 
to the way a 3D mesh is constructed and how the polygons are arranged to 
build up its shape. Good topology makes for geometry that is easy to select, 
manipulate, and construct, and is even better for sculpting onto. Also, gener-
ating and using UV maps are easier with clean topology. Although topology is 
important in all models that you create, you might approach a static object’s 
poly-flow differently than that of an object that will deform.
Topology for static objects
Objects that are rigid and require no deformation—such as guns, cars, or 
houses—have fewer topology restrictions as deformable geometry but can still 
benefit from clean poly-flow. Figure 6.4 shows the wireframe for a wireless  
remote I modeled with clean polygon flow, even though it was never intended 
to be animated or deformed. This topology made it easier to manipulate the 
mesh as I worked and allowed me to generate a clean UV map with ease.

154 
Digital Modeling
Another example is a vehicle. The topology of a car can determine whether 
the surface will appear smooth and flawless or has unwanted dents and dings. 
Also, you never know when you may need to deform a static model for pos-
ing, even if it will never animate.
Topology for objects that will deform
Animation of an organic object can be like a hurricane to a house if good 
polygon flow doesn’t exist. Your model will not hold up, and problems like 
pinching and polygon flipping will occur. It’s also easier to predict how an 
object will animate with clean geometry, and artists down the production 
pipeline will run into fewer problems compared to dealing with models created 
by an artist who produces sloppy or heavy models.
Are you in the loop?
Edge loops and limiting a model to all quads are often cited when talking 
about good topology. They are important in ensuring that the mesh is pro-
duction ready. Edge loops are bands of polygons in a mesh that make models 
[Figure 6.4] Static objects 
can benefit from good 
topology when editing or 
texturing is required.

[Chapter Six] Professional Modeling Practices 
155
easier to read, select, and manipulate. They are fundamental in creating good 
polygon flow. Just like having fewer polygons, the use of edge loops makes a 
mesh easier to rig and animate. 
The formation of these distinct loops can mimic major muscle groups, produce  
more realistic-looking character models, and create more predictable deforma-
tions in facial animation and posing. Figure 6.5 highlights three sets of edge 
loops in the face of a character that aid in the creation of facial animation.
One detail to keep in mind is that although loops are extremely powerful and 
you want to use enough to get the shapes you’re after, you need to be careful 
not to have too many loops. Too many can cause pinching and unwanted 
creases in your object. Using the right amount of loops can be tricky when 
you first start modeling, but the more models you animate, the easier it will 
be for you to judge how many to use.
[Figure 6.5] Building edge 
loops into a character’s  
face can help create more 
predictable deformations  
in facial animation.

156 
Digital Modeling
Controlling polygon flow
Part of creating geometry with clean topology is learning to manage and con-
trol the flow of the polygons that make up the mesh. This can be a challeng-
ing skill to master and will only come with lots of practice. The payoff will 
come into play on every model you build, so time invested is time well spent.
I’ve found that the most useful way to control poly-flow is to learn to redirect  
the flow of polygons either by manually building them point by point with the  
desired flow or with tools specifically designed for this task. Each 3D applica-
tion has at least one tool that can perform the same action, but each may call 
it something different. Some common names are SpinQuads, Flip Edge, Spin 
Edge, and Rotate Edge. These tools change the dividing edge between two 
adjacent polygons by spinning (rotating) the edge, so that the two ends of the  
edge attach to different points while leaving all of the points in the same place. 
This process will change the flow of your polygons while maintaining the 
surrounding mesh. It’s good to know that there are only so many options for 
where this dividing edge can be placed. Usually, after the third use of the 
tool, your edge will end up where it started. Figure 6.6 shows the process of 
spinning an edge to change the polygon flow of the mesh. 
Four-point perfection
When modeling an area that will undergo heavy deformation, you will get 
better results if you resist the urge to mix in any three-point polygons where 
it may seem convenient and stick to using all four-point polygons (quads).
Three-point polys tend to cause pinching and strange smoothing errors in 
most cases. Although you can get away with that in certain lighting situations  
[Figure 6.6] To connect the two polygons shown in pink (left), the common edge of the two  
green polygons is reconfigured by spinning the edge (middle two). With the edge reconfig-
ured, the topology of the geometry allows for the two pink polygons to flow into each other.

[Chapter Six] Professional Modeling Practices 
157
or camera setups, it is good practice to have your models deform nicely no 
matter what type of lighting or camera placement you may be working with.
N-gons—polygons with more than four points—are also known to cause 
pinching and smoothing errors in areas with deformation, and they are not 
supported by all subdivision algorithms, such as LightWave’s subpatches.
For this reason, I like to limit organic meshes to all quads. Simply put, quads 
are superior for meshes that will deform while animated, and working exclu-
sively with quads should be the goal of every organic modeler. 
One reason artists may use n-gons or triangles is to try to reduce the polygon 
count in areas that don’t need as much detail, like the back of the head. If you 
choose n-gons or three-point polygons to help reduce geometry, try to use 
them in areas that won’t deform or be in plain sight. This will reduce the 
chance of them showing up as errors in your animation.
If you choose to use all quads, you can use a technique I have used for years 
with much success, which I like to call four-point triangles. I’ve also heard art-
ists refer to them as pole polygons or diamond polygons.
Four-point triangles are a great alternative to the use of triangles and n-gons, 
and are basically just polygons that are made up of four points. These polygons 
are configured in the shape of a triangle or diamond, as shown on the hand 
and gun in Figure 6.7. These polygons not only help reduce poly-count, but 
can help define edge loops within your mesh. 
[Figure 6.7] Using four-
point polygons that are 
shaped like triangles or 
diamonds can be a great 
alternative to using triangles 
or n-gons.

158 
Digital Modeling
The rule of three
Areas on a model that will have heavy deformations need an underlying 
structure that will support the shapes you have defined. Although there are 
always exceptions to the rule, it is a good idea to use three segments in areas 
that will deform heavily. I refer to this as the rule of three.
The middle segment is where the deformation will take place, and the segments 
on either side support the mesh beyond the deformation. Example areas for 
using the rule of three would be elbows, shoulders, knees, finger joints, wrists, 
and even laugh lines on faces and eyelids. Figure 6.8 shows a few areas on 
the body to which I like to apply the rule of three to ensure that good defor-
mations take place during animation.
I used to fight areas like shoulders and hips when rigging and animating  
characters until I applied the three-segment configuration. Now I feel I can 
predict how those areas will deform with just a quick survey of the mesh.
Although the rule of three can be the solution most of the time, all objects 
are different. The number of segments depends on the type of deformation 
you want to achieve. Too many segments or loops can cause pinching in your 
mesh, as discussed earlier.
[Figure 6.8] The polygons 
shown in green are some of 
the areas on a character’s 
body where I like to apply 
the rule of three for better 
deformations.

[Chapter Six] Professional Modeling Practices 
159
All digital artists will find their own path to clean modeling and will have 
their preferred way of handling topology based on their own experiences.
The lack of good poly-flow, unnecessary use of triangles or n-gons, and exces-
sive numbers of polygons are pitfalls that all modelers should avoid. You can 
sometimes get away with a disjointed rat’s nest of a mesh if you’re creating 
a static mesh, but if your model is going to be animated, those pitfalls will 
come back to bite you.
Just remember when modeling to keep it simple and smooth (K.I.S.S.) and 
you’ll be on the right track to creating professional, production-ready meshes. 
Preparing a Model for Production
The last ten percent of any modeling task is to prepare it for the next phase 
of production. Whether you’re flying solo and plan on handling all aspects of 
a project or working with a team of artists in a production pipeline, there are 
some steps you can take to ensure that your model is production ready.
General Production Preparation
The first step in preparing a model for production is to find out the guidelines 
for the project at hand to ensure that the team will receive the model in the 
proper condition. Open communication with the other artists involved will 
prevent the model from getting sent back for adjustments later.
It’s also good to have a personal checklist that you use, because at the end of 
the day every model you deliver says a lot about you as an artist. You want to  
take pride in ownership and have your models be as prepared as possible. It’s as  
important as proofing an email to an important client before clicking Send. 
A good short list of general items that you should check include scale,  
position/rotation, and giving your model the final once over, or as I call it, 
giving a model a final pass.
Scale
Many artists build their meshes to real-world scale during the modeling pro-
cess. When modeling hard-surface/technical models, I almost always model 
to scale as I go. But on 99 percent of my organic objects, such as characters, 

160 
Digital Modeling
I never model to scale. I usually like to just start modeling and worry about 
details like the size of an object later. 
Regardless of whether you model to scale or not, take a final look, measure, 
and adjust accordingly. You don’t want to deliver a model of a mouse the size 
of the Empire State Building unless, of course, you’re modeling for an Asylum 
film called Mega Mouse vs. New York City.
Position/Rotation
When building a mesh, I always prefer to work with the model centered at 
the origin. This isn’t a requirement, but I find it the most efficient way to 
work, especially when working with modeling functions like symmetry. 
The majority of the time you’ll want to position your finished model at the 
origin, resting on the ground plane (zero in the Y axis) and rotated to face 
forward (towards the positive Z axis). This not only helps the rigging depart-
ment, but is quite useful for layout, texturing, and effects artists.
Final pass
Giving your objects a final pass allows you to take one last look at your poly-
count and topology, naming conventions, and any other details. Too many 
artists assume that a model is complete as soon as they’ve finished putting the 
last of the polygons in place. This is where they often overlook small issues 
that would only take a few seconds to adjust. Put in the extra effort and feel 
confident when passing on a model.
It is good practice to take a break from the model before doing the final pass. 
When possible, I like to wait until the following day so I can review the pre-
vious day’s work at the start of the next day. This allows you to review your 
models with a fresh eye.
Texturing Preparation
Depending on the requirements of the production pipeline, there may be 
ways that you can better prepare the texture artists before passing on a 
model. Up to this point in a production, you are the one who has spent the 
most time with the mesh and can navigate its geometry faster than anyone 
else, making you the ideal candidate for creating surface names and UV maps.

[Chapter Six] Professional Modeling Practices 
161
 • UV layout. When laying out your mesh on a UV grid, start by placing  
the portions of the mesh that will need the most accurate textures. 
These high-detailed areas may include the head and torso of a character, 
like the one in Figure 6.10.
The spacing between the polygon groups, or islands, as many people call 
them, should be close enough to not waste space, but not so close that 
textures will transfer from one island to the next. Be as efficient as you 
can with the real estate you have to work with.
 • UV seams. There is no escaping UV seams, but you can minimize their 
effects by placing them in areas that are more out of sight, like the 
inside of a character’s arm (Figure 6.11) or the back of a character’s 
head. On organic meshes, try to use as few polygon islands as possible, 
creating a continuous island of large polygon groups.
[Figure 6.10] When laying out the toad’s UVs, the areas that required more details 
were positioned first.

162 
Digital Modeling
 • UV options. There really is no right or wrong when it comes to laying 
out UV maps, so give yourself and/or the texture artist multiple options 
if time permits. An object can have multiple UV maps applied to its 
points, so experiment and see what works best for all involved.
Rigging Preparation
If you’ve already completed everything on the general production checklist, 
you’re already on your way to making the rigging artists happy campers. All 
that is really left is to make sure the character object’s base pose is ideal for 
the rigging process.
Base pose
Although many artists have a unique default pose they prefer to work with, 
there are some industry-standard attributes that most have adopted. When 
no direction is given, these standards are usually your safest bet. The two most 
common base poses are the T-pose and the relaxed pose.
[Figure 6.11] Placing the seams of the toad’s arms on the inside helped to hide them from 
the camera at render time.

[Chapter Six] Professional Modeling Practices 
163
 • T-pose. In a T-pose, the character is standing up straight and its arms, 
hands, and fingers are at 90 degrees, as shown in Figure 6.12. This pose 
gets its name from the T-shape the character makes and is the most 
commonly used base pose.
Positioning the arms and legs straight down a specific axis can make 
placing bones and controls much easier for a rigging artist. It also puts 
some distance between the arms and the torso, making them easier to 
see and access in multiple views.
[Figure 6.12] Modeling a character in the T-pose makes it easier for the rigging department 
to set up the mesh for animation.

164 
Digital Modeling
 • Relaxed pose. In a relaxed base pose, the character’s arms are at a 
45-degree angle, and all of the joints (knees, elbows, ankles, hands,  
fingers, and so on) are slightly pre-bent instead of straight, as shown in 
Figure 6.13. These pre-bends can assist in good deformations and IK 
(inverse kinematics) solving, but can make for more work for a rigging 
artist when placing bones and controls.
[Figure 6.13] Placing the character in a relaxed pose can help create good deformations 
but can be more challenging for the rigging artist to place bones and controls when creating 
a rig for the mesh.

[Chapter Six] Professional Modeling Practices 
165
Each mesh will call for its own specific needs, and ultimately, you need to 
fully discuss those needs with the rigging department before locking down 
any particular base pose. In your career as a digital modeler you’ll probably 
use several different base poses. The important thing is to do what you can  
to deliver the mesh in the optimal pose for the rigging department, and com-
munication with them will answer all of your questions.
If you’ve created a clean mesh with good naming conventions and you’ve 
gone through your final pass on the model with no surprises, you could be 
ready to call the mesh complete. My advice at this point is to be proactive 
and meet with the effects team to see if any of the models will require addi-
tional prep work that involves modeling.
If a model is going to explode or break apart, a proficient modeler can be an 
effects artist’s most powerful weapon. Creating multiple versions of a model 
in various stages of destruction could give a shot that extra level of detail 
that an effects artist might not have the time for. Anything you can bring to 
the table with your modeling skills to aid the effects department is usually 
welcomed with open arms.

[Chapter Seven]

polygonal Modeling
This portion of the book represents the first of several chapters that are 
designed to sharpen your problem-solving and observational skills, as well  
as hone your digital modeling skills through real-world digital modeling  
examples. In this chapter, I walk you through the creation of 3D text and  
the digital modeling of a complex seam pattern into a mesh with a focus on 
polygonal modeling.

168 
Digital Modeling
Modeling 3D Polygonal Text
A typical 3D text job is creating a logo. Logos, of course, are symbols or designs 
used by companies and individuals to help give them or their company an 
identity. Just about every company has one, and with millions of companies 
in the world, that means there is a pretty good chance that at some point in 
your career you’ll be tasked to create one in 3D.
3D logo creation is not just limited to entry-level spinning logos created by 
artists just getting started in the industry. Entire studios have been built and  
survive off the creation of 3D logos used for print, broadcast motion graphics, 
and more. The logo for Sister Act on Broadway (Figure 7.1) is an example of 
3D being used for signage in New York City. Also, just about every summer 
blockbuster film opens with several studio logos that have been created in 3D.
The techniques used to create professional 3D logo meshes can be a valuable 
skill set that carries over to other areas of digital modeling. In this section 
I explore the process of creating a 3D logo from an existing 2D design. I’ve 
selected the Applehead Factory logo (Figure 7.2) because it poses a few 
challenges that may come up on future models.
[Figure 7.1] This Sister Act
logo is a great example of 
how 3D has spread into new 
markets.

[Chapter Seven] Polygonal Modeling 
169
Vector and Raster Images
It’s common that a client will supply a logo as an EPS or Illustrator file  
(vector file), and most 3D software has the ability to load these formats.
Vector
Vector graphics use geometrical primitives—such as points, lines, curves, and 
shapes, which are all based on mathematical equations—to represent images 
in computer graphics. They are resolution independent, making them ideal 
for print graphics. The vector data is converted into editable geometry when 
imported into 3D software, which speeds up the 3D modeling process and can 
help ensure that the logo is technically accurate by working with a client’s file.
Raster
Just as often, a client will only supply you with a raster image. Raster files are 
made up of a rectangular grid of pixels, or points of color, stored in image files 
with varying formats. Their resolution is based on the number of pixels that 
make up the image, and when imported into 3D software for modeling, the 
image is used as a template to build on top of.
In the example in this section, I walk through the construction of a logo from  
scratch, using a small raster image, so that I can cover some useful techniques 
that would not be discussed if I used a vector file.
[Figure 7.2] Creating a 3D 
version of the Applehead 
Factory logo will be our goal 
for this section.

170 
Digital Modeling
Getting Started
Before I start modeling, I like to study my reference (in this case the logo 
itself) and come up with a strategy for how I will move forward. For the 
Applehead Factory logo, the shapes were fairly simple letterforms, but they 
were not created from an existing font. This meant I would need to model 
each letterform from scratch. To make the logo 3D, I’d need to give it depth 
and add details that improved its quality. 
I started by counting the number of shapes I needed. Although there are 3 
symbols (the factory and two smoke plumes) and 16 letters, there are actually 
only 18 individual shapes that I needed to construct because the r and the y
connect into one solid shape. 
At first I thought I could cheat and reuse the p and the e shapes, but after 
close inspection, I discovered they are slightly different. It would have been 
tempting to take a shortcut and reuse the shapes, and although most people 
might not catch it, I can almost guarantee the client would. Shortcuts and 
cheats are a must in this industry, but make sure you’re choosing shortcuts 
that help you meet your end goal quicker, not those that change your end 
goal of producing a mesh that is 100 percent accurate to the supplied refer-
ence material.
I decided to use a mixture of point-by-point and primitive modeling methods 
to create these shapes, because I’ve found this technique to be the fastest way 
to create custom-shaped polygons. I had a pretty sound game plan, so it was 
time to get started. Without a game plan, I might have found myself having 
to back track halfway through the modeling sessions for lack of forethought. 
Creating the 2D Base Mesh
I used the client-supplied reference image of the logo in the background  
as a template to work from. Because the 18 shapes are all independent, I 
could have started anywhere, but I wanted to get that factory shape out of 
the way first. 
I created 16 points, placing one point at each corner of the shape. I made 
sure to zoom in as close as possible to ensure proper placement. Once I had 
the points created, I selected them and then converted that selection into a 
polygon. Figure 7.3 shows the result of this process. 

[Chapter Seven] Polygonal Modeling 
171
That shape was the easiest of the bunch because it consisted of nothing but 
straight lines. Every other piece contained curved components that required 
far more points to produce the proper shapes. Placing each of these points by 
hand could have been time-consuming and produced undesirable results.
I have a few options available for creating shapes:
 • Placing the points by hand: This technique is identical to how I 
approached the factory shape and requires the placement of each  
point by hand. 
 • Using primitives: These are basic geometric shapes that are the build-
ing blocks for many other shapes and forms, and using them to help cre-
ate detailed curves is a technique that I’ve successfully applied for years. 
I usually use a disc primitive (a cylinder shape), and the idea is to create 
the disc with a portion of its edges conforming to the shape you are 
attempting to create. 
Once I create the disc, I select and copy the points I need, and then 
remove (delete) the disc object. With the points I copied still stored  
in the system’s clipboard, I simply paste them back into the model 
(Figure 7.4). I can repeat these steps until I have all the points needed 
to make up the desired shape.
[Figure 7.3] Each point 
needs to be accurately 
placed based on the 
reference image (left). 
This shape was created by 
the selected points being 
converted into a polygon 
(right).

172 
Digital Modeling
 • Using splines: Splines (curves in 3D space) are probably the most  
common and preferred way of generating multiple points along a curve. 
Similar to the primitive method, I simply create a spline based on the 
shape I’m building. With the spline created, I convert it to a polygon 
and copy the points I need, paste the points back into the model, and 
repeat as needed. Figure 7.5 shows these steps.
A good idea when working with splines is to create copies before convert- 
ing them to polygons so that you can always return to the original source 
at a later time. I never like re-creating something I’ve already created; it 
is not an efficient use of my time.
[Figure 7.4] The top portion of this disc primitive has been lined up to the edge of the 
apple shape (left). The selected points need to be copied to the clipboard before removing 
the disc (middle). Once the disc is removed, the copied points are pasted back into the 
object file (right).
[Figure 7.5] A Bézier spline is used to trace the outer edge of the apple shape (left). The 
spline is converted into a polygon, and the points are copied to the clipboard (middle).  
The result of pasting the points for the clipboard (right).

[Chapter Seven] Polygonal Modeling 
173
I decided to use a combination of all three of the preceding options because 
the majority of the letterforms have a mixture of straight and curved shapes. 
At this point I didn’t worry about how I was going to get the apertures (holes 
in the letterforms) and simply created them as separate polygons.
As I finished the points for a shape, I selected them and converted the selec-
tion into a polygon (Figure 7.6).
Once all the shapes were created (Figure 7.7), I focused on getting the aper-
tures cut into the letterforms that need them. Booleans—modeling tools that 
let you add, subtract, and intersect one mesh with/from another—are pretty 
standard fare for this type of operation, so I decided to use them to tunnel 
the aperture shapes through the letterforms (Figure 7.8).
[Figure 7.6] All of the 
necessary points for the 
apple shape have been 
created (left). This polygon 
was created from the 
selected points (right).
[Figure 7.7] The result of 
all the shapes being created, 
including the letterform’s 
apertures.

174 
Digital Modeling
From 2D to 3D
With the 2D base mesh complete, it was time to add some dimension to this 
logo. I’m not a big fan of the “Superman logo” effect of a massive amount 
of depth, so I went for a more subtle depth on this logo. I used the Extrude 
command to give thickness to the shapes (Figure 7.9).
You could call this logo final, if you were a hobbyist. Although I brought this 
2D logo into 3D space, it was missing something that most artists overlook 
that could take their models to the next level: micro-bevels.
Micro-bevels, Chamfers, and Fillets
When most people hear about using micro-bevels on their objects, they 
immediately think it must be a special tool or plug-in. A micro-bevel is a small 
beveled edge connecting two surfaces. If the surfaces are at right angles, the 
micro-bevel will typically be at 45 degrees. Although the term micro-bevel 
[Figure 7.8] The shapes 
that make up the holes  
are selected and used to 
create the apertures in  
the letterforms.
[Figure 7.9] These figures 
show the before and after  
of extruding the base  
logo mesh.

[Chapter Seven] Polygonal Modeling 
175
is sometimes also used to describe both chamfers and fillets, they are actually 
quite different from each other:
 • A chamfer is a beveled edge connecting two surfaces. Another way to 
describe it is as an angled cut applied to an exterior edge. In Figure 7.10, 
the edges on top of the object are chamfered to create a beveled edge. 
 • A fillet is the rounding off, or beveling, of an interior corner. In Figure 
7.11 the interior edges of the model are given a small bevel.
You can see why chamfers and fillets fit in the micro-bevel category, but why 
use them? Look around you and try to find something, anything, that has a 
razor sharp edge. It’s harder than you think. It’s quite rare that an edge in the 
real world lacks some form of rounding. That means adding edge rounding 
can help you mimic the properties of real-world objects. 
Another equally important reason for using micro-bevels is that they catch 
light on their surfaces and produce a highlight along the edges of the model. 
[Figure 7.10] The outer 
edges of this shape are too 
sharp and need smoothing 
(left). The chamfer on these 
edges can help prevent it 
from looking too CG (right).
[Figure 7.11] The interior 
edges of this shape are also 
sharp and need refining 
(left). A fillet is applied, 
giving a much more realistic 
inner seam to this object 
(right).

176 
Digital Modeling
This can not only mimic real-world properties of an object, but can help 
define the shape in a render.
When you compare an object that has micro-bevels with one that doesn’t,  
it becomes quite obvious why you’d want to use them on your meshes 
(Figure 7.12). Professionals can spot them a mile away, and the lack of 
micro-bevels usually makes your work look more CG than realistic. It’s good 
practice to add micro-bevels to your modeling checklist and to include them 
whenever possible. 
For the Applehead Factory logo, I created these bevels on each letterform 
individually instead of beveling all of the shapes at once to ensure that they 
all produce clean results. It was important that I use the same bevel values 
to produce a consistent look. Figure 7.13 shows several of the shapes with 
micro-bevels created.
[Figure 7.12] The object on 
the left suffers from a very 
CG appearance. The object 
on the right has a much 
more realistic look to it 
thanks to micro-bevels.

[Chapter Seven] Polygonal Modeling 
177
Clean Up
I chose the Applehead Factory logo for this example knowing it would create 
a common issue that I could use as an example. Bevels often produce errors in  
corners with sharp angles caused by overlapping polygons, which can produce 
render errors and unsightly geometry. Many 3D artists will tell you to avoid 
fonts that are prone to produce these errors when beveled, but that isn’t very 
useful if you are trying to re-create a specific shape based on a client’s logo. 
There were a few problem areas on the current Applehead logo that needed 
to be addressed. The tip of the leaf on the apple shape shown in Figure 7.14
was a bit of a mess, with overlapping polygons caused by the inset of the 
bevel operation.
[Figure 7.13] The micro-
bevels added to the edges 
of these letterforms will 
increase the quality of the 
final render by catching 
highlights along the 
beveled surfaces.

178 
Digital Modeling
This issue was easy to fix with a few adjustments to the mesh. By moving 
some of the points, I quickly cleaned up this issue (Figure 7.15) and moved 
on to other problem areas. Don’t take the easy way out and either change the 
amount of bevel you really want or avoid beveling the edges altogether. This 
issue is an easy fix and worth the time invested.
[Figure 7.14] This geometry 
suffers from a common case 
of overlapping polygons 
due to the beveled inset.
[Figure 7.15] Simply 
adjusting the points in the 
tip solves the issue without 
having to avoid the desired 
beveled edge. 

[Chapter Seven] Polygonal Modeling 
179
Before calling the model final, I always look over every area of the mesh with 
a fine-toothed comb. If anyone is going to find an issue with my model, I’d 
rather it be me. With the bevel issues resolved and a detailed survey of the mesh, 
I had a completed 3D version of the Applehead Factory logo (Figure 7.16). 
[Figure 7.16] The 
completed 3D Applehead 
Factory logo.
Polygonal Modeling Exercise #1
Now that you’ve seen the production of the Applehead Factory logo, choose 
another company’s logo with a challenging design made up of complex curved  
shapes and take it through the same process. To get the most out of the experi-
ence, avoid using EPS or Illustrator files; create all the letterforms from scratch. 
The more time you invest in this type of polygonal modeling, the more prepared 
you will be when working on other model forms, such as robots, buildings, 
weapons, and more.

180 
Digital Modeling
Modeling a 3D Polygonal Object  
with Seams
Years ago, I was tasked by a client to create a detailed 3D model of a tradi-
tional soccer ball (Figure 7.17). After reviewing the storyboards, I was sure 
that a bump map (an image used to create the appearance of surface detail) 
on the surface of the sphere wouldn’t produce the seams at a high enough 
level to hold up under the scrutiny of the extreme close-up shots the anima-
tion required.
Fortunately, I was lucky enough to come across an amazing tutorial that took 
what could have been a difficult task and simplified the steps for me. This 
technique involves starting with a tessellated primitive sphere (a sphere 
made up of nothing but evenly spaced triangles), and with just a few steps, 
you end up with a photo-real, fully detailed, traditional soccer ball model 
(Figure 7.18).
[Figure 7.18] A tessellated 
ball (left) is a great base mesh 
when starting to model a  
traditional soccer ball. Each  
patch on the ball was selected   
and beveled to create the 
seams (middle). Beveling 
each patch and assigning 
surfaces  resulted in a photo-
real soccer ball (right).
[Figure 7.17] A soccer 
ball can be a challenging 
3D model without a good 
technique in place to create 
the seam pattern.

[Chapter Seven] Polygonal Modeling 
181
I’ve used this technique anytime I’ve been called on to create a traditional 
soccer ball over the years, and it always reminds me of how good problem 
solving can make light work of any challenge.
While creating 3D assets for FunGoPlay (FGP), an online virtual sports theme  
park for kids, I was tasked with creating another digital model of a soccer 
ball. This time it was a custom version of a traditional soccer ball that would 
be used for a close-up shot in a commercial showcasing FGP’s sports gear 
product line. Once again I used the same technique that had never failed me, 
and the resulting mesh was created in short order. Figure 7.19 shows a final 
frame from the commercial that ran on Cartoon Network and Nickelodeon.
The FGP virtual world also called for several new digital soccer balls, ranging 
from the 2009 Teamgeist to the 2010 World Cup Jabulani. I loved the seam 
pattern on the Jabulani ball (Figure 7.20), so I gladly accepted the challenge 
to re-create it in 3D.
[Figure 7.19] This CG 
soccer ball was created for 
a FunGoPlay commercial 
using the same technique 
discussed earlier.

182 
Digital Modeling
Getting Started
As with any digital modeling project, I started by gathering reference material  
and carefully studying the design of the ball. I find that loosely sketching 
out the shapes can be a great way to try to get your head around an object. 
Figure 7.21 shows how I broke down the ball’s paneling, and I discovered 
that the Jabulani ball is composed of eight panels that are spherically molded. 
There are two distinct shapes that make up the eight panels. It’s important 
that these shapes be exact so that they connect perfectly together.
It didn’t take long to figure out that starting with a tessellated sphere was not 
the solution for this unique seam pattern. However, after a few hours, I was 
able to create the pattern of the ball using spline patch modeling. I accom-
plished my goal but was left unsatisfied because I was convinced there was a 
more refined solution that would produce a cleaner topology, and to be quite 
honest, I wanted to take this opportunity to put my problem-solving skills to 
the test.
[Figure 7.20] Our goal in 
this section is to re-create 
the paneling of the 2010 
Jabulani soccer ball.

[Chapter Seven] Polygonal Modeling 
183
The procedure that follows is the result of a day’s experimentation with the 
goal of creating easily reproducible results when modeling a 2010 Jabulani 
soccer ball. By going back and breaking down the model into refined steps, 
you truly become a better problem solver, and I’d suggest doing the same on 
your own projects from time to time.
I found that starting with either a segmented or tessellated ball produced 
undesirable polygon flow, but starting with a tetrahedron (Figure 7.22), a 
platonic solid primitive, could provide a good base mesh for the Jabulani ball. 
The polygons that make up a platonic solid are all identical, with the same 
number of faces meeting at each vertex; thus, all its edges are congruent, as 
are its vertices and angles.
[Figure 7.21] This rough 
sketch helped to work out 
a game plan for how I was 
going to build each of the 
eight panels.

184 
Digital Modeling
A tetrahedron is a type of pyramid consisting of four equilateral triangles with 
a flat polygon base and triangular faces connecting the base to a common 
point. My thought was that the four tips of this pyramid could be a good base 
for four of the eight panels.
Next, I needed to split the tetrahedron into several sections to allow for 
reshaping. Instead of measuring or guessing where to split the polygon faces,  
I subdivided the object into smaller faces that made it easier to work with. 
The resulting mesh gave each triangle face a poly-count of 64 three-point 
polygons, with a total object poly-count of 256.
To keep the object manageable, I assigned the tips of the tetrahedron to a 
new surface group and changed their color so that I could easily see the dif-
ference between the polygon islands (groups of polygons). Figure 7.23 shows 
these tips in blue.
[Figure 7.22] Starting with 
a tetrahedron seems odd, 
but this platonic solid is 
surprisingly versatile
[Figure 7.23] The 
tetrahedron divided into 
256 polygons. Changing the 
surface of the tips makes it 
easier to define each section 
of the base mesh.

[Chapter Seven] Polygonal Modeling 
185
With the tetrahedron sectioned off, I needed to remove the excess polygons. 
I simply selected the polygons that make each section and merged them into 
one. It was important to merge only those polygons that were on the same 
plane, not the entire tip. Figure 7.24 shows the base mesh after merging 
each group of polygons.
I know I just finished making those extra polygons, but that step was only to 
help create the shapes I now have. It prevented me from having to do any 
measuring, and I knew that all of the shapes that had been created up to this 
point were identical.
House Cleaning
Some 3D software may leave unwanted points behind after merging. I like to 
keep my work area clean as I go, so I always remove any points that are not 
connected to any polygons when constructing a mesh in this fashion. 
There were still a number of points that needed to be removed from the tip 
portions of the object, so I selected the 12 unneeded points per tip (a total  
of 48 points), which were located along the base edges, and removed them. 
The process of cleaning the mesh is shown in Figure 7.25.
[Figure 7.24] Each poly-
group is merged to refine 
the mesh by removing 
unneeded geometry.

186 
Digital Modeling
Layout Foundations
To get the base mesh closer to the proper shape I was after, I needed to bring 
the four points at the very tips of the tetrahedron down to the same edge that 
bordered the base of the tips. I selected the four tip points and moved them 
so that they became flush with the tips’ base edges. Figure 7.26 shows the 
result of the moved points.
[Figure 7.26] The four 
points at the tips of the 
tetrahedron are selected in 
preparation of the next step 
(left). The selected points 
are moved flush to the tips’ 
bases (right).
[Figure 7.25] These selected points are no longer connected to any polygons and can be 
removed (left). Although these points are connected to polygons, they are no longer needed 
for us to continue on to the next step (middle). The resulting mesh is much cleaner with the 
points removed (right).

[Chapter Seven] Polygonal Modeling 
187
My goal was to end up with the cleanest polygon flow possible, so I reconfig-
ured the geometry that makes up the tips. To do this, I split the edges that 
make up the base of the tip sections, working on one tip section at a time.  
I selected the bordering edges and added a point in the center. I did this for 
all four tip sections before moving on. For each section, I created new edges 
that connected the new points to the center point of each tip. Figure 7.27 
shows these new edges.
All that was left for the tip sections was to merge the polygon pairs, so that I 
ended up with a diamond shape configuration (Figure 7.28). Reconfiguring 
the tip sections may seem trivial right now, but it will drastically change the 
final topology of the object for the better. Trust me!
[Figure 7.27] The points 
selected here (left) were the 
result of adding points to 
the three bordering edges 
of the tip polygons. These 
three new edges (right) 
were generated to help aid 
in reconfiguring the tips’ 
topology.
[Figure 7.28] Three sets 
of triangle polygons were 
merged into these three 
diamond-shaped quads.

188 
Digital Modeling
I made sure that all four tip sections had been reconfigured before moving on 
to the next step. With all of the tips in the proper configuration, I started to 
create the topology needed for the center sections of the base object. 
I knew I wanted to split the center sections into smaller components. Doing 
this would enable me to control the polygon flow of the final mesh. I started 
by selecting the two center points and splitting the center sections right 
down the middle, creating a new edge (Figure 7.29).
I then selected the new edge that was just created and added a new point in 
its center. I added the points that were on the edges that border the center 
section to my selection and created new edges, splitting the center area into 
four faces. Figure 7.30 shows the result of the split.
[Figure 7.29] These two 
points (left) are selected in 
preparation of splitting the 
center polygon. An edge is 
created, connecting the two 
selecting points (right).
[Figure 7.30] A new point 
is added to the center of the 
newly created edge (left). 
The two points along the 
border of the center patch 
are added to the selection 
(middle). Edges are created 
to connect the selected 
points (right).

[Chapter Seven] Polygonal Modeling 
189
I repeated the steps on the lower portion of the mesh by selecting the center  
point and the points bordering the tips on the other side of the triangle, 
creating two more edges and thus splitting the center area into six polygons 
(Figure 7.31).
I once again repeated the steps until all four of the center sections were iden-
tical; each contained six polygons. I still wanted to divide the center areas 
into more polygons, so I selected the edge loop that bordered one of the tips 
and split it down the center, creating two bands around the tip. Figure 7.32
shows the two bands around the base of the tip.
[Figure 7.31] The same 
edges are needed for the 
lower portion of the mesh. 
These points are selected in 
preparation for new edges 
(left). Edges are created to 
connect the selected points 
on the lower part of the 
mesh, resulting in the center 
patch being made up of six 
polygons (right).
[Figure 7.32] The edge 
loop bordering the tip 
geometry is highlighted 
here in pink (left). This band 
of polygons has been split 
down the center, creating 
two sets of loops (right).

190 
Digital Modeling
Satisfied with the results, I repeated these steps for the remaining tips  
(Figure 7.33).
Believe it or not, the tedious portion was then complete. What I currently 
had was a magic configuration that would allow me to create the Jabulani 
soccer ball I was after. This base mesh consisted of 60 four-point polygons  
(60 quads).
It was important to go through these steps so that the underlying topology 
would provide optimal results. There are several ways I could have divided 
the base object to end up with the current state of the mesh, but I found 
this to be the most efficient way to ensure that all the segments were evenly 
spaced. This even spacing guarantees a more refined final mesh, which should 
be a goal of any model you create.
Final Stages
The finish line was in sight. To speed up selecting individual sections in 
future steps, I gave each of the center sections its own surface (Figure 7.34). 
Trivial steps like this are often overlooked by artists, costing them lost time 
on a production.
[Figure 7.33] New bands 
are created around the 
remaining tips.

[Chapter Seven] Polygonal Modeling 
191
Before I was ready to convert this geometric shape into a sphere, I wanted to 
increase the geometry a bit, so I subdivided the mesh into 960 quads. With  
a denser mesh and more polygons to work with, I performed a little magic!  
I wanted to deform this mesh into the shape of a sphere, so I used a deforma-
tion tool that shrink-wraps any geometry into a sphere. The result, shown in  
Figure 7.35, was a perfect sphere with the topology that I mapped out earlier. 
Without the initial preparation, I could have generated a ball object, but the 
underlying polygon flow would have been less than desirable.
[Figure 7.35] The base 
mesh is subdivided in 
preparation of deformation, 
which will occur in the 
next step (left). The result 
of deforming the mesh 
into the shape of a sphere 
(right).
[Figure 7.34] The center 
patches are given unique 
surface groups and assigned 
different colors to aid in 
future steps.

192 
Digital Modeling
The sizes of the tip panels were too small. I wanted to increase them so that 
they were in proportion to the center panels. I selected the polygons that 
made up the tip sections and expanded the selection so that four new poly-
gon bands were part of each of the tip’s selection. I changed the surface of 
the selected polygons so they all used the tip surface. Figure 7.36 shows  
the result.
The object had a low polygon count, which would reveal faceting when 
viewed up close. That wasn’t going to work. I wanted this soccer ball to be 
seen at much higher resolutions, so I subdivided it again (Figure 7.37).
I could see that I had accomplished my goal of creating the proper paneling 
of a Jabulani ball, but it was missing the seams that would allow the edges of 
the paneling to catch light. Adding this level of detail to a model will only 
enhance a mesh and add more realism to the final render.
[Figure 7.36] The tip 
patches’ surface groups are 
expanded to match the size 
of the real-world patches on 
the Jabulani ball.

[Chapter Seven] Polygonal Modeling 
193
To create the seams on the ball, I created a beveled edge around each patch, 
as shown on the yellow polygons in Figure 7.38. Because I planned ahead and  
created a different surface group for each patch, it was an easy task. I selected 
the polygons that made up one of the center patches and beveled it using a 
small shift and inset value.
[Figure 7.37] The mesh is 
subdivided again.
[Figure 7.38] The “yellow” 
patch is selected and beveled 
with a small shift and inset 
to start the creation of the 
seams in the ball.

194 
Digital Modeling
I deselected the polygons and repeated this process until all eight patches 
(triangle centers and tips) had been beveled (Figure 7.39).
With the seams in place, I subdivided the mesh one more time to increase 
the poly-count and smooth out the seams’ edges so they didn’t appear unnat-
ural and sharp. 
I changed the surface attributes for all the panels that made up the object to 
solid white instead of creating a new surface group so that I could get a bet-
ter look at the final mesh (Figure 7.40). Changing the color of the existing 
surfaces gives me the ability to go back at a later time and edit each patch 
independently by selecting polygons by surface.
[Figure 7.40] The mesh is 
subdivided again to smooth 
out the newly created seams  
and all of the surface group’s 
colors are changed to white.
[Figure 7.39] Each patch is 
given a bevel to complete 
the seam work.

[Chapter Seven] Polygonal Modeling 
195
Goooal!!!
There you have it! With a bit of preplanning and taking a little extra time 
in the beginning, I not only successfully completed what I set out to create, 
but I set myself up with clean polygon flow and patches that are mathemati-
cally identical for the eight-panel design that makes up the 2010 World Cup 
Jabulani soccer ball. 
Although I invested an entire work day developing this technique, using it 
allows me to generate this soccer ball in less than five minutes, whereas the 
spline patch modeling method took over an hour, and the topology wasn’t as 
accurate as I would have liked it to be.
For every digital model you create, your goal should be to deliver a clean 
mesh with optimal topology. Sometimes revisiting an object you’ve already 
created and thinking outside the box can lead to new techniques that shave 
hours off of your future modeling sessions.
Polygonal Modeling Exercise #2
If you’re looking for a similar challenge to this one, try modeling the 2006 
Teamgeist soccer ball shown in Figure 7.41. It has its own set of challenges 
and is a fun project to tackle. Here’s a hint to get you started: The first step 
involves another platonic solid. You’ve gotta love geometry!
[Figure 7.41] Take the 
2006 Teamgeist soccer 
ball challenge and 
re-create this ball in 3D.

[Chapter eIght]

Subdivision Surface Modeling 
Once primarily used for organic objects, subdivision surfaces (SubDs) have 
since become widely used in all areas of modeling. They provide the smooth-
ness of NURBS surfaces with the local detail and texturing capabilities of 
polygonal meshes. 
Although subdivision surface modeling doesn’t completely replace polygonal 
modeling, it does have numerous advantages. One of those advantages is the 
ability to work on a low-poly model with the effect propagated automatically to 
the subdivided mesh in real time. SubDs allows you to work with a simpler and 
lighter model for faster interaction rather than dealing with a heavy, denser, 
high-resolution version. 
The biggest advantage of working with SubDs is the ability to change the level 
of subdivision for the mesh, both during the modeling process and at render 
time. Simply stated, subdivision surface modeling is multi-resolution modeling.
In this chapter, I’ll show you the power of SubDs and share techniques that 
produce clean and efficient models using this modeling method.

198 
Digital Modeling
Modeling 3D Text with SubDs
Creating 3D text has always been a straightforward process. Digital modelers  
are quite often tasked with generating 3D text for everything from PowerPoint 
presentations to print graphics, feature film credits, and more. Modeling 3D 
text with SubDs involves a little more work but allows for resolution inde-
pendence similar to vector files, making it worth the extra effort. Being able 
to build one mesh and change the amount of geometry created at render time 
allows you to avoid faceting on the curved shapes that make up many type-
faces while maintaining a simple mesh that is easy to manipulate. It’s also a 
snap to create realistic edges on a SubD mesh.
For the example in this chapter, I chose the Agency typeface because its  
letterforms are made up of both hard-edge and curved corners. This will 
allow me to share some techniques you can use for any typeface you choose 
on future projects.
Getting Started
I begin building SubD text the same way I would if I were going to construct 
it with the traditional polygonal method, using one of three methods. I could 
import an EPS or Illustrator file, build the letterforms from scratch (as I did 
in Chapter 7), or simply use the text tool found in most 3D software. For this 
example, I used the text tool in my 3D modeling software to create the num-
ber 3 and the letter D (Figure 8.1).
[Figure 8.1] These two  
letterforms are made up  
of n-gons that will need 
to be reworked into an all 
quad mesh.

[Chapter Eight] Subdivision Surface Modeling 
199
This generated two n-gons that would work perfectly if the final model were 
going to be a polygonal mesh, but would collapse if I tried to apply SubDs  
at this point. There are many techniques used to generate SubD text, but  
I have found that adding support edges provides the cleanest mesh with the 
most flexibility.
Adding Support Edges
SubD text needs support edges to maintain the model’s shape, so I started 
creating this support geometry by beveling both of the n-gons with a slight 
inset. Figure 8.2 shows the result of the inset on the two letterforms.
By creating these insets, I added handy edge loops consisting of quad poly-
gons that border the edges of each shape. These edge loops not only help 
support the shape, but allow for a more refined edge. As long as I maintained 
this clean flow of polygons, I avoided the potential creasing and pinching 
that are commonly seen in SubD text models by other artists.
At this point I selected both n-gons and deleted them. Although that’s not  
a requirement for this technique to work, removing them gave me better  
visibility of the edge loops and allowed me to work faster. If I applied SubDs 
to the mesh at this point, the curved corners in each letterform would main-
tain their correct shape but the rigid corners would completely fall apart. 
Figure 8.3 shows a comparison of the object with and without SubDs.
[Figure 8.2] Creating a 
small inset produces a clean 
edge loop of quad polys.

200 
Digital Modeling
To maintain the shapes of each letterform, I needed to add additional support 
to the corners with sharp angles. To do this, I simply added hold segments to 
the sides of the edges that made up the corners. Figure 8.4 shows a before 
and after view on two of the corners that required hold segments.
There were a total of 17 corners that I had to add segments to. With all of 
them in place, I applied SubDs to the mesh. Figure 8.5 shows the two letter-
forms maintaining their shape with assistance from the newly created edges.  
[Figure 8.3] The polygonal 
mesh (left) maintains the 
original shape, whereas the 
SubD mesh (right) loses its 
shape without proper sup-
port segments.
[Figure 8.4] This close-up 
of one of the ends of the 3 
shows before the segments 
were added (left) and after 
(right).

[Chapter Eight] Subdivision Surface Modeling 
201
Patching in Polygons
With the letterforms holding their shapes, I needed to fill in the holes that 
were created when I deleted the n-gons. Although most SubD algorithms 
support n-gons, I like to avoid them and try and stick to an all quad mesh for 
cleaner results. 
I switched back to a polygonal mesh and started with the D, creating indi-
vidual four-point polygons that bridged the two inner edges that made up the 
letterform. This required me to add an additional segment for each curved 
corner of the D to keep the mesh all quads. Figure 8.6 shows one of the 
curved corners patched and the entire letterform completed.
[Figure 8.6] To finish 
off the D letterform, the 
inner edges were bridged 
together, creating a series of 
quad polygons. 
[Figure 8.5] With the sup-
port segments added in all 
of the required areas, the 
letterforms hold their shape 
when SubDs are applied to 
the mesh.

202 
Digital Modeling
Moving on to the next shape, I started by adding additional segments to the 
edge loop so that I had the same number of edges on both sides of the gap in 
the 3. This generated an additional 33 polygons but would make bridging the 
gap much cleaner. As I did for the D, I patched in four-point polygons, filling  
the inner hole of the 3. I left the two ends of the letterform unfinished so 
that I could create a custom configuration. Figure 8.7 shows the result.
Instead of using the six points that made up each of the end caps and creating  
two quads, I opted for the four-poly configuration shown in Figure 8.8, 
which avoided the creation of tiny quad polys that might cause issues later. 
This created a cleaner result while still maintaining clean polygon flow.
[Figure 8.8] To fill the holes 
in the ends (left), a four-
quad polygon configuration 
was used (right).
[Figure 8.7] Additional 
segments were added to 
the edge loop of the 3 to 
allow for an equal number 
of edges on each side of the 
shape. This made it easier to 
generate an all quad mesh. 
Quad polygons were gener-
ated to fill in the 3 with the 
two ends being left undone 
for a custom configuration.

[Chapter Eight] Subdivision Surface Modeling 
203
Adding Depth
With the two letterforms complete, I added depth by extruding them. I applied  
SubDs to the mesh to review the result shown in Figure 8.9. Although this 
could have been considered final, I wasn’t happy with how soft the edges were 
and wanted to adjust them.
Knowing that SubDs smooth the mesh’s surface based on the proximity of 
bordering geometry, I cut two segments into the sides of the letterforms. The 
closer I moved these new segments to the border, the sharper the letterform 
edges became. If I moved the segments farther apart, I had a larger area to 
smooth and produced a softer edge. I settled on a placement that gave me  
the edge that I was after (Figure 8.10).
[Figure 8.9] The flat letter-
forms were extruded to give 
them depth.
[Figure 8.10] Two new 
segments were cut into the 
sides of the letterforms and 
moved close to the outer 
edges to create a tighter 
edge.

204 
Digital Modeling
Adding Detail
Because I worked clean poly-flow with edge loops into the letterforms, I was 
able to add details to the letterforms to take them to the next level. Figure 8.11
shows two examples of what is possible with just a few simple bevels.
Creating SubD text involves only a few simple steps, and the payoff is well 
worth the time spent. The more letterforms you create with SubDs, the 
quicker you will become at delivering them to your clients.
[Figure 8.11] These are two 
examples of how you can 
take advantage of the clean 
poly-flow that was created 
to enhance the shapes of 
the letterforms.
Subdivision Surface Modeling Exercise #1
To start gaining speed with this technique, choose a font and generate the 
entire alphabet in SubD letters that you can pull from when the need arises. 
Challenge yourself by working with an array of fonts that include multiple 
curves, serifs, and any other details that require additional hold segments. Your 
time will be well spent, and the skills that you gain from the experience will aid 
you in other hard-surface models you’re likely to build using SubDs.

[Chapter Eight] Subdivision Surface Modeling 
205
Modeling a SubD Object
I continually tell students and artists who are new to digital modeling to get 
as much modeling time under their belts as possible and practice constantly.  
I often get the same response: “What should I model?”
The short answer is, “Anything!”
It really doesn’t matter what you model. Every model you build will only 
strengthen your ability to build the next one. Remember the earlier quote from 
Renée Descartes: “Each problem that I solved became a rule which served 
afterwards to solve other problems.”
For this next example of modeling with SubDs, I chose a standard wooden 
clothespin that I had lying around the house. Using the clothespin allows me 
to demonstrate the same technique we explored for creating the SubD letter-
forms but also introduces a new challenge.
Reference
I fired off a few photos of a clothespin so that I could display the images on 
my second monitor while I worked. I also had the actual clothespin close  
by so I could reference it if the images didn’t supply enough information. 
Figure 8.12 shows one of the reference photos I took.
[Figure 8.12] This clothespin 
consists of three components: 
two wooden prongs and a 
metal spring.

206 
Digital Modeling
Studying the clothespin, I knew that I could create the wooden prongs using 
the same technique that I used to create the SubD letterforms. I also decided 
that I only had to create one of the wooden parts and the other one could be 
duplicated to save time.
After giving some thought to the metal spring, I decided that I would have 
the most control if I rail extruded a simple flat disc along a single spline. 
The rail extrude operation allows a flat shape (polygon or group of polygons) 
to be extruded (extended) along a spline with the newly created geometry 
conforming to the shape of the spline. With my plan in place and references 
handy, I was ready to begin.
Getting Started
I started by creating one large n-gon for the wooden prong. Because I knew I  
would be taking advantage of SubDs, I used very few points to define the 
curved portions of the shape. Figure 8.13 shows a comparison of the number 
of points I would use if this were going to be a polygonal mesh and what I 
created for this SubD mesh. Notice the lower point count on the version that 
will take advantage of SubDs.
Beveling the polygon with a small inset created an edge loop of quad polys 
that bordered the silhouette of the wooden prong. I deleted the n-gon and 
applied SubDs to the mesh to see where I stood. Figure 8.14 shows the 
results of these two steps.
[Figure 8.13] The prong  
on the top uses more  
points to define the curves 
and is what I would use  
for a polygonal mesh. The 
prong on the bottom uses 
fewer points to take advan-
tage of SubDs smoothing 
algorithm. 

[Chapter Eight] Subdivision Surface Modeling 
207
I added more segments throughout the edge loop to maintain the wooden 
prong’s shape and to allow me to patch in the center using four-point poly-
gons (Figure 8.15).
I was happy with the silhouette of the wooden prong, so I gave it depth by 
extruding it. The result produced soft edges, so I added two segments running 
the length of the object, placing them close to the existing border edges to 
produce a tighter edge (Figure 8.16).
[Figure 8.14] The prong’s 
n-gon was beveled with a 
small inset (top). Once bev-
eled, the n-gon was deleted 
and SubDs were applied 
(bottom).
[Figure 8.15] Extra hold 
segments were added to 
maintain the shape of the 
wooden prong (top), and 
then the center hole was 
patched with quad polys 
(bottom).

208 
Digital Modeling
With the wooden prong completed, I mirrored it to create the other one and 
rotated it into place. Figure 8.17 shows the two finished wooden prongs.
[Figure 8.16] The flat  
shape was extruded to  
give it depth (top), and  
extra hold segments were 
added to sharpen the  
edges (bottom).
[Figure 8.17] The second 
wooden prong was created 
by mirroring the original one.

[Chapter Eight] Subdivision Surface Modeling 
209
Creating the Metal Spring
Next, I needed to create a spline that I could use to generate the metal spring.  
I started by creating one piece of the coiled portion that I duplicated three 
times and then merged them into one spline. From that single spline, I added 
the two arms that extended out from the spring to produce the shape I needed. 
I merged the two arms to the coil to produce a single spline. Figure 8.18
shows this process.
[Figure 8.18] Multiple 
splines were created and 
merged to produce a single 
spline in the shape of the 
metal spring.

210 
Digital Modeling
I created a disc polygon that I could use to extrude along the spline. I only 
used eight points to define the shape of the disc to keep the polygon count 
low. Too often artists use too many sides and segments on discs, balls, and 
other shapes that could be created using fewer. Remember that SubDs will 
generate a smooth surface using a low-resolution polygonal cage.
I moved the flat eight-point disc to the head of the spline and rail extruded it 
to generate the metal spring (Figure 8.19). It’s a good idea to keep the spline 
used for the rail extrusion for future use. I know a lot of artists who delete 
their splines after they’ve used them and then later find they need them 
again. Why set yourself up to do the same task twice?
All that was left to complete the metal spring was to produce cleaner end 
caps to replace the n-gons. To do this, I beveled the two n-gons at the ends 
of the spring three times to produce a slightly rounded shape. I created a pole 
of triangle polygons out of the n-gons and then merged the triangles into 
four-quad polygons. Figure 8.20 shows this process.
[Figure 8.19] An eight-
point disc was created to 
extrude along the spline. 
The disc was aligned with 
the spline (left) and then 
extruded along the spline 
to create the metal spring 
geometry (right).
[Figure 8.20] The ends of 
the spring were beveled 
to round them off, and the 
n-gons were converted into 
triangles. Those newly cre-
ated triangles were merged 
to create quad polys.

[Chapter Eight] Subdivision Surface Modeling 
211
With the metal spring modeled, I applied SubDs to it and resurfaced all three 
components of the clothespin to get the final results shown in Figure 8.21.
As you can see, the techniques used on the letterforms earlier in the chapter  
can be just as useful on other meshes. The same goes for the rail extrude tech- 
nique. I’ve used rail extrude to create everything from rollercoaster tracks, 
hoses and wiring, and more. Once you have the spline, you can try extruding 
a variety of shapes to generate completely different results. Every time you 
pick up a new modeling technique, commit it to memory, and you’ll soon 
have enough techniques in your toolkit to solve any modeling challenge.
[Figure 8.21] The final 
clothespin consists of all 
quad polys and is ready for 
the next phase of produc-
tion.
Subdivision Surface Modeling Exercise #2
Select an everyday item, like a stapler, tape dispenser, hair brush, or nail clip-
pers, and re-create it using SubDs. Take some photos that you can use as refer-
ence and have the actual item nearby. Remember to study your reference and 
formulate a plan before you ever launch your 3D software. Not only will this 
exercise give you more modeling experience, but it will also allow you to start 
building a library of 3D assets that may come in handy on future projects. You 
may also be surprised at how much these everyday objects sell for on a site like 
TurboSquid (www.turbosquid.com). The important thing is to keep modeling.

[Chapter nIne]

Modeling a realistic head
Chances are good that at some point in your digital modeling career you will 
be tasked with creating a 3D model of a realistic head. It might be used for 
a live-action television series in need of a CG stunt double, for an animated 
game cinematic, or any number of projects that require a photorealistic 3D 
human head. 
The biggest challenge when creating a realistic head model is that just about 
everyone can spot a bad CG face from a mile away. This is because we see faces 
every day. Reference and observation, once again, are key to the success of  
re-creating a human head in 3D.
In this chapter, I’ll walk you through creating a realistic head with these four 
main objectives in mind:
 • Using subdivision surfaces
 • Matching reference material
 • Building a clean mesh that is ideal for animation
 • Making extensive use of the edge extend (extrude) build out modeling method

214 
Digital Modeling
Choosing a Method:  
Edge Extend vs. Box Modeling
There really is no one technique that you have to use when creating any digital 
model. That said, the two most popular methods for creating a character head 
are box modeling and the edge extend build out method. With box modeling,  
I would start with a primitive object (box, ball, disc, and so on) and would 
work on the primary details first, like the overall head shape. I would then 
build in the finer secondary and tertiary details. Using the edge extend method, 
I would start with the tertiary details, like a fully detailed eye, and build out  
additional geometry from there. To create the realistic head used as the example 
for this chapter, I chose the edge extend method.
It’s important that I take a minute to explain why I chose the edge extend 
method of modeling for this particular model, because I don’t want you to 
get the wrong idea. I’ve read quite a few articles and forum threads, written 
by industry professionals, that would lead you to believe that the edge extend 
technique is the only option when building a realistic head, and that other 
methods, such as box modeling, are not accurate enough. Also, some would 
say that you can tell the difference between a head that has been created using 
the build out method and one that has been created using other methods. 
This couldn’t be further from the truth.
I’ve used the box modeling method for creating more realistic heads in my 
career than any other technique. Figure 9.1 shows a couple of head models 
created using the box modeling technique. I’ve even tried my hand at other 
methods of modeling a head, and regardless of the technique used, they all 
delivered similar results. There is really no way to tell how a model was cre-
ated. The only attributes of the model that a discerning eye can recognize is 
whether or not it matches the reference and whether it’s a clean mesh.
Why have I chosen the edge extend method? I tend to choose the edge 
extend method when I’m in a pinch and short on time. It’s by far the fastest 
way I know to create a production-ready, realistic head. It is also the easiest 
method for someone new to modeling to learn.

[Chapter Nine] Modeling a Realistic Head 
215
For the walkthrough in this chapter, I wanted to use a young female model, 
because I find female models to be more challenging than male models. Most 
female faces are smooth, whereas most male faces are on the rougher side. 
With a male model, you’re more likely to get away with a mesh with dents 
and dings because the features can add character to a male face, but on a 
female model that same texture can look unattractive and distracting.
My friend April Warren (www.aprilwarren.com), shown in Figure 9.2, is the 
subject for this chapter and is an ideal candidate for us to reference.
[Figure 9.1] The box mod-
eling method was used 
to create these two head 
models.
[Figure 9.2] Actress and 
digital artist April Warren 
will be our subject for this 
chapter.

216 
Digital Modeling
Using Reference 
April was kind enough to supply not only great front and side reference 
snapshots, but she went the extra mile and delivered a collection of photos 
showing a range of expressions (Figure 9.3). These shots are a great resource 
and demonstrate why good poly-flow is essential to a realistic head that will 
animate. These facial expressions are driven by motions or positions of the 
muscles of the face. When we create proper poly-flow in our 3D meshes, we 
can mimic the movement of these muscles. Keep this in mind when I walk 
through the process of building the areas of the face that you see undergoing 
the most change in these various expressions.
[Figure 9.3]  
Facial expressions are an 
important channel of non-
verbal communication and 
play a substantial role in 
character animation.

[Chapter Nine] Modeling a Realistic Head 
217
Preparing the Background Templates
After a good study of the reference images, the next step was to prepare the 
front and side images that were used as the background templates for model-
ing on top of. This preparation required using Photoshop to scale and rotate 
the two images in order to line up key areas like the corners of the eyes, tip of 
the nose, corners of the mouth, and chin (Figure 9.4).
It’s common that the ears remain a little off due to camera lens distortion and 
the fact that ears sit closer to the camera in a side-view photo. As you can 
see in Figure 9.4, the bottom of April’s ears line up, but the top of the ear in 
the side view is higher than the front. When possible, it’s ideal to use a long 
lens to reduce this type of distortion, but because these photos were taken 
with a simple point-and-shoot camera, I just needed to compensate for the 
difference when I modeled the ears. To do this, I focused on the side-view 
reference when modeling the ear and overlooked the fact that it wouldn’t 
match the front-view reference. Once the final mesh was created, I eyeballed 
the difference and chose an ear height that looked good.
[Figure 9.4] Matching the 
front and side images is an 
important step before mod-
eling begins.

218 
Digital Modeling
Taking Advantage of Symmetry
Taking advantage of symmetry on a mesh like this means only having to 
model one half of the head, and can also make for more efficient UV map-
ping, morph target creation, rigging, and more. If you look at the front view 
of April in Figure 9.4, you can see a slight difference between the two sides of 
her face. Using Photoshop, I mirrored the (screen) right side of her face over 
to the (screen) left (Figure 9.5). 
The new reference now looks a bit alien, and it’s important to understand 
that no real-world human has a perfectly symmetrical face. CG human models 
with symmetrical faces can stand out as not being realistic and are, unfortu-
nately, commonly seen throughout the industry. The trick is to create an  
asymmetrical model and use an asymmetrical morph during the rigging phase. 
This allows for all departments to take advantage of symmetry while not losing 
the asymmetrical qualities of a real-world person in the final render.
[Figure 9.5] Mirroring 
a person’s face may look 
alien, but it can save valu-
able production time when 
modeling.

[Chapter Nine] Modeling a Realistic Head 
219
Modeling the Head’s Components
With the reference prepped and a modeling method chosen, I was ready to 
start modeling. The six main components that I needed to tackle on the 
mesh were:
 •   Eyes 
•   Ears
 •   Nose 
•   Jawline
 •   Mouth 
•   Rest of the head
Using the edge extend technique, or any form of build out, allows you to start 
modeling any area of a model. But I find the eyes to be the best place to start 
when modeling a human face.
Eyes
If you don’t match the eyes, it’s nearly impossible to create a likeness of a  
particular person. If the eyes on a CG model are identical to the reference, 
other areas can be close enough and you can usually get away with it. I used 
this knowledge to my advantage when modeling a series of celebrity M&M’s, 
like the Brooks and Dunn M&M’s shown in Figure 9.6, because they required 
a likeness without having a nose, ears, or other key defining attributes that 
usually help capture a likeness.
[Figure 9.6] These celebrity 
M&M’s relied on the eyes to 
capture the likeness.

220 
Digital Modeling
Eyeballs
Many artists begin modeling a character’s face without starting with an eye-
ball mesh, which I find to be less efficient than having an eyeball in place  
to conform the eyelids to. Although I used the edge extend technique for 
modeling the head, I cheated and built the eye out of a low-poly sphere 
primitive. Because I took advantage of subdivision surfaces (or SubDs, which 
we defined as a refinement algorithm that creates a smooth, curved surface 
from a coarse polygonal mesh), I limited the amount of sides and segments 
that made up the sphere to keep a low poly-count. Figure 9.7 shows the back 
of the eyeball.
After I created the eyeball base mesh, I lined it up with the background 
images. For the front of the eyeball, I selected the eight triangles, flattened 
them, and performed five bevels to create the shape of the iris and pupil. 
When I was happy with the shape, I merged the eight triangles into four 
quads like I did on the backside. Figure 9.8 shows the results of these steps.
One last element needed to be created for the eyeball mesh to be finished, 
and that was the cornea geometry. Using a slightly larger sphere, I went through 
the same steps as before, but this time I beveled the polygons on the front of 
the mesh outward to create a slight bulge for the cornea (Figure 9.9). When 
textured, this geometry will be made transparent with reflective and refractive 
properties, giving the appearance of a shiny, glasslike surface at render time. 
For the rest of this walkthrough, however, we will shelve this portion of the 
mesh because it’s not required for the remaining steps.
[Figure 9.7] Keeping the 
poly-count low on a char-
acter’s eyeballs will help 
increase render times later 
during the production.

[Chapter Nine] Modeling a Realistic Head 
221
Eyelids
With the eyeball created, I moved forward by creating the eyelid area of 
the face. I started with a flat plane that I sliced into eight polygons. I wasn’t 
[Figure 9.8] Modeling 
the iris flat and the pupil 
indented will produce much 
more realistic renders than  
a perfectly round eye.
[Figure 9.9] The cornea 
geometry will be made 
transparent and reflective 
with a level of refraction 
to give the eyes a glasslike 
quality.

222 
Digital Modeling
picky about where I made the cuts because I knew I would eventually adjust 
the points, conforming to the shape of the opening of the eye. Using the 
reference images and the eyeball as guides, I moved the points to create an 
arched leaf shape (Figure 9.10).
Before I started edge extending, I cheated again by not edge extending and 
instead beveled the geometry four times to create the inner ridge of the eyelid  
as well as something that I refer to as the eye-sack (Figure 9.11). The eye-
sack is just extra geometry behind the eyeball that can come in handy later 
in the modeling process, as you will see. It is also necessary if you plan on 
creating a 3D print of the mesh, because you can’t have open edges on a 
mesh when printing.
It was finally time to start the edge extending. I selected the open edges around 
the eye and extended them three times, creating the eyelids (Figure 9.12). 
It’s important to create enough edge loops to be able to properly close the 
eyelids during animation but not so many that it causes unwanted creases. Also, 
it’s tempting to continue extending the edges, but it’s important to reshape the 
newly created geometry first, because it will save time in the long run.
[Figure 9.10] Taking special 
care with point placement 
early on will save clean up 
time later in the modeling 
process.

[Chapter Nine] Modeling a Realistic Head 
223
[Figure 9.11] Beveling 
allows you to quickly  
create the inner portions  
of the eyelids.
[Figure 9.12] Using the 
rule of three, I made sure  
I had enough segments to 
allow the eyelids to close 
properly.

224 
Digital Modeling
A close look at the reference material shows the lacrimal caruncle—the 
small mass located at the inner corner of the eye. I wanted this mesh to be 
realistic, so I needed to re-create this mass of skin. I even add the lacrimal 
caruncles to most of my cartoon character models as well and have found 
that most people spot the detail and comment on it favorably.
I selected the inner corner polygons and beveled them to generate localized 
detail. I wanted to also take advantage of the extra polygons along the edge, 
so I deleted the existing corner polygons shown in purple in Figure 9.13, 
and reshaped the newly created geometry. 
Eye socket
I extended the open edges of the eyelids two times to create the eye socket 
area of the face. When I was happy with my point placement, I mirrored the 
entire mesh across the X axis. The results are shown in Figure 9.14.
[Figure 9.13] Adding the 
lacrimal caruncle gives a 
higher level of realism to a 
model’s eyes.
[Figure 9.14] Mirroring and working with symmetry allows you to create character meshes 
in half the time.

[Chapter Nine] Modeling a Realistic Head 
225
Eye mask
Connecting the inner edges of the eye sockets with four rows of quads allowed 
me to construct the root of the nose. I then extended all of the open edge 
twice to create what I refer to as the eye mask, or Zorro mask (Figure 9.15). 
At this point, I took a few minutes to make sure I was happy with the eye 
region of the face. It’s always important to go back over the mesh from time 
to time to ensure that you’re still on target.
Nose
For the nose region, I started by extending the bridge of the nose several 
times, making note of where I would need extra rows for future use. I then 
extended geometry around the wings of the nose. I bridged the wings to the 
bridge with three rows and then closed the hole that was generated by creating 
the necessary quads. The results are shown in Figure 9.16.
[Figure 9.15] Always take 
time to go back over your 
mesh when you’ve com-
pleted the eye mask region 
and make sure you’ve 
captured the reference’s 
likeness.

226 
Digital Modeling
[Figure 9.16] Creating proper flow around the wings of the nose will help define the wings and allow for proper deformation.
I then extended three rows of polygons off the tip of the nose to create the  
septum, and extended the edges around the nostrils and wings of the nose.  
I extended the end edges of the nostrils one time and then connected them  
to the end row around the wings with a single polygon, which gave me the 
results shown in Figure 9.17.
Extending the inner nostril edges again allowed me to then create new poly-
gons to close off the inside of the nose, as shown in Figure 9.18.

[Chapter Nine] Modeling a Realistic Head 
227
[Figure 9.18] Although 
most camera angles won’t 
reveal the inner nostril, it’s 
always a good idea to close 
off the geometry.
[Figure 9.17] Having a row 
of polys flow around the 
wings and into the nostril 
gives a natural look to the 
mesh that holds up well 
during animation.

228 
Digital Modeling
Laugh Line
Before moving on to the mouth, I like to make sure I get a solid laugh line 
in place. A proper laugh line edge loop should border the mouth, run around 
the wings of the nose, and cross over the bridge of the nose. This region of the  
mesh is often overlooked by modelers, leading to undesirable results when a  
character makes extreme expressions with his or her mouth. A strong laugh 
line is key to successful deformations, so it’s always a good idea to get it in 
place early on. Figure 9.19 shows the progression of extending the laugh  
line geometry.
Mouth
Many modelers will continue to extend off the nose to create the mouth, but 
I’ve found that it’s much more efficient to build the mouth separately in the 
same fashion as I built the eyes. I started with a flat plane, sliced it into 12 
polygons, and pushed points to shape the geometry to the reference images. 
The result of this process is shown in Figure 9.20.
[Figure 9.19] The laugh 
line poly flow plays a sub-
stantial role in good defor-
mations through a wide 
range of a character’s facial 
expressions.

[Chapter Nine] Modeling a Realistic Head 
229
I beveled the mouth polys six times to create the lips and the inside of the 
mouth. Each time I beveled, I adjusted the points to conform to the refer-
ence. It’s important to not be in a rush when adding new geometry and to 
take the time to refine the mesh as you go. Figure 9.21 shows the result of 
these six bevels with refinement.
With the lips in place, I selected the open edges that made up the mouth and 
extended them three times. These edge loops are important because they will 
allow for smooth deformations to take place around the mouth. 
I connected the six polygons located in the top center to the nose region of 
the face, extended the remaining open edges of the mouth twice, and con-
nected the new geometry to the bordering polygons to create a seamless 
mesh. The results are shown in Figure 9.22.
[Figure 9.20] Using a  
separate piece of geometry 
for the mouth produces 
results quicker than extend-
ing from the nose region.

230 
Digital Modeling
[Figure 9.21] Similar to the 
eye-sack technique, bevel-
ing the mouth geometry to 
create the lips is a trick I’ve 
used for years and saves 
production time.
[Figure 9.22] The edge 
loops around the mouth 
allow for clean deforma-
tions in that region when 
animated.

[Chapter Nine] Modeling a Realistic Head 
231
Jawline
When a character opens his or her mouth, it requires the entire jaw to 
hinge open. I’ve found that creating a row of polygons that follows along 
the jawline, although not 100 percent necessary, can be a safe bet for good 
deformations. So, I extended jawline polygons off of the laugh line and then 
extended the row up to the ear.
With the jawline in place, I completed the area by extending polygons and 
connecting them to their neighboring polys. Figure 9.23 shows the results.
Before moving on to the ear, I wanted to finish off the face mask, also 
referred to as the death mask region of the face, by adding a forehead. I simply 
extended off the eye mask edges and connected to the jawline. Note that 
the polygon shown in blue in Figure 9.24 was used to reduce the forehead 
geometry from flowing into the jaw area. Although I only saved one row of 
polygons, every polygon counts at render time, so avoid any unneeded geom-
etry whenever possible.
[Figure 9.23] Creating 
poly flow along the jaw 
can help define the jawline. 
Extending polygons and 
connecting them to their 
neighboring polys finishes 
off that region of the face.

232 
Digital Modeling
Ears
Many artists struggle with modeling ears, but I think it has nothing to do 
with the difficulty and everything to do with psyching themselves out before 
they begin. If it helps, don’t think of the shape as an ear but simply as an 
organic form that has specific shapes. I always start modeling an ear the same 
way when using the edge extend method and used the same technique on 
this mesh. I started by mapping out the outer rim of the ear (the helix), as 
shown in Figure 9.25).
With the helix in place, I spent a few minutes patching in the inner ear 
based on the reference. Polygon flow is far from important when dealing with 
the inner ear, but sticking to an all-quad mesh is always desirable. Figure 9.26
shows the inner ear base mesh completed.
[Figure 9.24] Terminating 
rows of geometry where it  
is not needed allows for 
localized detail and a 
cleaner mesh.

[Chapter Nine] Modeling a Realistic Head 
233
[Figure 9.25] Starting  
with the helix allows you  
to define the borders of  
the ear.
[Figure 9.26] Poly flow is 
not important when creat-
ing the inner polygons of 
the ear because it doesn’t 
undergo the same level of 
deformation as the face. 

234 
Digital Modeling
Next up was creating the external auditory canal. I selected the geometry 
shown in green in Figure 9.27, beveled it twice, and adjusted the mesh to 
create the canal.
To finish off the ear, I extended the outer edges of the ear three times, wrap-
ping the new geometry around to the back of the ear. Extending the edges off 
the ear and connecting them to the face mask allowed me to create a seam-
less integration of the components, as shown in Figure 9.28.
Finishing Off the Head
With the eyes, nose, mouth, and ears completed, I had light work ahead of me.  
Starting with the open edges on the forehead, I extended 11 times, connect-
ing the newly created geometry to its bordering polygons with each extension 
until I reached the base of the neck. The result is shown in Figure 9.29.
[Figure 9.27] Depth in  
the auditory canal will add 
realism to your ear.

[Chapter Nine] Modeling a Realistic Head 
235
[Figure 9.28] Creating the 
back side of the ear is a 
snap by simply extending 
the outer rim of the ear. 
With the ear completed and 
connected to the rest of 
the face, the most detailed 
regions of the head are  
now complete.
[Figure 9.29] Keep the 
poly-count low for the back 
of the head because there is 
little to no detail needed.

236 
Digital Modeling
I continued the process off of the jawline to create the throat area and finish 
off the neck (Figure 9.30).
With all of the head’s geometry in place, I went ahead and resurfaced the 
mesh to get a better look at what I had created. The final result is shown in 
Figure 9.31.
Using this edge extend method of modeling a head, you’ll spend only 10 per-
cent of your time creating new geometry and 90 percent pushing and pulling 
points into their proper place. This technique is quite straightforward and 
allows you to move quickly. Getting proper flow in your geometry is as simple 
as placing the polygons where you want them, and at its core, that is what 
makes this technique so favorable to modeling from background images.
[Figure 9.30] Give yourself 
enough segments in the 
throat area to allow for  
subtle deformations when  
a character is talking or 
swallowing.

[Chapter Nine] Modeling a Realistic Head 
237
[Figure 9.31] In short order 
I’ve created an all-quad 
mesh with clean poly flow 
that will hold up during 
facial animation.
Head Modeling Exercise
Now that you’ve seen the process of creating a realistic head model using the 
edge extend method, take reference photos of any willing person and create 
a CG double of that person. Not only will it be a good learning experience, but 
you will create a mesh that might come in handy on future projects when a 
generic character head is needed.
Remember to be mindful of poly-count and polygon flow, and constantly refer-
ence your photos to stay on mark. After you have created two or three head 
models, the process will become second nature.

[Chapter ten]

Modeling a Stylized Character
Whether I’m working from another artist’s concept or pulling from my own 
imagination, I love building 3D characters. Without a doubt, digital character 
modeling is what attracted me to the animation industry, and it’s what has kept 
me satisfied as an artist, creatively and professionally, to this day.  I’ve literally 
created hundreds of 3D character models, ranging from realistic to cartoon, 
but I have a passion for creating stylized characters. I like the idea of creating 
something that the world has never seen before—something that nobody could 
simply take a picture of.
Although it’s good practice to have clean geometry in every mesh that you  
create, it’s extremely important when building a character model. Creating a 
digital character model is one thing; creating a character that is easy to rig,  
texture, and animate, and renders properly is a different matter altogether. 
Every aspect of your model needs to have good topology with a manageable 
poly-count to make your mesh production ready. Simply put, character models 
need to consist of squeaky-clean geometry.
© Disney/Pixar

240 
Digital Modeling
In this chapter, I show you one of the techniques I use to quickly create a 
complete, stylized, biped character model. I take you through the process of 
building clean geometry and show you how to find the form and detail of 
a character, starting from a simple box primitive. Although I demonstrate 
this technique on a cartoon-style character, it can be applied to any number 
of styles, including realistic. This technique is also not limited to character 
modeling, so feel free to explore the possibilities once you have an under-
standing of this method.
Box Modeling a Character Mesh
Box modeling is my favorite modeling method, and I find that it’s my go-to 
solution when building characters. Most times, I can box model a character 
faster than creating a 2D drawing of the same subject, making this method 
ideal not only for quickly developing character concepts, but also for produc-
ing finished meshes ready for production. 
When I worked on Pixar’s animated short Partly Cloudy, I used the box  
modeling method to create an array of cute animals and props in a variety  
of shapes and details. Figure 10.1 shows a few of the characters you might 
recognize from the film.
When employing the box modeling technique, I find that I only use a hand-
ful of tools. Doing this allows me to focus on the creative aspects of modeling 
more than the technical aspects, while still delivering a clean mesh ready for 
production. For this modeling example, I didn’t work with reference material; 
instead, I chose to build a biped male character from my imagination while 
keeping the following goals in mind: 
 • Create an all-quad mesh with localized detail.
 • Use subdivision surfaces.
 • Build a clean mesh with good topology that is ideal for animation.
 • Make extensive use of the box modeling method.

[Chapter Ten] Modeling a Stylized Character 
241
[Figure 10.1] Working from a 2D artist’s concepts, I box modeled these characters for Pixar’s Partly Cloudy.
All images ©Disney/Pixar 

242 
Digital Modeling
Getting Started
When starting a character model without reference, I prefer to start with the 
head. I find that the head drives the overall design of a character, and once I 
capture the look I’m after, the rest of the mesh can be child’s play. I also like 
to take advantage of symmetry on my character models, because it means I 
only have to model half the character and the software handles the other side.
Although you can start with any primitive as a base mesh when box model-
ing, I usually use a box. It’s extremely low poly and gives me an all-quad 
mesh to start with. To start the head, I created a simple box primitive and 
subdivided it to gain access to more polygons and to round off the base shape 
(Figure 10.2). Don’t make the same mistake many modelers do and subdi-
vide the mesh multiple times at this early stage.  Keep the mesh as light as 
possible for as long as possible. The lighter the mesh, the easier it is to define 
the shape and make broad changes throughout your model. I like to dictate 
where every polygon is being created, and subdividing the mesh multiple 
times would produce unnecessary geometry in many areas.  
With that said, I did need more geometry to define the shape of this character’s 
head. I started by extending two of the quads on the lower portion of the 
base mesh to create the mouth and chin area. With this simple step, I could 
already see a basic head shape taking form. Figure 10.3 shows the results of 
the new geometry created.
[Figure 10.2] Subdividing 
a box gives a rounder shape 
and a few more polygons to 
work with to construct the 
head mesh.

[Chapter Ten] Modeling a Stylized Character 
243
I still needed more geometry to work with, so I added a segment through the 
mouth area and edge beveled the segment that ran through where I envi-
sioned adding the eyes. I added another segment through the newly created 
eye row of polygons that would act as a center line for where the eyes would 
be placed. I then edge beveled the segment running down the center of the 
head to produce a new row of polygons that could act as the bridge of the 
nose, give me more geometry for the mouth, and help shape the forehead and 
the back of the head. Figure 10.4 shows the results of these steps. 
At this point, I wanted to keep any new polygon creation localized and not 
add any unneeded geometry to the back of the head. I turned my focus to  
the eye area and added a new segment running through the border of the face. 
[Figure 10.3] Extending 
two polygons from the 
bottom of the base mesh 
created the mouth and chin 
area of the head (left to 
right).
[Figure 10.4] I started lay-
ing the framework for the 
face by adding new seg-
ments to the base mesh. 
I cut through the areas in 
pink and edge beveled the 
segments to generate the 
areas in green (left to right).

244 
Digital Modeling
I reshaped the eye area and then defined that region of the face by extend-
ing the geometry twice.  This gave me the area I like to call the eye mask.  
Figure 10.5 shows this process.
I avoided adding any more detail to the eyes and moved on to the nose. I used 
a technique that I developed years ago that is the quickest way I know to 
create the base nose shape. I simply selected an upside-down T configuration 
in the polys and extended them to produce the entire nose structure in one 
step. Unlike the other areas of the nose, I wanted the top portion (the root) 
to flow smoothly into the forehead. To do this, I reconfigured the geometry by 
spinning one edge on each side of the forehead and then tweaked points. Every 
3D application has at least one tool that can perform this action, but each 
may call it something different. Some common names are SpinQuads, Flip 
Edge, Spin Edge, and Rotate Edge. Figure 10.6 shows these four steps.
It’s never too early to have topology in mind when creating a mesh, so the 
next area I concentrated on was the character’s laugh line. A lot of artists 
forget to include a row of polygons that borders the mouth and nose, and 
also crosses over the bridge of the nose. This geometry mimics the underly-
ing muscles in the face, allowing for clean deformations when the character 
speaks and makes expressions. All that was required for me to create this  
necessary feature was to spin one edge to redirect the polygon flow, thus pro-
ducing a clean edge loop (Figure 10.7).
[Figure 10.5] To create the 
eye-mask area of the face, 
I added a new segment 
that borders the face and 
extended the eye-mask 
region twice (left to right).

[Chapter Ten] Modeling a Stylized Character 
245
Hopefully, you are starting to see the power of spinning edges to rapidly  
produce clean polygon flow. It truly is my secret weapon when box modeling, 
and once you’ve mastered the process, you’ll gain full control over the topology 
of your mesh.
I wanted to flesh out the character’s face more, so I extended the base of the 
nose to give it more shape (Figure 10.8).
[Figure 10.6] The entire 
base shape of the nose was 
produced by simply extrud-
ing the shape out of the 
base mesh and spending a 
few seconds tweaking the 
newly created geometry 
(left to right).
[Figure 10.7] Reconfiguring 
the polygon flow to pro-
duce a clean edge loop for 
the laugh line was as simple 
as spinning one edge (left 
to right).
[Figure 10.8] Extending 
the nose geometry allowed 
for a rounder shape (left to 
right).

246 
Digital Modeling
The template for the face was almost complete. The only thing left to create 
was the mouth. I selected the six polygons located just inside the laugh line, 
extended them, and tweaked the points to produce a rough mouth shape. 
Figure 10.9 shows the process.
With all the facial elements prepped to be detailed, I added a neck by extend-
ing a group of polygons on the bottom of the head twice and reshaping them 
(Figure 10.10).
[Figure 10.9] The rough 
shape of the mouth was 
created by extending and 
tweaking the geometry (left 
to right).
[Figure 10.10] Adding the 
neck allowed me to get a 
better idea of what I was 
going to do with the charac-
ter’s jawline (left to right).

[Chapter Ten] Modeling a Stylized Character 
247
Detailing the Face
Next, I refocused my attention on the character’s eyes and extended the eye 
socket geometry a few times to form basic eyelids (Figure 10.11). I wasn’t 
concerned with how many segments were needed. I was more interested in 
the size and shape of the eyes.
With the basic shape of the eyes in place, I decided to finish off the nose.  
I extended the nostrils, added an additional segment through the nose, and 
reconfigured the geometry to get the shape I was after. Figure 10.12 shows 
the result. As with every area I detailed, I kept any addition to poly-count 
localized to that area. Doing so keeps the mesh light while still gaining 
needed polygons to get the shapes you’re looking for.
Creating the mouth involved the same process used on the eyes. I simply 
extended the mouth geometry a few times and adjusted the points until I was 
satisfied with the shape of the lips (Figure 10.13).
[Figure 10.11] Extending 
the geometry that made 
up the eye sockets a few 
times allowed me to form 
the character’s eyelids (left 
to right).
[Figure 10.12] Additional 
geometry needed for the 
nose was added locally 
instead of throughout the 
entire mesh (left to right).

248 
Digital Modeling
With the eyes, nose, and mouth looking good, I spent a couple of minutes 
reshaping the brow and forehead. No new geometry was created at this time— 
I was simply pushing points around to define the shape I was after. I find that 
I spend 90 percent of my time pushing points and only 10 percent creating 
new points to push. It’s important to adjust the geometry as you build. This 
adjustment allows you to make changes more quickly, defining the character 
as you build instead of at the end of the modeling process. Figure 10.14
shows the transformation of the forehead and brow area.
Before moving on to the ear, I wanted to do a little house cleaning on the 
side of the face. I knew it would be easier to tackle before the ear was in place, 
so I started by changing the polygon flow with a single spin edge. This created  
undesirable topology where the base of the ear would sit, so I chased the config- 
uration past the ear area and to the back of the head. Chasing refers to spinning 
[Figure 10.13] The mouth 
was created using the same 
process that produced the 
eyes (left to right).
[Figure 10.14] Tweaking 
the points’ placements on 
the brow and forehead gave 
me the shape I was after 
and made for a more inter-
esting look for the character 
(left to right).

[Chapter Ten] Modeling a Stylized Character 
249
edges to move a particular polygon configuration from one area to another. 
You don’t remove the layout, you simply give it a new home. Figure 10.15 shows 
this process.
[Figure 10.15]  
Reconfiguring the side of the  
head’s topology produces 
much cleaner polygon flow 
and creates a nice edge loop 
from the chin to the top of 
the head (left to right).

250 
Digital Modeling
While I was in cleanup mode, I reconfigured the neck geometry to produce 
cleaner topology. This required spinning a few edges (Figure 10.16).
At this point I realized that I had forgotten an important detail on the eye 
geometry. Although I liked the shape of the eyes, I didn’t create enough  
segments to produce clean deformations when animated. One of the easiest 
ways to check for this is to model the eyelids closed. The last thing you want 
to do is deliver a mesh missing key segments to the rigging department that 
limits its ability to make your model shine during animation. That’s a situa-
tion where everyone loses, and it’s easily avoidable. Figure 10.17 shows the 
newly created segments and the character with his eyelids closed.
When it comes to box modeling, one of my favorite areas of a character’s 
head is the ear. I have a prime spot picked out for where I want the ear to 
be. I want the top of the ear to be in line with the corner of the eye and the 
[Figure 10.16] Spinning a 
few of the edges in the neck 
produced a cleaner mesh 
with better topology (left 
to right).
[Figure 10.17] Adding two 
new segments around the 
eyes allows for clean defor-
mations when the eyes are 
opened and closed (left to 
right).

[Chapter Ten] Modeling a Stylized Character 
251
bottom to line up just under the character’s nose. I only need two polygons to 
create an ear that can have any level of detail, from cartoon to realistic, but 
this character looked like he needed a stylized ear to go with the rest of his 
cartoony features.
I started off the ear by extending the two polygons a few times to create the 
basic shape and to give me more geometry to work with. You can see this 
process in Figure 10.18.
I wanted a more defined shape to the ear, so I extended a patch of polygons at 
the top of the ear and spent some time reconfiguring the geometry by spinning 
edges and pushing points until I was happy with the results. Figure 10.19
shows the progression of the ear being refined.
I thought the design of the ear was fitting for the character, but I wanted 
to give you an idea of how the same two polygons could produce a more 
detailed ear using the same process I just covered. Figure 10.20 shows the 
result of a few more minutes of extending, spinning edges, and pushing points.
[Figure 10.18] Extending 
the two polygons a few 
times creates the basic 
shape of the ear (left to 
right).
[Figure 10.19] Extending 
the patch of polygons at the 
top of the ear allowed for 
the refining of the shape of 
the ear (left to right).

252 
Digital Modeling
With the ear polished (and a backup ear with more detail saved), I wanted to 
add a few more segments to the head and neck before moving on to the body. 
I started by adding a segment to the neck and refining the shape. I thought it 
was too thick for the character design, so I made the circumference smaller 
(Figure 10.21).
[Figure 10.20] Any level of 
detail can be added to the 
ear by extending patches of 
geometry, spinning edges, 
and pushing points.
[Figure 10.21] Adding a 
new segment through the 
neck allowed me to create  
a skinnier neck that was 
more fitting for this charac-
ter design.

[Chapter Ten] Modeling a Stylized Character 
253
I finished off the head by adding two new segments to the face. The first  
segment was added to the chin, cheeks, eyelids, and forehead through one 
edge loop. I wanted to give myself more control points to work with when 
deforming the character for facial expressions during animation.
The second segment was added to the laugh line to ensure that I had the rule 
of three in place. The basic idea of the rule of three is to have a hold segment 
on either side of the segment through which the deformation will take place. 
In the case of the laugh line, the center segment creates the crease in the face, 
whereas the outer segments hold the cheeks and mouth in place. Figure 10.22
shows the new segments that were added to the face.
Building the Body
This character was in need of a tall, lanky body to match his thin goofy face. 
I selected the polygons that made up the base of the neck and extended 
them several times to give myself enough segments to shape the body. Once 
I roughed out the shape of the chest, midsection, and pelvic area, I selected 
the polygons that made up the shoulder and hips, merged them into n-gons, 
and converted them to polygonal mode (non-SubDs). Figure 10.23 shows 
the result of this process.
[Figure 10.22] Two new 
segments added to the 
face allow for more control 
points to aid in facial defor-
mations during animation 
(left to right).

254 
Digital Modeling
Converting the shoulder and hip geometry to polygonal n-gons allows me to 
focus on the shape of the torso. This conversion also ensures that the point 
placement of the hips and shoulders are evenly distributed into a circular 
shape before creating the arms and legs.
The next step was to create the arms. I extended the n-gon at the shoulder 
several times, refining the shape with each extension.  I made it a point to 
add the rule of three at the shoulder and elbow to ensure that proper defor-
mations would occur during animation. Figure 10.24 shows the results.
[Figure 10.23] Creating 
the body out of the neck is 
a quick task. It’s important 
to use the time you save to 
tweak the newly created 
geometry to get the shape 
of the body right before 
moving on to the next step 
(left to right).
[Figure 10.24] When creat-
ing arms on a character, it’s 
important to include the 
rule of three for the shoul-
ders and elbows to produce 
proper deformations during 
animation.

[Chapter Ten] Modeling a Stylized Character 
255
I used the same process to create the legs for the character, making sure that I 
added the rule of three at the hips and the knees. I also used my trusty under-
wear rule.  The underwear rule is a good way to check to see if your character’s  
pelvic area will hold up during animation. Basically, if you can select polygons 
that are in the shape of a swimsuit or underwear, you’re probably in good 
shape. Make sure there is a gap of polygons separating each leg and that there 
is geometry that separates the hip from the belly. I’ve seen too many charac-
ter models that don’t have this topology, and it usually ends in disaster when 
rigging and animating.  Figure 10.25 shows the results of creating the leg 
geometry, as well as the underwear rule in action.
With all four limbs of the character created, I extended the feet out of the 
end of the legs and reshaped them to look like they were wearing socks. I made 
sure that I included the rule of three at the ankle and the base of the toes. 
Most artists remember to add the segments at the ankles but miss the hold 
segments for the toes, causing the foot to deform in an unrealistic way when 
animated. It’s important to put just as much care and thought into something 
as simple as a foot as you would the character’s face. Figure 10.26 shows the 
feet being created.
[Figure 10.25] Always 
remember the rule of three 
for the hips and knees,  
and check to see if you  
have proper flow for the 
pelvic area.

256 
Digital Modeling
Give ’em a Hand
Before growing the hand out of the wrist, I needed to convert the n-gons that 
I created earlier back into four-point polygons. Having n-gons on a mesh that 
will deform during animation is a disaster waiting to happen. N-gons, like 
triangles, tend to produce pinching and render errors on the surface of the 
mesh when manipulated during animation. You should always strive for your 
mesh to consist of all-quad polys if deformation will take place. Figure 10.27
shows the process of converting the n-gons into triangles and then merging 
them into four quad polys.
[Figure 10.26] The ankle 
and base of the toes require 
the rule of three for solid-
looking deformations (left 
to right).
[Figure 10.27]  
Converting the n-gons to 
quads allows for the hand 
to be extended with the 
proper polygon configura-
tion (top to bottom).

[Chapter Ten] Modeling a Stylized Character 
257
To create the base shape of the palm and top of the hand, I extended the wrist  
geometry once and then extended the sides of the palm out to add some width 
and enough geometry to create four fingers. Figure 10.28 shows these steps.
I needed more geometry to work with to produce the nice, round cartoon 
fingers I wanted for the character. To do this, I added segments to the ends 
of the hand. I created four n-gons on the top and four on the bottom of the 
hand. This was only a temporary measure that I would need to address at 
some point to get the model back to its all-quad topology. These new seg-
ments are shown in Figure 10.29.
[Figure 10.29] Adding 
additional segments allows 
for rounder fingers to be 
created from the hand (left 
to right).
[Figure 10.28] Extending 
the wrist geometry allows 
for easy creation of the  
palm and top of the hand 
(top to bottom).

258 
Digital Modeling
Using the same technique that I used on the shoulders and hips, I created the 
base for the four fingers (Figure 10.30).
Before adding the base of the thumb, I needed two more segments running 
through the hand, so I added them and reshaped the hand to make it less 
boxy. Figure 10.31 shows the results.
The base of the thumb was created, and the hand geometry was adjusted.  
My goal was to create what looked like a hand that had its fingers cut off. 
Figure 10.32 shows the resulting mesh.
[Figure 10.30] Taking the 
time to reshape the base of 
the fingers makes light work 
of actually growing the fin-
gers later (left to right).
[Figure 10.31] Additional 
segments were added to 
the palm in preparation for 
the base of the thumb and 
to produce a less boxy hand 
shape (left to right).

[Chapter Ten] Modeling a Stylized Character 
259
Before growing the fingers and thumb out of the hand, I wanted to clean up 
the n-gons I created earlier. I started by converting each n-gon into a quad 
and triangle combination on both the top and palm of the hand. Figure 10.33
shows the result of the conversion on the palm of the hand.
I also wanted to add a gap between each finger to allow them to deform better  
when spread open during animation. To do this, I created an edge bevel down 
the top and palm of the hand. Figure 10.34 shows the result of the edge 
bevels on the palm of the hand.
[Figure 10.33] To remove 
the n-gons created earlier, a 
quad-triangle combination 
was used (left to right).
[Figure 10.32] The base 
of the thumb was added to 
prepare for creating all five 
phalanges.

260 
Digital Modeling
I prefer my meshes to be made up of all quads, because they deform better 
and transfer between different software packages much easier. At this point, 
the hand was unacceptable in this regard, so I created new edges that con-
verted all of the triangles into quads. Figure 10.35 shows the conversion. 
The topology was far from ideal, but I planned to address the issues once I had 
the entire hand in place. At this point, I knew I was halfway there with the 
mesh being made up of all quads.
I was ready to add fingers to the hand, so I started with the index finger. 
Because I prepped the base of the fingers early by making them round, all 
that was left to do was extend several times and convert the tip from an 
n-gon to quads, using the same technique I showed for the wrist earlier. I made 
sure to include the rule of three for each joint on the finger before moving 
[Figure 10.34] Adding 
gaps between each finger 
allows the hand more  
flexibility when animated 
(left to right).
[Figure 10.35] Adding 
edges to the mesh allows 
for all of the triangles to  
be converted to quads (left 
to right).

[Chapter Ten] Modeling a Stylized Character 
261
on to the other fingers. Figure 10.36 shows the progression of all the fingers 
being created.
With all the geometry created for the hands, it was time for a bit of cleanup 
on the palm and top of the hand.  The first issue that needed to be addressed 
was the shape. The thumb was a little too close to the index finger, and the 
palm was too short. Both issues were easy to address by simply moving the thumb 
towards the body of the character and pulling all four fingers away from the 
body. I also added a third segment to the wrist to apply the rule of three.
I then turned my focus on the topology of the mesh. Spinning several of the 
edges and pushing points, I reconfigured the geometry to create better polygon 
flow, thus allowing for better deformations when animated. Figure 10.37
shows where the hands started and what they looked like after they had been 
reconfigured. By using this topology, I was able to transition from 28 polygons 
on the edge loop located at the knuckles down to 8 polygons at the wrist. This 
should be a shining example of how you can add localized details on any model 
without adding unnecessary geometry elsewhere on the mesh. 
[Figure 10.36] Growing 
the fingers out of the hand 
was an easy task because 
I prepped the geometry 
at the base of the fingers 
earlier during the modeling 
process (left to right).
[Figure 10.37] Taking the 
time to reconfigure the 
hand’s topology pays off 
when the character is rigged 
and animated. The original 
mesh is on the left, and the 
final topology of the hand is 
on the right.

262 
Digital Modeling
The great thing about modeling hands is that you have reference “handy” at 
all times.  Be sure to create multiple shapes with your hands when referenc-
ing them to see how they deform in the various poses. This will give you an 
idea of where you should place edge loops for deformation.
Final Character Review
With the hands completed, I had a full character modeled, and took some 
time to review the mesh. I always like taking a break from the mesh at this 
point so that I can come back with a fresh set of eyes and look for anything  
I may have missed. Some particulars that I look for include:
 • If I’m working from reference material, does the mesh match the 
reference?
 • Did I include the rule of three in all the right areas?
 • Is 100 percent of the mesh created out of four-point polygons?
 • Does the mesh have proper polygon density?
 • Is the mesh in the proper pose for rigging? (T-pose or relaxed pose)
 • Is the mesh facing in the correct direction with its feet planted at zero 
on the Y axis?
 • Is the mesh the proper scale?
 • Does the overall mesh have clean topology?
After my review of the mesh, I was satisfied with the look and structure that 
I had created. The model consisted of 2,200 quads. Half of those polygons 
were used on the hands, and less than a quarter on the head. You can check 
out the final mesh in Figure 10.38.
Depending on the production requirements, you may find that the base  
mesh needs to have a higher density. You can accomplish that by simply  
subdividing the geometry as many times as required to hit your target density. 
Figure 10.39 shows the character after being subdivided once. Be sure to 
save a version of the object before subdividing it so you can always go back 
and make broad changes quickly on the lower-resolution mesh.

[Chapter Ten] Modeling a Stylized Character 
263
[Figure 10.38] The final 
mesh is ready for some 
clothes, hair, and other 
accessories to add to the 
character’s personality.
[Figure 10.39]  
Subdividing the geometry 
creates a denser mesh, 
which is sometimes required 
for production.
Character Modeling Exercise
With box modeling fresh on your mind, create a stylized character using the techniques described and 
shown in this chapter. Keep in mind all of the details I covered to ensure that you create a clean mesh with 
proper polygon flow. Once you have the base figure created, begin adding details like hair, clothes, shoes, 
and so on. Continue enhancing your box modeling skills by starting some of these elements with other 
primitives, such as a ball or a disc.

[Chapter eleven]

product Modeling for print graphics
Product modeling has always been big business in the visualization market  
of the industry. Within the last ten years, product modeling has exploded  
into the world of print graphics with CG renders of digital models replacing 
the majority of product imagery. Working with digital artists gives an art  
director the ability to produce imagery that would be extremely difficult or 
impossible to achieve with traditional photography and in some cases can  
be more cost-effective. 
Almost all product photographs must be retouched to eliminate a variety of 
problems: Reflections of studio equipment, such as cameras and lights; seams 
and other subtle manufacturing imperfections; and unwanted shadows are  
just a small sample of the undesirable elements that come with using the tradi-
tional method of presenting a product. Because cameras and lights in CGI can 
provide illumination without physically appearing in reflections, 3D-generated 
images are extremely clean and typically require little, if any, post processing.  
This makes digital modeling the ideal solution for generating picture-perfect  
product imagery. The same 3D assets can be used to produce animated sequences 
for product displays and promotional materials, thus providing greater flexibil-
ity and cost-effectiveness.

266 
Digital Modeling
In this chapter, using the spline patch modeling method I walk you through 
the process of creating a digital model of a product with a clean mesh that is 
ideal for high-resolution imagery.
Building a Better Product
Although I’ve digitally reproduced many products for clients over the years, 
ranging from vehicles, industrial equipment, computer hardware, and more, 
the majority of my digital product modeling has fallen into the consumer 
packaging market for print graphics. This includes boxes, blister packs, cans, 
bags, bottles, and more. Bottles tend to be the most interesting to model. 
Over time, they have grown in complexity, making them an ideal challenge 
for even the seasoned digital modeler.
Even though some digital models created for other markets in the industry, 
such as feature film, can hold up to the extremely high resolutions of product 
print graphics, most models can’t. Here are a few details that separate prod-
uct print models from the rest:
 • Unlike other markets, you usually want to avoid dirt, grime, scratches, 
dents, and other wear that usually help sell a digital model as being real-
istic. I like to add a little waviness to the paneling of a car to help add 
realism, for example.
For product shots, in most cases you’re trying to achieve a hyper-realism 
with flawless qualities. CG artists are used to adding in the details that 
photo-retouchers get paid handsomely to remove. Without all those 
details to sell a model as real, the challenge then becomes to fine-tune 
surfacing and lighting, and to create an environment for the object to 
reflect and refract.
 • Avoid adding details like manufacturing seam lines, embossed product 
codes, and any other imperfections in the surface of the product.  
Figure 11.1 shows examples of details you’d want to avoid modeling  
for a product shot.

[Chapter Eleven] Product Modeling for Print Graphics 
267
 • Subdivision surfaces (SubDs) have become a requirement of sorts to 
ensure that no faceting will appear at render time. Building meshes  
with SubDs allows you to work with a manageable polygon count while 
modeling, and affords you the ability to render with incredibly high  
poly-counts and resolution independence.
 • Tertiary model details like micro-bevels become required for product 
shots, because any edges without them will be obvious and will make 
the mesh appear as CG.
 • Your goal should always be to create a clean mesh for every project—
when modeling for print, that goal becomes imperative. You have to 
model as if every area will be seen under a microscope. Any pinching, 
creasing, or other imperfections in the model’s surface caused by bad 
polygon flow or the use of triangles, n-gons, or poorly distributed  
geometry will stick out like a sore thumb when viewed at extremely 
high resolutions.
You’re not re-creating reality when you produce a model for product shots; 
you’re creating an ideal version of the object that can fool the viewer into 
thinking it’s real. Simply put: perception is, indeed, reality.
Think about it this way: How many times have you ordered a meal at a res-
taurant based solely on the photo in the menu, only to be disappointed when 
it is delivered to your table? The difference between the photograph and the 
meal you were served is that all the tricks in the book were probably used to 
make the photograph look good. This could include using white glue instead 
[Figure 11.1] Although  
details like manufacturing 
seams would add realism 
to the model, they are best 
avoided when creating a  
product shot for print.

268 
Digital Modeling
of milk, motor oil instead of syrup, and spray deodorant on fruit to give it a 
frosty veneer—and let’s not forget what the power of Photoshop affords us.
Although you could create hundreds of bottles with just a primitive and 
a few simple steps, for this modeling walkthrough, I chose a stylish plastic 
bottle design that consists of several compound and reverse curves similar to 
what you’d find on most modern vehicles. 
Compound curves normally consist of two curves joined together and curving  
in the same direction, whereas reverse curves consist of two curves joined 
together but curving in the opposite direction. Simply put, this bottle has a 
complex surface with a lot of curves that flow into each other seamlessly.
Reference: CAD Geometry, Photos, and 
Blueprints
The three common reference types you will usually receive from a client 
when tasked with the creation of a product model are CAD geometry, pho-
tos, and blueprints. CAD geometry is rarely suitable for rendering directly, 
because its polygon density is usually notoriously high, but it can serve as a 
perfect template from which to build a new, clean model. I have found it  
rare that a client supplies CAD data, but it’s always a good idea to ask if it 
can be made available to you.
Photographs are the most common reference but are rarely ideal because 
they often have lens distortions that change the overall shape of the product. 
Figure 11.2 shows an example of this type of distortion. This can lead to  
the digital model not being 100 percent accurate, and although the average 
person won’t catch the discrepancy, the client definitely will. 
Blueprints are my weapon of choice for product modeling when available. 
They give you a clean template to build from and are usually more accurate 
than photos. If photos are supplied, consider using them as a template to  
create your own blueprint, which would allow you to make adjustments to 
the line art to account for lens distortion. This could prevent some headaches 
during the modeling stage.

[Chapter Eleven] Product Modeling for Print Graphics 
269
For this walkthrough, I used the blueprint shown in Figure 11.3 as a template 
to create the bottle. I prepped the reference by creating individual images of 
the different views so they could be loaded into my 3D software and used in 
the background to work on top of.
[Figure 11.2] The distor-
tion in the photo of the 
bottle (left) can cause  
issues when trying to accu-
rately re-create an object. 
Using blueprints (right) is 
more ideal.
[Figure 11.3] This line  
art of the bottle was used 
as a blueprint to model on 
top of.

270 
Digital Modeling
Studying the blueprints, I began formulating a plan of attack. There were 
some areas that I wasn’t sure how I would tackle, so I did what any smart  
artist would do: I contacted my friend Lewis (www.lewis.tomsoft.hr) and  
had a quick Skype chat. Sometimes discussing a problem with a fellow  
modeler can be the quickest way to develop a solution. Why go it alone if 
you can enlist a second problem solver? As the old saying goes, two heads are 
better than one.
After bouncing ideas back and forth, we came to the conclusion that spline 
patching the basic shape of the mesh was the ideal method for generating  
the complex, curved surface of the bottle. Spline patching would require me 
to generate multiple curves, convert those curves to patches of polygons, and 
refine the mesh with any needed details. 
Getting Started: Creating Splines
With the reference prepped and a plan in place, I started by creating individual  
splines that matched the reference blueprints. At this point, I wasn’t concerned  
with how I was going to break the surface area into polygon patches; I was 
more interested in capturing the overall shape of the bottle based on the 
blueprint. Because the bottle is symmetrical in shape, I had to generate splines 
for only half the object. Figure 11.4 shows the splines created based on the 
blueprints.
With the base shape of the bottle outlined, I started adding more splines to 
create the framework that allowed me to break the surface of the bottle into 
multiple patch zones. I tried to create each of these zones using four splines 
so that the polygons that were generated when the splines were patched would 
consist of all-quad polys. I ended up having to resort to using three splines 
for a few of the zones, which I knew would generate three-point polygons. 
I didn’t let that slow me down, because I knew I could sort out those areas 
when the time came. Figure 11.5 shows the bottle being broken into mul-
tiple zones with the creation of additional splines.

[Chapter Eleven] Product Modeling for Print Graphics 
271
[Figure 11.5] Additional 
splines were created to 
break the bottle into  
multiple zones for the next 
step of patching polygons. 
[Figure 11.4] Splines were created using the blueprints as a template.

272 
Digital Modeling
Spline Patching
When I was happy with the spline cage, I began creating polygon patches. 
Although I could attempt to patch all of the zones in one go, I opted to 
patch one at a time to keep a close watch on the polygon flow as well as the 
shapes being generated. I kept the amount of polygons generated to a low 
number, knowing that the final mesh would take advantage of subdivision 
surfaces. Figure 11.6 shows several patches being created.
I ran into a zone in the lower-left corner of the bottle that produced undesirable 
results. I’ve found that I can spend more time trying to create new splines 
than if I just patch by hand, so I opted for the latter. Fortunately, this was an 
easy area to create. I simply bridged the edges from the top to the edges on 
the bottom, creating three quad polygons. I then cut two new segments into 
these polys and closed the remaining hole with two quads. These steps are 
shown in Figure 11.7.
With the left side of the bottle complete, I turned to the right side and con-
tinued to create patches of polygons using the splines (Figure 11.8).
[Figure 11.6] Patches of 
polygons were created one 
zone at a time to ensure 
that proper polygon flow 
and a clean mesh were 
being generated.

[Chapter Eleven] Product Modeling for Print Graphics 
273
I ran into an issue on the lower-right side of the bottle that I wanted to 
address before moving forward. The lower portion of the bottle required more 
rows of polygons than the upper part of the handle. Instead of adding a row, 
I decided to terminate the extra in the upper part to keep the poly-count as 
low as possible. This created a three-point polygon that I would address at a 
later time. While I reworked this area, I also did a little housecleaning on the 
mesh (Figure 11.9).
[Figure 11.7] Manually 
patching this portion of the 
bottle allowed for a cleaner 
topology.
[Figure 11.8] The bottle 
really started taking shape 
once the majority of the 
zones on the right side of 
the bottle were patched.

274 
Digital Modeling
Just when I thought I was in the clear, the top of the bottle gave me a similar 
issue, so I reworked it as well. Figure 11.10 shows a before and after of this 
portion of the bottle’s mesh.
[Figure 11.9] The topology 
of the mesh on the left was 
not ideal. With a little recon-
figuring of the geometry,  
I was satisfied with the mesh 
on the right.
[Figure 11.10]  
Reconfiguring this portion 
of the mesh produced a 
cleaner topology and a 
smoother surface.

[Chapter Eleven] Product Modeling for Print Graphics 
275
Before I started patching the bottle cap, I went ahead and extended the edges 
of the mouth portion of the bottle (Figure 11.11) to help generate the seam 
that exists between the base and the cap.
The cap proved to be the easiest portion, although I’m sure that comes as no 
surprise. After patching the cap, I created the full cap by mirroring the newly 
created geometry and then temporarily closed off the top with an n-gon. With  
the top closed, I beveled the geometry multiple times to achieve the rounded 
shape that matched the reference. These steps are shown in Figure 11.12.
[Figure 11.11] Using the 
edge extend method made 
light work of the mouth of 
the bottle.
[Figure 11.12] After patch-
ing half of the cap (left), I 
mirrored the geometry and 
closed the top off with an 
n-gon (middle). Beveling the 
top multiple times gave me 
the shape I was after (right).

276 
Digital Modeling
To clean up the top portion of the cap, I collapsed the n-gon and merged 
the newly created three-point-polygons to create an all-quad configuration. 
Figure 11.13 shows the results of these steps.
Because the cap was so close to being finished, I went ahead and added the 
tertiary details to the lower portion by generating several edge bevels to 
refine the shape. Figure 11.14 shows the completed cap.
I knew the middle of the bottle was going to be tricky, so I moved to the bot-
tom and patched the outer rim of the base. Because it seemed to work well 
for the cap, I decided it would be faster to bevel in the rest of the bottom, 
so I mirrored the entire bottle and then capped of the base with an n-gon. 
Figure 11.15 shows the results of these steps.
[Figure 11.13] I wanted to 
remove the n-gon (left) so 
I collapsed it (middle) and 
merged the newly created 
three-point polygons to  
create an all-quad configu-
ration (right).
[Figure 11.14] With the 
cap close to being finished 
(left), I generated several 
edge bevels to refine the 
shape (right).

[Chapter Eleven] Product Modeling for Print Graphics 
277
[Figure 11.15] The border of the 
bottle’s base (top) was patched, the 
entire mesh was mirrored (middle), 
and the hole was capped with an 
n-gon (bottom).
[Figure 11.16] The n-gon was beveled several times (left) and then converted to 
an all-quad configuration (right).
[Figure 11.17] The center of the bottle was created using the build out method to create an ideal topology.
I created multiple bevels using the blueprint as a guide and then cut 
in the required edges to convert the n-gon to an all-quad configuration. 
This process is shown in Figure 11.16.
After several failed attempts to generate clean, polygon flow by spline 
patching to the remaining middle portion of the bottle, I opted to 
manually create the polygons using the build out method. Because  
I had the bordering polygons in place and a spline cage and blueprints 
as a guide, this was surprisingly easy to accomplish. Figure 11.17
shows the middle of the bottle being created at multiple stages.

278 
Digital Modeling
Final Details
With all the elements created, and the spline patching portion of the modeling 
out of the way, I applied subdivision surfaces to the mesh. I was pretty happy 
with the results but added an edge bevel around the circular center to tighten 
up the edge. Often, additional segments need to be created to compensate for 
the smoothing that occurs when polygonal meshes are converted to SubDs. 
Figure 11.18 shows the results with the additional segment.
The mesh looked complete so I mirrored the geometry to create the full bottle. 
I took some time to survey the topology and discovered six three-point 
polygons. I always try my best to avoid triangles when working with SubD 
meshes, and because there was an even number of triangles, I knew it would 
be an easy fix. I selected all six triangles and merged them into three quads 
(Figure 11.19).
I took another couple passes over the mesh. Once I was satisfied that I didn’t 
miss anything, I created a few surface groups and changed their attributes  
to add color and specularity to get a final look at the completed model. 
Figure 11.20 shows the completed mesh.
Although there were a few areas that proved to be quicker using other  
modeling methods, spline patch modeling was the clear choice for creating 
the complex curves that made up the design of the bottle. Exploring alter-
nate modeling methods gives you the ability to use the right technique at the 
right time. You can never have too many tricks in your modeling toolkit.
Product Modeling Exercise 
Product modeling can be big business for a digital modeler. Choose a bottle  
or package design that has some challenging areas and re-create it using a 
modeling method that is either new to you or that you aren’t very comfortable 
with. Challenging yourself can be the quickest way to increase your problem-
solving skills as well as your modeling speed. As always, be sure to create a 
clean mesh and stay true to your reference. 

[Chapter Eleven] Product Modeling for Print Graphics 
279
[Figure 11.18] The circular edge in the center of the 
bottle was too soft when SubDs were applied (top), so  
an edge bevel was added to tighten the edge (bottom).
[Figure 11.20] The completed bottle has good polygon 
flow and is a light model made up of a low poly count,  
making it ideal for production.
[Figure 11.19] The six triangles in the mesh (left) were 
merged to create three quad-polys (right).

[Chapter twelve]

Digital Sculpting
Artists throughout the 3D industry have introduced digital sculpting to their 
modeling workflow. In a nutshell, digital sculpting is the art of manipulating a 
mesh with digital brushes using software instead of physical clay. This method 
of modeling has enhanced production pipelines for feature films, broadcast 
media, the gaming industry, and more. I’ve used digital sculpting in my print 
graphics work to easily achieve levels of detail in my 3D models that would 
have been difficult or impossible to do using any other method. 
Although digital sculpting has changed the playing field for the production 
portion of a pipeline, it has also been adopted in the pre-production phase. 
Traditionally, concept artists working in the visual design department worked 
in clay to create maquettes (small scale models). Because of the advancements 
and accessibility of today’s digital sculpting packages, many concept artists now 
choose digital sculpting over making physical maquettes, allowing them to 
work faster, have more creative freedom, and explore more options. 

282 
Digital Modeling
In Chapter 2 of this book, a few of my industry buddies share their experience 
and advice to help create a clearer picture of a digital modeler’s contribution  
is in a production pipeline. In this chapter, I’ve asked my good friend Glen 
Southern (southerngfx.co.uk) to share some of the techniques he employs 
when using the digital sculpting method of modeling. Glen has been sculpting 
most of his adult life in one form or another but has been digitally sculpting 
almost exclusively for the last ten years. He was one of the earliest adopters of  
digital sculpting and continues to be a leader in this new method of modeling. 
In this chapter, Glen covers modeling a creature maquette, starting with a 
primitive sphere. While explaining the fundamental process of digital sculpt-
ing, Glen shares some of the sculpting techniques he’s developed over his 
many years of experience. So, without further ado, I hand the reigns over to 
him for the rest of this chapter.
Digital Sculpting with Glen Southern
Instead of using clay to create dimensional sculptures, I now sculpt using a 
Wacom graphics tablet (www.wacom.com) and a computer. I use ZBrush for 
digital sculpts, which was developed in the late 1990s by Pixologic and has 
become the industry standard tool for digital sculpting. Even though other 
packages allow you to achieve the same results (such as Mudbox, 3D-Coat, 
Silo, and Modo), I have chosen to stay with ZBrush for most of my career. 
Sculpting is very different from other digital modeling methods, which may 
seem strange when you discover that the underlying algorithms—SubDs—are 
exactly the same.
One major difference is that digital sculptors don’t often think in terms of 
topology and polygon flow. The sculpting is done on top of a primitive shape 
(a sphere, for example) or onto an imported mesh from another 3D package. 
Either way, the process is the same, but the artist doesn’t often get to see or 
really care about the underlying polygons. The idea is that once your highly 
detailed sculpture is made, it is possible to go back and, using a technique 
called retopology, re-create the surface of the mesh with better polygon flow. 
When using a sculpting package, I start off by pulling or pushing a simple 
3D mesh into whatever shape I’m after. Once I create a rough armature (the 

[Chapter Twelve] Digital Sculpting 
283
basic structure from which the sculpture is built), I can add the detail stage 
by stage using a wide range of brushes (Figure 12.1).
I can further enhance these sculpting brushes with alphas (grayscale images). 
When a grayscale image is used as an alpha, the details in the image control 
the shape of the brush. Alphas allow for an endless number of custom brushes 
that make light work of details that would be extremely time-consuming  
otherwise. Figure 12.2 shows my library of alphas.
[Figure 12.1] ZBrush has a massive collection of brushes that can overwhelm a new user.  
It is possible to configure the interface and put the tools you need right at your fingertips.

284 
Digital Modeling
Creating a Digital Creature Maquette
Instead of working from a 2D concept sketch, I used a digital model as the 
“sketch” of this creature maquette. In the same amount of time that it would 
take to create a 2D concept sketch, I produced a 3D sketch. The speed in  
which a digital sculpt can be created is one of the many reasons digital sculpting 
has gained popularity in the industry so quickly. 
In earlier versions of ZBrush, a polygon mesh that was stretched too far 
would become an issue, because the sphere is actually made up of subdivided 
polygon quads or triangles. If a portion of the mesh was pushed or pulled too 
[Figure 12.2] Brushes can be even more powerful when they are combined with grayscale 
alpha textures. ZBrush has quite a few alphas built in, but they become even more useful 
when you create your own.

[Chapter Twelve] Digital Sculpting 
285
far, it would become blocky and pixelated, as shown in Figure 12.3. Now, 
using a new technique called Dynamesh, the model is re-meshed on the 
fly, which means that if the polygons are getting stretched out of shape, the 
software redistributes them evenly across the entire model. Dynamesh was 
introduced in ZBrush 4, Release 2 and has changed the way a lot of modelers 
work. I used Dynamesh a great deal for this project, so as you read and come 
across portions where I re-mesh or Dynamesh an object, it simply means I 
was redistributing the polygons at that point.
For this sculpt, I started with a primitive sphere. I find that I usually start 
with a simple object such as a sphere, which allows me to head in any direc-
tion I want without being constrained by the shapes of a more complex 
mesh. I also took advantage of the Symmetry option and enabled it across 
the X axis. Symmetry is a great feature for a character modeler because most 
living things are more or less symmetrical. This is not only a major time-
saving feature, but as you create your model, you can adjust the proportions 
by seeing both sides at the same time.
[Figure 12.3] Pulling and 
pushing polygons on a 
sphere leads to stretched 
polygons. That is where the 
power of Dynamesh comes 
into its own by redistribut-
ing the polygons evenly 
throughout the mesh.

286 
Digital Modeling
The early stages of sculpting are all about creating the basic anatomy before 
moving on to looking at proportions and form. This means that the first 
thing you should do is pull out chunks of geometry to be used for the legs, 
arms, and head. 
Sculpting Legs 
Using a basic Move brush, I pulled down a thigh and a lower leg, and then used  
the Inflate brush to build up some volume around the knee area (Figure 12.4). 
If at any time an area of the mesh looked too raised or messy, I used the Smooth 
brush to smooth out the area immediately under the brush. Most of the core 
sculpting of this creature was done using these three brushes.
It’s extremely important that all sculptors obtain an excellent grasp of anat-
omy. When I’m modeling a fictional subject, such as an alien or creature like 
this one, I still think in terms of real-world anatomy and muscle structure. I 
based the legs of this creature on a goat’s legs that end in a sort of split hoof. 
[Figure 12.4] The body  
is created out of a sphere. 
By using simple brushes  
like Move, Inflate, and 
Smooth, it is possible to 
make almost anything.

[Chapter Twelve] Digital Sculpting 
287
To keep the figure accurate, I worked out where all the major bones would be 
and then created the shapes in the model to match that concept. 
I can’t stress enough the importance of gathering good reference material for 
any of your projects. If you choose to model from memory, you often end up 
doing the same thing over and over with very similar results. Try to collect a 
reference library to use for future projects. A good library of images is a great 
place to get inspiration and always a good place to start a project.
Once the legs and feet were pulled into place, I went over the area with a 
combination of the Smooth and Inflate brushes, making sure that the creature 
was roughly in proportion with enough volume in the necessary areas  
(Figure 12.5).
One method that I use to allow me to focus on the object’s overall form 
and not be distracted by the details is to make the model completely black 
(Figure 12.6). I then spin it around a few times to view it from multiple 
angles. If you use a black material, you will be limited to the silhouette of  
[Figure 12.5] Once I had 
created the basic anatomy 
for the leg, I used the Move 
brush to get the proportions 
correct—always turning the 
model to make sure it works 
from all angles.

288 
Digital Modeling
the object, which can sometimes help you spot potential issues, such as flat 
areas that need more volume or odd-looking muscle groups. I suggest doing 
this several times during the sculpting process to make sure you’re producing 
a solid overall form.
Sculpting Arms 
Although I mentioned the need for sculptors to understand anatomy (and 
you may think that this next bit of modeling might contradict that state-
ment), I decided to give this creature four arms. I still wanted to make the 
creature believable, even though the anatomy is nonstandard, so I referred 
to real-world references. I used the same tools that were used on the legs and 
pulled out geometry to create the top shoulder. 
I reworked the area with the Smooth and Inflate brushes and then pulled out 
more geometry for the arms. I continued repeating these steps down through 
the bicep, elbow, and onto the forearm. At first, I just created a basic shape 
for the limb (essentially a long cylinder) and then adjusted the shape to fit 
[Figure 12.6] A great way 
to see if the image is read-
ing well is to make it 100 
percent black and rotate it. 
This helps you see the  
silhouette and check for  
flat areas.

[Chapter Twelve] Digital Sculpting 
289
the concept I was after. I could have continued on to the hands/claws at this 
stage, but to stay focused on the overall shape, I decided to move to the sec-
ond set of arms. I used the same technique to create the second pair of arms 
as I did for the first set. The results of this process are shown in Figure 12.7.
Sculpting the Head
Once I was happy with the arms and legs, it was time to sculpt the head 
detail. I pulled out the neck, gave it some muscle definition, and started to 
build up volume where the head would be. Using the Inflate brush, I then 
built up the eyes, nasal area, and chin.
Keep in mind that if the resolution of the mesh is not sufficient to give you 
high-resolution detail, you can always adjust the density of the Dynamesh 
setting, which controls how many polygons will be created. However, I am 
always careful not to add too much sculpted detail in the early stages and 
rather focus on good proportions and shape to avoid getting stuck into detail-
ing any one area. Once you get into the fine detail of an area, it becomes 
[Figure 12.7] The four  
arms were created by pull-
ing geometry out of the 
shoulder area and refining 
the shapes. 

290 
Digital Modeling
difficult to make global changes. I use a very similar approach when creating 
a traditional 2D sketch. 
At this stage, I defined the eyes and eyelids, the nasal area, and the lips. I used 
very little detail but added a good suggestion of where the feature was going 
to be placed. Figure 12.8 shows the results.
One very powerful tool in the digital sculptor’s arsenal is the ability to mask 
off an area of the model. With an area masked, any brushwork will only 
affect the nonmasked area. I created the horns/antennae on this creature by 
masking off the entire body and most of the head, only leaving the bumps 
where the horns would be placed. I then inflated that area to give me some 
geometry to work with. I used the Move tool to pull out the horns 45 degrees 
from the back of the head.
Once I had the basic shape for the stump of the horns, I cleared the masking  
and re-meshed the creature again. I switched the mask back on and then 
switched from Draw mode to Rotate mode. Draw mode is where you will 
spend most of your time in ZBrush, and the Rotate, Scale, and Move modes 
are used to adjust things once they are built. This allowed me to use a very  
power feature called Transpose. With Transpose activated, you can reposition, 
[Figure 12.8] At this stage 
in the sculpting process, 
it’s important to keep facial 
details at a minimum. This 
allows for broad changes  
to be made quickly.

[Chapter Twelve] Digital Sculpting 
291
rotate, or scale parts of your model. In this case, I wanted to angle the horns 
to suit my concept, so I used rotate. Using Transpose with masking makes the 
process even more useful, because you can limit which areas of the mesh are 
affected. Figure 12.9 shows the mask and Transpose tool activated.
When I was happy with the horns’ placement, length, and angle, I simply 
switched back to Draw mode and finished off the horns with the Smooth and 
Inflate brushes.
In the images I’ve shown so far, you can see that I used several different 
materials on the surface of the mesh. Each material has different settings for 
surface attributes, such as diffuse colors, specularity, reflection, bump, and so 
on. It’s a good idea to change the materials regularly to check your progress. 
Using different materials with different properties allows you to see how light 
falls on your model. If you use the same material throughout the modeling 
process, you may find that at the end, when you change to a different material, 
the overall look is wrong.
To complete the initial body sculpting, I added two claws to each of the four  
arms using the same techniques I used on the rest of the mesh (Figure 12.10). 
It’s important to point out that to get to this stage of the model, I still only 
[Figure 12.9] Using a  
mask allows you to limit 
which areas of the mesh  
are affected. You can  
switch to Rotate, Scale,  
and Move modes and use 
the Transpose tool to pose 
portions of the model.

292 
Digital Modeling
used three of the brushes that ZBrush has available. Although it is good to be 
aware of what tools and options are available to you in an application, don’t 
feel like you have to use every one of them. All artists find a favorite set of 
brushes that suits their style, but it takes time to work out what each one 
does and how to use each brush effectively.
Second Pass over the Sculpt
When I had the overall shape of the body finished, I started the second pass. 
This involved going back to each area of the mesh and adding tertiary details 
and features. I started by detailing the face. Using the Inflate brush with a 
very low focal shift (which adjusts how fast the brush’s effect “falls off” as it 
approaches the edge of the brush) gave me a nice, hard-edged stroke and 
allowed for good creases around the eyelids and lips. In this model, the eye-
balls are part of the mesh and are fairly large. For speed sculpting, having the 
eyes attached makes things easy. For more detailed projects or models, such 
as the head and shoulders, it may be worth making the eyes separately. As 
digital sculpts increase in complexity and poly-count, they can slow down 
your computer. One way to cope with this is to hide portions of the mesh 
(Figure 12.11). 
[Figure 12.10] To finish  
the first pass, I added  
small claws on the end  
of the arms. 

[Chapter Twelve] Digital Sculpting 
293
It’s very important to keep rotating the mesh as you model to ensure that the 
shape stays accurate. It is easy to do a lot of work in a particular view, only to 
realize that it doesn’t work well in a side profile. I constantly spin the mesh 
and look at it from all angles, including from above and below. I worked 
down the entire body, adding the muscle detail stage by stage. The abdomen 
was based on a human torso, so I added muscles that you would expect to see 
there. I focused on areas like the elbows, shoulder blades, knees, and ankles. 
By simply adding volume with the Inflate brush, I quickly defined all of the 
major muscle groups. Figure 12.12 shows the results.
[Figure 12.11] To help your 
computer cope with high-
resolution models, you can 
hide parts of the mesh while 
you work on other areas.
[Figure 12.12] Using refer-
ence images of a human 
abdomen, I added tertiary 
details to the creature.

294 
Digital Modeling
Detailing
The next stage of the sculpting process was to add surface detail. I changed 
my stroke type to Drag Rectangle and then chose a set of alpha textures that 
matched the look I needed. The Drag Rectangle option allows you to drag 
out alpha images and apply them dynamically to the surface of your mesh. 
I made some custom alphas for my brushes using images of elephant skin, some 
wrinkles from an older person, and other images that provided the details I 
was after. Figure 12.13 shows a few of these textures. 
I tried to build up the surface detail by overlapping the alphas wherever  
possible. My goal was to create believable skin details that would bring this 
fictional creature to life. Figure 12.14 shows the results of these details 
applied to the mesh.
Although having Symmetry activated helps to speed up modeling, there 
comes a time when it needs to be switched off. In nature nothing is perfectly 
symmetrical. In fact, creatures can look odd if you don’t break the symmetry 
in your model. I switched off Symmetry and then started to adjust the pose 
a little. The best way to do this is to mask off parts of the model and then 
use the Transpose tool in Rotate mode. I did this to the arms and adjusted 
the transpose pivot point (the point in 3D space around which all rotations, 
[Figure 12.13] These 
simple grayscale images 
transformed the standard 
brushes into detailed  
powerhouses when used  
as alphas.

[Chapter Twelve] Digital Sculpting 
295
scaling, and transformations are centered) to allow me to get the best angles. 
I moved the arms down at the shoulders by a few degrees and then bent them 
slightly at the elbow. I moved each arm separately and in a slightly different 
way (Figure 12.15).
I turned one of the legs outwards to change the stance a little and gave a 
small rotation to the foot. I made sure I was happy with the creature’s pose 
from various angles and applied a different material to the surface to look for 
any imperfections in the mesh (Figure 12.16).
[Figure 12.14] With a set of 
decent alpha textures, you 
can transform the look of 
the model in minutes.
[Figure 12.15] Posing a 
figure in ZBrush is done 
with the Transpose tool 
and using masks. I masked 
off the arm and used the 
Transpose Rotate tool to 
reposition it.

296 
Digital Modeling
To finish the model, I made some accessories from primitive shapes in the same 
way I created the main body. I also created a basic stand for the creature to be 
displayed on. I added these items as subtools (separate meshes), which allows 
me to add new parts to an existing character project but keep these new items 
as objects separate from the main mesh. Using subtools for these additional 
elements allows any changes to easily be made in the future. Figure 12.17
shows the final creature maquette, posed and ready to be showcased.
[Figure 12.16] It’s impor-
tant to continue to view 
the model from all angles 
and with different materi-
als, even at this stage of the 
sculpting process.
Digital Sculpting Exercise
Now that you’ve seen the process, you can have a go at creating a 3D creature 
sketch. Find some reference material of a creature you would like to model 
(or sketch your own if possible). Start the project with a primitive sphere and 
concentrate on making the overall shape before going onto the detailing. 
Spend the time looking at the reference material carefully and try to match the 
anatomy as accurately as possible. Switch to a black material to see the model 
in silhouette and remember to keep changing the material to see how the 
sculpting is progressing.

[Chapter Twelve] Digital Sculpting 
297
[Figure 12.17] The creature was finished by adding some accessories. Once you place the figure on  
a stand, you may need to adjust the feet using Transpose to suit the scene.

[Chapter thIrteen]

game Modeling
Real-time 3D gaming has shown amazing growth over the years. Because of 
this, the opportunities for digital artists have grown as well. There has never 
been a better time than right now to be an artist working in gaming. 
The 3D models being created for the latest console and computer games  
(commonly referred to as next generation or next-gen models) allow for an amazing  
amount of detail that, in many cases, match the details of the digital models seen  
in feature films. Hardware and software continues to evolve, allowing the amount 
of polygons used in game assets to increase at an amazing rate. A character model 
used in a top console game 15 years ago may have been limited to 500 polygons; 
today it can reach 30,000 polygons and up.
Games require everything from characters and creatures to vehicles, weapons, 
and environmental models, which allows digital modelers a plethora of oppor-
tunities to create varied subject matter.

300 
Digital Modeling
My friend Glen Southern (www.southerngfx.co.uk) is currently creating digital  
models for a real-time 3D game being developed with the Unity 3 game devel-
opment tool (http://unity3d.com). I asked him to share his process. In this 
chapter, Glen walks you through the creation of a next-gen game model. The 
process involved creating a high-resolution digital sculpt, performing retopology 
to generate a lower-resolution mesh, and creating multiple image maps. 
Next-Gen Game Modeling  
with Glen Southern
The game I’m currently working on calls for a variety of creature models, 
including a quadruped beast called a Hellhound, which I’ll use for this walk-
through. This creature required a fairly high level of surface detail while 
maintaining a low-polygon count for real-time playback in the game engine.
There are several ways to create all of the intricate details seen in next-gen 
game models, but I find that creating a high-poly digital sculpt, like the one 
created in Chapter 12, to be the quickest solution. The purpose of the high-
poly model is to provide the details used in a normal map for the low-poly 
game assets. Normal mapping is a technique used to apply details to a low-
resolution mesh, based on the surface of a high-resolution mesh. Simply put, 
a normal map adds surface detail without adding polygons.
When creating the high-resolution digital sculpt for a next-gen game model, 
remember that you’re not creating the final mesh. There is no reason to 
spend time worrying about topology or polygon count, since a new mesh will 
be created. You’re free to be as messy with the mesh as you’d like, as long as 
the surface displays the details you’re wanting.
Creating the Creature Sculpt
I chose to use ZBrush (www.pixologic.com) to make the high-polygon sculpt 
of the Hellhound creature. However, several options are available for sculpt-
ing high-resolution meshes, such as Mudbox (www.autodesk.com/mudbox), 
3D-Coat (http://3d-coat.com), Sculptris (www.pixologic.com/sculptris), and 
others. Starting with a basic sphere, I began to shape the creature with a vari-
ety of brushes by pulling the mesh into the form I needed. 

[Chapter Thirteen] Game Modeling 
301
Although this creature doesn’t exist in the real world, I wanted it to have 
features from a dog and a gorilla, so I collected several images that I used as 
reference. I pulled out two basic stumps at the front of the mesh that would 
become the creature’s front legs, using the gorilla images as reference. I then 
pulled two additional stumps towards the rear of the mesh for legs based off 
the dog reference I gathered. I also pulled out a lump for the head and made 
the chest area larger to complete the base shape I was after (Figure 13.1).
Once I had the basic, blocky shape to work from, I went back and reshaped 
the limbs using the Smooth and Move brushes. I made sure to reference the 
gorilla and dog images I gathered to ensure I was creating realistic shapes.  
I positioned the thigh, stiffle (knee), hock (ankle), and hind foot of the back 
leg and posed it to match the dog reference images. I modified the front  
limbs to be jointed like a gorilla’s arms with hands tucked under, as seen in 
Figure 13.2.
[Figure 13.1] Starting with 
a basic primitive sphere, 
I pulled out the legs and 
arms of the creature.

302 
Digital Modeling
It’s important to get the basic anatomy and idea of the overall form of the 
creature at this stage in the process before sculpting in any of the fine details. 
Sculpting tertiary details at this early stage doesn’t allow for broad changes to 
be made easily. It’s tempting to want to start creating those details, but don’t 
let temptation lead you down the road of inefficiency. 
The next step in bringing this creature to life was to start adding mass to the 
basic shape using a Clay Buildup brush. This brush allowed me to quickly 
add volume in the shape of muscle mass. Working my way around the entire 
mesh with the Clay Buildup brush, I added bulky muscle groups that helped 
to define the overall shape of the creature. I used a Smooth brush in areas 
that had too much volume and then reworked the area with a lower intensity 
setting until I was satisfied with the shapes I had created. I repeated this 
process, adding more muscles, rotating the mesh to make sure it was getting 
closer to my reference.
I then indented the front of the face in preparation for sculpting a mouth, 
tongue, and teeth later in the process. I also prepared the front portion of the 
mesh, making a space to pull out the horns. The results of the steps can be 
seen in Figure 13.3.
[Figure 13.2] I continued 
to refine the basic anatomy 
in roughly the correct pro-
portions using a gorilla and 
dog as reference.

[Chapter Thirteen] Game Modeling 
303
[Figure 13.3] I added 
muscle groups using a Clay 
Buildup brush on a low 
intensity setting.

304 
Digital Modeling
I used a feature that is unique to ZBrush called Dynamesh throughout the 
sculpting process. Dynamesh redistributes polygons evenly across the entire 
model. This option allows you to add an endless amount of detail to your 
digital sculpture without over-stretching polygons.
Using Dynamesh and the Clay Polish brush, I continued refining the surface  
of the creature without losing the overall shape. This smoothed out the rough-
ness created by the Clay Buildup brush, but didn’t lose any of the muscle mass. 
I pulled out a set of horns from the back of the head and re-meshed using 
Dynamesh several times until the polygons were evenly distributed. I put my 
focus on the Hellhound’s horns and made sure they had a good amount of 
volume by building up their mass with a variety of brushes (Clay Buildup, 
Standard, Inflates, Rake, and Trim Adaptive). With the horns in place, the 
base mesh was complete and ready for tertiary details. (Figure 13.4)
The last sculpting pass for this creature allowed me to really bring it to life. 
I wanted the surface to follow the lines of the creature’s muscles but have a 
striated, scratched look. I brushed scratch marks into the surface using the 
Rake brush and sculpted details to get the appearance of muscle. The more 
[Figure 13.4] Horns were 
added to the creature by 
pulling out new geometry 
from the head.

[Chapter Thirteen] Game Modeling 
305
detail I put into the surface at this stage, the better-looking the final creature 
would be, so I took just as long doing this final pass as I did on the preliminary 
modeling. I continued to finesse the surface of the creature until I was satisfied 
with the entire mesh. The final results of the high-resolution sculpture can 
be seen in Figure 13.5.
Performing Retopology to Create the 
Game Model
When a 3D model has been sculpted in a program such as ZBrush or Mudbox 
using millions of polygons, or the model simply has poor topology, it might 
be useful for still images but won’t perform well when animated or used in 
a real-time game environment. Creating a new mesh with cleaner topology 
is not only important for controlling how the mesh deforms, but can greatly 
reduce the poly-count of the model. The process of creating this new mesh is 
called retopology.
[Figure 13.5] The Rake 
brush helped to get a stri-
ated look and made the 
muscles stand out.

306 
Digital Modeling
Each 3D application has its unique workflow and way of performing retopology. 
No matter what program you use, when you break it down to the most basic 
level, retopology, in its essence, is the process of creating new topology for a 
model. The new mesh is created by using the surface of the existing mesh as 
a template to build on. The high-resolution data can then be projected back 
onto the low poly mesh using a normal map, thus saving precious processing 
power for real-time games.
When creating a low-poly model for games, remember that less is more. Use 
as few polygons as possible while still capturing the shape needed to sell the 
mesh. Make sure you have enough geometry in the low-poly mesh to produce  
a good silhouette. Always check with your team to find out what the budget 
of the game assets are before building anything. You wouldn’t want to create  
a mesh with a poly-count that the game engine couldn’t support. For the 
Hellhound creature mesh I needed to keep the poly-count to around 6,000 
three-point polygons in order for it to work properly in the Unity game engine.
I used ZBrush to create a low-poly mesh for the Hellhound creature. The  
first step was to load a ZSphere in a new document. A ZSphere is a tool 
unique to ZBrush that allows for the creation of new geometry (Figure 13.6). 
In other applications you can simply start creating new geometry without the 
need of a ZSphere, but it is required when creating new geometry in ZBrush. 
For this project, you can think of it as simply a placeholder for the geometry 
to be created. 
With the ZSphere placed into a new document window, I opened the Adaptive 
Skin, Topology, and Rigging panels from the Tool menu to allow for quick 
access to the tools I use during retopology. In the Rigging panel, I loaded the 
high-poly Hellhound creature. I find it easier working with the high-poly 
object when I can see through the mesh, so having transparency activated 
from the main window sidebar helps. See Figure 13.7.

[Chapter Thirteen] Game Modeling 
307
[Figure 13.6] The first step 
in creating a game version 
of the creature in ZBrush 
was to load a ZSphere to  
act as the base for the  
retopology mesh.
[Figure 13.7] The high-poly 
creature was loaded, and 
the transparency option was 
activated for better visibility.

308 
Digital Modeling
I scaled down the ZSphere until it fit completely inside the creature (Figure 
13.8). This is where the transparency display option really helps, because 
you can easily see right through the mesh. When performing retopology in 
ZBrush, it’s important that the ZSphere sits completely inside the mesh in 
order for the rest of the process to work correctly. If the ZSphere protrudes 
out through the high-polygon mesh, there may be errors in the retopology 
mesh later in the process.
I activated the symmetry option across the X axis, which allowed me to per-
form retopology on both sides of the mesh at the same time. This is a massive 
time-saver for symmetrical meshes. 
In the Topology panel, I selected the Edit Topology option and closed down 
the Rigging panel because it was no longer needed. I then began to lay down 
the first rows of new geometry. Because I had symmetry enabled, I worked 
down the left-hand side of the mesh, and the right side was created simulta-
neously. This process is similar to the edge extend build out method used in 
Chapter 9 to create the April head model.
[Figure 13.8] I scaled down 
the ZSphere and ensured it 
was fully inside the body of 
the creature.

[Chapter Thirteen] Game Modeling 
309
I clicked along the center line and connected vertices until I had a few polygon 
faces strung together (Figure 13.9). Although all game engines require triangle 
(three-point) polygons, I kept the mesh as close to 100 percent quads (four-
point polygons) as possible to keep my mesh more efficient while I worked, 
knowing that the game engine would convert all the polygons to triangles. 
I kept the principles of good topology in mind with every new piece of geometry 
I added. I placed a complete ring of polygons inside the nasal cavity, building  
off of those rings to create the muzzle portion of the face (Figure 13.10). 
Whereever possible, I tried to flow the polygons around the muscles to ensure 
proper deformation would take place when the creature was animated. 
Areas of the creature’s anatomy that would need to be animated, such as the 
eyes, needed more polygons to allow for greater detail in the game engine.  
I focused on the creature’s face and worked down around the eyes, over  
the cheeks, and down to the chin. The results of these steps can be seen in 
Figure 13.11.
[Figure 13.9] Working  
down the center of the 
mesh, I began creating  
new geometry.

310 
Digital Modeling
[Figure 13.10] Edge loops 
were created around the 
creature’s nasal cavity.
[Figure 13.11] Adding 
more polygons to areas 
that undergo deformation 
during animation ensures 
cleaner results in-game.

[Chapter Thirteen] Game Modeling 
311
On a regular basis I took breaks from creating new geometry and checked to 
see how the low-poly mesh was looking. It’s important to take these breaks to 
ensure that you’re heading in the right direction before you get too far along. 
To view the low-poly mesh, I pressed the A key on the keyboard and could 
see an approximation of the geometry I had created (Figure 13.12). I could 
see the overall clean shape and was happy with the direction I was going in. 
I was happy with the new low-poly portion of the mesh I created, but I find 
it helpful to preview how the new mesh will look with the high-resolution 
details projected onto them. I used the Project buttons in the Project panel 
and also increased the Presubdiv slider to add more detail. In ZBrush, the 
Presubdiv slider allows you to subdivide a new mesh before details are projected 
onto it. The higher the value is set, the more details can be captured by the 
new mesh. 
With these settings in place, I could see the low-poly mesh with all the high-
resolution data projected onto it by pressing A (Figure 13.13). This gave me 
a good idea of what I could expect the final low-poly object to look like with 
a normal map.
[Figure 13.12] Reviewing 
your work on a regular basis 
is an important step that 
shouldn’t be overlooked. It’s 
better to catch any issues 
early on than once all the 
geometry is created.

312 
Digital Modeling
I repeated the retopology process across the creature’s entire body. The teeth 
and horns were more detailed than the rest of the body, so they took longer 
than the large flat areas. I continued using the A key to check the mesh to 
see and how the projection was working out. Once the horns and mouth 
areas were completed, I continued working down the back and onto the legs 
using the same process I described earlier. Once I finished creating geometry  
for the entire body, I went back over the entire mesh and reduced any unneeded 
polygons to keep the model as low-poly as possible, while keeping details in 
the areas that needed it, such as the mouth, horns, and so on.
Once I was happy with the new low-poly mesh, I exported it from ZBrush as 
an .OBJ file ready for UV unwrapping. The results of the final mesh can be 
seen in Figure 13.14.
[Figure 13.13] The Project options allow you to review the high-poly details applied to the 
surface of the low-poly mesh.

[Chapter Thirteen] Game Modeling 
313
[Figure 13.14] The final low-poly creature model ready for UV unwrapping.

314 
Digital Modeling
Creating UVs for the Low-Poly Model
To generate the image maps that the Hellhound required for use in the game, 
I needed to create a UV map for the mesh. UV mapping sets up a relationship 
between the two dimensions of an image, U and V, with the three dimensions 
of an object surface, X, Y, and Z.
Although you can create UVs in any 3D software, I used Headus UV Layout 
(www.uvlayout.com), a standalone application dedicated to the creation of 
UVs, which is very straightforward and produces efficient UV maps quickly. 
I loaded the low-poly Hellhound model into UV Layout and sectioned off 
the individual parts of the mesh, such as the arms, legs, horns, and so on. 
Adding seams and splitting the parts off into sections allows the parts to be 
unwrapped and flattened without too much stretching occurring when image 
maps are applied to the surface of the mesh. 
The green edges in Figure 13.15 show the borders of each section where the 
mesh will be split and unwrapped (laid out on the UV map).
[Figure 13.15] The low-
poly model was sectioned 
off into individual parts 
before unwrapping.

[Chapter Thirteen] Game Modeling 
315
With the edges of each section selected, I unwrapped the mesh and flattened 
them out on the UV grid. I then positioned each polygon island to optimize 
the UV real-estate and exported the model to a new OBJ file to be reloaded 
into ZBrush. Figure 13.16 shows the final UV layout of the creature mesh.
Generating Maps for the Low-Poly Model
I reloaded the low-poly model with the newly created UV map into ZBrush 
and set it to the lowest SubD level of my creature. Some maps (normal maps 
and displacement maps) can only be created from the lowest SubD level. 
This model then had a low-poly base with UV coordinates and six levels of 
high-frequency detail to use in map creation. The higher detail allows for a 
higher quality map at extraction time.
Color Map
The first map I wanted to create was a color texture map. A color texture map 
adds surface details to a mesh and is similar to applying colored wallpaper to 
[Figure 13.16] The final UV layout for the Hellhound mesh.

316 
Digital Modeling
a white wall. I grabbed some lava textures from my resource collection and 
painted a fairly basic black and red texture on the surface of the creature. 
ZBrush is very powerful for texture creation as you can paint the texture live 
in 3D right onto the mesh using a feature called Polypainting. I converted 
my basic texture to Polypaint and then used a range of alphas to make the 
creature’s skin interesting. I used alphas that were made from skin textures, 
which add a great deal of realistic surface detail. Figure 13.17 shows the 
resulting image map.
[Figure 13.17] Using Polypaint in ZBrush, a detailed lava-like color map was created.

[Chapter Thirteen] Game Modeling 
317
Bump Map
When I was happy with my color map, I converted it into an alpha map (gray- 
scale image) and saved it out to be used in the Bump channel (Figure 13.18). 
The Bump channel simulates raised and recessed areas on the surface of a mesh 
without generating additional geometry.
[Figure 13.18] Converting the color map into an alpha map allowed me to save out the image 
to be used in the Bump channel.

318 
Digital Modeling
Normal Map
The final map I needed to create before the model was ready for Unity was a 
normal map. A normal map’s RGB (Red, Green, and Blue) values correspond 
to the X, Y, and Z coordinates of the surface normals of a 3D object. Simply 
put, normal mapping allows you to create a high-poly model made up of mil-
lions of polygons and bake the high-resolution detail down to an image that 
stores the surface data of the model.
To create a normal map for the Hellhound, I lowered the subdivision levels of  
the mesh to the lowest setting and then adjusted the settings in the Normal 
Map panel, using the Adaptive mode which produces a higher quality map. 
Once the image was generated, I cloned and exported it. Cloning the map 
copies it to the texture panel making it ready for export. At that stage the 
texture needs to be flipped vertically prior to saving it. ZBrush inverts all its 
maps, and other programs won’t read them correctly unless you invert verti-
cally. Figure 13.19 shows the normal map that was generated.
With all the maps exported, the Hellhound creature was ready for some 
action in the Unity. Using the low-poly model and the three maps (color, 
bump, and normal) that were generated in ZBrush, I loaded the assets into 
[Figure 13.19] This normal 
map stores the surface detail 
of the high-poly model.

[Chapter Thirteen] Game Modeling 
319
Unity to see the model as it would be seen in-game (Figure 13.20). Happy 
with the results, I passed the final model onto the rigging artist who placed 
bones and controls into the mesh that allowed the animators to add motion 
to this beast.
[Figure 13.20] The Hellhound game model inside of the Unity game environment.
Game Asset Modeling Exercise
Now that you’ve seen the production of the Hellhound Creature model, create  
a weapon that could be used to take on this massive beast. Start with a concept 
sketch and build a high-resolution mesh that could be used to generate a normal 
map. Create a low-poly model ideal for real-time rendering. A common poly-
count for weapons in current games falls into the range of 1,500 to 2,000 polys.

[Chapter FOUrteen]

3D printing of Digital Models
When I started my career as a professional artist, my first introduction to work-
ing in 3D was to create what was then referred to as 3D illustration. Basically,  
I created physical clay sculptures, built small props, took photographs of them, 
and then used those photos to create illustrations. These sculptures began to 
take up a lot of space, and before long I had an entire room devoted to storing 
them. Soon after, I discovered computer graphics and eventually 3D modeling 
and animation. No longer did I have to find an unused shoebox to store my 
newest character. Instead, I could simply save it to a disk. But there was only 
one thing missing: being able to hold my creation in my hand and place it on a 
shelf for others to see. 
With the advent of 3D printing—the process by which a digital model in a 
computer can be turned into a physical object in the real world—artists can 
now have the best of both worlds: the freedom of working on a computer with 
all its abundant bonuses and the ability to hold their creation in their hands.
In this chapter, I cover how to prepare a model for 3D printing to ensure a 
smooth process and share my experience of bringing a toy to market. 

322 
Digital Modeling
3D Printing Overview
3D printing is a form of rapid prototyping that uses the method of additive 
manufacturing, the process of joining materials to make physical objects from 
3D model data. The physical model is created by building up multiple layers 
on top of each other, one layer at a time, as opposed to traditional machin-
ing, which uses subtractive manufacturing—starting with a solid shape and 
removing portions until the desired shape is formed.
To visualize how 3D printing works, consider an apple. If you were to slice 
the apple into wafer-thin layers, save each layer, and then restack them 
in order, you would re-create the shape of the original object. 3D printing 
accomplishes this by stacking very thin layers on top of each other from the 
data of a digital mesh. As this technology has advanced, the thickness of 
each layer has decreased, allowing for a smoother surface to be generated.
Several options are available for how these layers are created for printing a 
physical object. Some methods for 3D printing involve printers that lay liq-
uid materials and harden them one layer at a time; others melt materials to 
produce the layers. The most common method of 3D printing is the ink jet 
printing system. 
Ink jet printing consists of several stages, and I’ll step through each one to 
paint a better picture of this process. Of course, the first step is to generate a 
3D model that you want to print. Figure 14.1 shows an award I designed and 
built in 3D that I took through the printing process.
The 3D printer shown in Figure 14.2 has a spreader that scrapes a thin layer 
of powder from the feed chamber over the build chamber and prints the shape 
of the layer on the powder using a binding agent (think superglue).  

[Chapter Fourteen] 3D Printing of Digital Models 
323
[Figure 14.1] Every 3D 
printing job starts with a 
digital model that can be 
created in your software of 
choice. 
[Figure 14.2] The ink jet 
3D printer used for this job 
uses two chambers: the feed 
chamber (left) and the build 
chamber (right). 

324 
Digital Modeling
The software that drives the printer slices the 3D mesh into thin layers. One 
of these layers is shown in black in Figure 14.3. The feed chamber piston 
then pushes powder up by one layer thickness, and the feed layer drops down 
by one layer thickness. 
Figure 14.4 shows a layer in the build chamber with the binding agent 
applied; the binder holds the layer together. This step is repeated until all 
layers have been generated, and the entire model is built.
At the completion of the printing process, the part is buried in powder. This 
allows nearly any geometry to be printed because the surrounding powder 
provides support. The part is then extracted from the printer carefully by 
using a powerful vacuum to remove loose powder (Figure 14.5). At this time, 
the model is at its most fragile and can easily be damaged. Service bureaus 
often lose hours of printing time by destroying the print at this stage.
[Figure 14.3] The area 
shown in black represents 
the current layer being 
printed. Each model is made 
up of many thin layers to 
produce the entire object.

[Chapter Fourteen] 3D Printing of Digital Models 
325
Even after the vacuum has removed most of the excess material, the part is 
still covered in powder when it is extracted from the build chamber. At this 
point, it is then transferred to the cleaning station where the loose powder 
is carefully blown away using compressed air. The structure that outlines the 
cleaned part is generated by the printing software and is sometimes printed 
with the part for additional support.
[Figure 14.4] The bind-
ing agent and powder are 
applied one layer at a time, 
fusing the two together. 
[Figure 14.5] The excess powder is removed from the chamber using a vacuum (left), and once the object is outside of the 
chamber, any additional powder is removed from it using compressed air (right).

326 
Digital Modeling
When the part is free of the loose powder and the technician is happy with 
the result, it can be infused with the binding agent again to strengthen the 
3D print (Figure 14.6). 
When the process is complete, the part is ready for any additional sealing and 
finishing. Figure 14.7 shows the finished 3D print of the award. Although 
I’ve had my 3D meshes printed in a variety of materials, including resin and 
plastic, powder prints are the most affordable. These powder prints can be 
finished off in a variety of ways by adding wax, polymers, and even metal.  
I suggest that you use some sort of sealant to protect your model before paint-
ing. I’ve found that clear coat acrylic spray works great. Once sealed, you can 
use spray paint, brush-on acrylic, or leave it as it is. 
[Figure 14.6] A binding agent is applied 
over the entire 3D print to add stability.
[Figure 14.7] The final 3D print was a 
perfect prototype for the award to get 
it in front of people before producing 
a mold and generating copies. 

[Chapter Fourteen] 3D Printing of Digital Models 
327
If budget is of no concern, resin is ideal for almost any prototype, mainly 
because it’s more durable than powder. Metal printing is probably the best 
route for mechanical prototyping, but be prepared to empty your wallet.
3D printers have been around for several years, but until recently the process 
was far too expensive for an average artist to have a model printed. I compare 
it to the days of color printing when a single A4 color printout could cost up 
to $30 at a local service bureau. Now you can own a color printer for about 
the same price as the gas you’d use driving to the local service bureau. 
Although 3D printing technology hasn’t yet reached the point where you 
want to buy a 3D printer for your office—an entry-level prototyping unit 
such as Z Corporation’s ZPrinter 150 (hwww.zcorp.com) currently costs 
$14,000—it can be very affordable to have your models printed by a third-
party service bureau. Each model might cost as little as $40. 
There are a growing number of 3D printing service bureaus, and I’d suggest 
trying several until you discover the one that fits your needs. For years I used 
a service bureau called 3D Art to Part, but it no longer offers those services. 
Some popular printing firms include
 • ShapeWays: www.shapeways.com
 • NextFab: www.nextfabstudio.com
 • Kraftwurx: www.kraftwurx.com
 • Sculpteo: www.sculpteo.com
 • Quick Forge: www.quickforge.co.uk
 • Ponoko: www.ponoko.com
If you’re a student, you may be lucky enough to attend one of the hundreds 
of schools that have 3D printers on campus. You could even use an open 
source 3D printer, such as MakerBot (www.makerbot.com), if you have the 
basic technical skills required.

328 
Digital Modeling
3D Printing Applications
So why would you want to print your models? Endless applications for 3D 
printing are found in a variety of markets, including aerospace, automotive, 
dental, fashion, jewelry, military, medical, and many others. Prototyping for 
product development is currently the biggest use of 3D printing technology. 
It allows designers and engineers to test ideas for 3D products cheaply before 
committing to expensive tooling and manufacturing processes. For example, 
industrial designers might want to prototype their designs to look for possible 
flaws that are hard or impossible to see on the computer screen. 
Surgeons are printing body parts for reference before complicated surgeries. 
3D printers are also used to create bone grafts for patients. Research is even 
underway by biotechnology firms and academia for 3D printing of organs and 
body parts from layers of living cells that are deposited onto a gel medium 
and slowly built up to form 3D structures. 
I’ve used 3D character prints as physical maquettes to convince clients of a 
character design by allowing clients to actually hold their company mascot in 
their hands. Figure 14.8 shows an example of a turtle character model I had 
3D printed for use as a maquette to help pitch an animated TV series.
[Figure 14.8] 3D prints  
of digital models can be  
a great way to generate 
physical maquettes.

[Chapter Fourteen] 3D Printing of Digital Models 
329
And what 3D artists don’t want to add the  
characters they’ve designed to the toy collection  
that’s proudly displayed around their computer? 
With the success of small-run vinyl toys, 3D print-
ing offers artists the ability to create physical  
representations of their own designs and bring 
them to market.
We’ve used 3D printing at Applehead Factory to 
prototype a variety of products, especially after 
our initial success with 3D printing the Tofu the 
Vegan Zombie figure before having it manufac-
tured in China. 3D printing has allowed us to 
work through design elements and also get our 
products out to focus groups for testing before 
committing to the heavy expense of manufactur-
ing the final products. We are currently developing  
the bobble-top figure shown in Figure 14.9 and 
using 3D prints to determine the best way to break 
it into individual parts for manufacturing and to 
test the market for price points.
Preparing a Digital  
Model for 3D Printing
How do you go about creating the 3D file that  
will be turned into a physical model? Is it the  
same process that you’d go through when creating  
a character for animation? Well, not quite.
Using Closed Meshes
To start, you need to be working with closed meshes. A closed mesh is any 
shape that contains a volume. Any open edges on a 3D model will cause issues 
when trying to print it. Think of your model as a watertight mesh. If you 
could fill it with water, leaving no places where the liquid could leak out, 
you’ve done it right. 
[Figure 14.9] 3D printing of digital models before going 
to final production can be instrumental during the design 
phase of a product.

330 
Digital Modeling
One common problem is with characters whose eye sockets are open when 
the eyeballs are modeled and inserted into the sockets separately. If such a 
figure were filled with water, the water would run out of the sockets. A quick 
solution is to cap off the sockets behind the eyeballs, like I did in Chapter 9 
on the April head mesh. Figure 14.10 shows the eye socket with and with-
out the needed cap polygons. Although this would be wasted geometry for 
animation, it is a must for 3D printing. A complex model with many open-
ings can create problems, but it’s straightforward to fix.
Avoiding Texture or Displacement Maps
You don’t want to use texture or displacement maps because the 3D printing 
process won’t use them. Any surface detail must be modeled into the mesh 
and be represented by polygons. This principle applies to surface modifiers or 
smoothing modifiers. Make sure that the object is a polygon mesh with any 
smoothing or subdivision applied previously.
It’s important that your model be something that can function in the real 
world. Although you can get away with a top-heavy model within your 3D 
package by “cheating” on the animation, if you want to print such a char-
acter, it would just fall over. The base has to be large enough to support the 
weight of the model. 
[Figure 14.10] Open edges on meshes cause printing issues, like the one here in the eye 
socket (left). Simply capping them off will solve the problem (right).

[Chapter Fourteen] 3D Printing of Digital Models 
331
Also, although your 3D model and the base don’t have to be a seamless con-
tiguous mesh and can be made of separate objects, they must be intersecting 
meshes. Intersecting separate meshes, like the ninja’s tunic and straps shown 
in Figure 14.11, are seen as a seamless mesh by a 3D printer.
Getting the Right File Format
You need to save the file in a format that the printing bureau can handle. 
Many service bureaus need models in the Stereo Lithography (STL) file 
format. If you need to save as an STL file and your 3D application doesn’t 
export to it, you can use a program like PolyTrans (www.okino.com) or Deep 
Exploration (www.righthemisphere.com) to convert it. With that said, most 
service bureaus that I’ve worked with accept a variety of file formats and will 
do the conversion for you.
[Figure 14.11] Separate 
meshes can be combined 
during the printing process 
by simply having them 
intersect each other on  
your model.

332 
Digital Modeling
Guidelines for 3D Printing
Over the past nine years I’ve printed close to 100 models and have devised 
a simple list of guidelines I like to follow. By keeping these in mind, I pre-
vent myself and the technicians doing the printing from running into issues. 
Follow these guidelines for a smooth printing process:
 • Avoid protrusions: Avoid things that stick out of your model, such 
as swords, fins, or long, thin spikes. These can become warped during 
the build process and can be broken when they are removed from the 
machine or during shipping. Shorter, tapered projections like horns or 
fingers are OK. 
 • Add thickness: Try to keep part thickness greater than 0.07 inches  
(1 mm), about the thickness of a U.S. quarter. The ninja character’s 
sash belt in Figure 14.11 shows a perfect example of where I adjusted 
thickness of the mesh for better 3D printing results. 
Always find out the suggested part thickness from the printing company 
because each printer will have its own limitations. 
Although many of my characters have large heads with thin necks, large 
hands with thin wrists, and large feet with thin ankles, these are not 
ideal for 3D printing. You want to thicken those areas for printing to 
ensure that they are strong enough to support the weight of the areas 
they are connected to.
 • Make larger prints for finer detail. Although I’ve seen some amazing 
detail come from a 3D print, small features or fine surface detail usually 
won’t show up, so you shouldn’t expect things like modeled eyelashes or 
fine wrinkles to be reproduced. Figure 14.12 shows two different prints 
of the same 3D model. The larger print has more refined creases and 
tighter edges than the smaller one. In general, the smaller the model, 
the less detail will show up.
 • Check your polygons. Make sure all the polygons of your mesh point in 
the proper outward direction, or the printer might view flipped polygons 
as holes in your model.
Remember that all your meshes must be watertight. This means your 
mesh mustn’t have any holes caused by missing polygons.

[Chapter Fourteen] 3D Printing of Digital Models 
333
 • Consider how the model will stand up. If you expect your model to 
stand by itself, you’ll have to model it with the proper weight distribu-
tion or it will simply fall over. Alternatively, you can glue it to some sort 
of support base, but note the next point.
Bases cost money. It’s cheaper to model your character to support itself 
rather than print a separate base. In some cases, the base can almost 
double the cost. If you decide to include a base in the printing process, 
consider a small size to cut costs.
 • Use separate parts: Because each 3D printer has a limit to the object 
size it can print, consider printing your model in parts to maximize the 
size of each part. Printing the wings of a dragon separately allows for a 
larger print of the model and only requires basic assembly of the parts 
after they have been printed.
[Figure 14.12] The smaller 
the model, the less detail 
you will see.

334 
Digital Modeling
 •  Let the service bureau know if you’re produc-
ing a model that will generate unconnected 
parts so it won’t think they’re an error. If you 
do want separate parts, make sure you separate 
the meshes by at least 20 mm to avoid indi-
vidual parts fusing together during the printing 
process.
 •  Ask questions. If in doubt, ask. If you aren’t 
sure about a particular portion of your model, 
ask the service bureau. It should be able to spot 
any potential problems right away.
Figure 14.13 was the first 3D print I produced 
back in 2002, and I could have benefited from the 
preceding guidelines. The neck, hair, and fingers 
were much too thin and frail, the base was just  
as expensive to produce as the character, and the 
figure ended up breaking in several spots. With 
just a few adjustments to the 3D model and a little 
bit of preplanning, I could have saved myself time 
and money. 
From 3D Printing to Manufactured Toy
Most artists I know working in the industry have a collection of toys that 
would make any kid green with envy. My collection reached a point two 
years ago where I had to start limiting my purchases or I was going to need  
a second home just to house them. Throw a grandkid into the mix who guilts 
me into giving away portions of my collection and 3D printing my own 
designs instead of buying other artists’ creations, and I think my collection 
stays manageable.
[Figure 14.13] This 3D print breaks all of the guidelines 
and should be used as an example of what not to do.

[Chapter Fourteen] 3D Printing of Digital Models 
335
Once I started 3D printing my digital models, it became more and more 
obvious to me that I needed to take it to the next level and actually produce 
a toy. It’s important to understand that although 3D printing can produce 
quality physical models, it’s only the first step in having a digital model go 
through the entire process of manufacturing a toy and bringing it to market. 
Producing a few 3D prints can be affordable, but once you’re ready for mass 
production, toy manufacturing in China becomes the only real option.
My first experience creating an actual toy was a few years ago when I started 
developing the Tofu the Vegan Zombie character (www.tofutheveganzombie.
com). As with many of my 3D models, Tofu started as an idea that I just 
couldn’t shake. He went through several designs in my sketchbook until I was 
happy with the look and several more redesigns as a 3D mesh. Figure 14.14
shows Tofu during the final modeling phase of his creation. The same 3D 
model used for creating the prototypes was also used in the animated short 
Zombie Dearest (www.tofutheveganzombie.com/movie).
[Figure 14.14] The Tofu the 
Vegan Zombie toy started 
life as a digital model cre-
ated in LightWave 3D.

336 
Digital Modeling
[Figure 14.15] Tofu went through several prototypes using a variety of materials. Resin was used for the figure on the left, 
whereas powder was used for the version on the right.
Until you can actually hold the character in your hand, it’s hard to determine 
what will work. When I was satisfied with the 3D model, I started creating 
poses and expressions with the character, and began generating 3D prints in 
various scales to get a feel for how large I would want the toy to be. Figure 
14.15 shows two early prototypes created during this phase of production. 
In total, I created approximately eight 3D prints before settling on a size  
of seven inches and the pose shown in the CG render in Figure 14.16.  
I was able to use the CG render to start promoting the toy and raising  
awareness online while I worked out the challenging task of preparing the 
figure for production. 

[Chapter Fourteen] 3D Printing of Digital Models 
337
[Figure 14.16] The digital 
model was finalized and  
CG renders were used to 
market the toy while pro-
duction continued.

338 
Digital Modeling
Although there are guidelines you have to follow when 3D printing, it’s 
important to know that even stricter rules apply when preparing a toy for 
manufacturing. A 3D ink jet printer can produce parts that wouldn’t be pos-
sible for toy production. I worked closely with my two business partners at 
Applehead Factory and toy industry veteran Steve Varner, who’s been run-
ning Varner Studios (www.varnerstudios.com) for over 30 years, to ensure 
that Tofu wouldn’t have any issues when sent to China for manufacturing. 
Some guidelines that are key to successful toy production include
 • Making sure all your parts are moldable. 3D ink jet printing allows for 
overhangs because the printed object doesn’t have to be removed from 
a mold. To allow for removal of a part from a mold, the mold features 
must not overhang one another in the direction that the mold opens.
 • Ensuring that all the transitions from part to part work properly 
with the joints. As a result, they will smoothly articulate against one 
another. Keeping these areas round is the trick to allowing them to fit 
together in the full range of movement.
 • Leaving the cutting of joints to the experts. My first attempt ended 
in disaster. Varner’s experience made light work of the task, and the 
results of the Tofu figure cuts worked out perfect for articulating the toy 
(Figure 14.17).
 • Working seam lines into the design of the toy. Unlike 3D printing, 
a toy will have visible seams when two parts are brought together after 
being created from the molding process. The trick is to minimize their 
visibility by working them into the design. Tofu’s jumpsuit was ideal 
for hiding seams along the natural seams of the clothing. These seams 
weren’t in the original design of the toy but were added to help hide the 
seam lines, and in turn, it added nice tertiary details to the character.
 • Using the same guidelines for 3D printing when developing a toy.
For example, avoid skinny limbs and long spikes, keep thickness of the 
parts in mind, and so forth. 

[Chapter Fourteen] 3D Printing of Digital Models 
339
Once you’ve created the digital mesh following these guidelines, you can 
print out the final prototypes. A Chinese toy manufacturer will require that 
you send two, but I suggest making four because the manufacturer won’t 
return the two, and you’ll want prototypes to use to promote the toy at shows 
while it’s being manufactured. Figure 14.18 shows the final prototypes that 
were sent to China and one of the prototypes that stayed behind to be used 
at Toy Fair in New York.
Knowing the technical aspects is important when bringing a toy to market, 
but before you take the plunge and produce 5,000 copies of your favorite  
digital model, consider the following: Make sure you’re committed to the 
process and that you’re prepared for the amount of time you’ll need to invest. 
The Tofu toy took just over a year to bring to market after the final design 
was selected, and I’ve spent the years since marketing and selling it.
Even more important is the financial commitment involved. The molds alone 
can range from $6,000 to $16,000, and that doesn’t even get you one toy. 
The more toys you produce, the lower the cost per unit, so it’s a catch-22.  
Do you produce fewer units and charge more per unit, or do you produce 
more units to bring the price down but have to sell more?
[Figure 14.17] The digital 
model was cut into parts 
for articulation (left), and 
the result is shown in the 
printed parts (right).

340 
Digital Modeling
[Figure 14.18] Final proto-
types were generated and 
sent to China (top) and  
used at Toy Fair and other 
shows (bottom).

[Chapter Fourteen] 3D Printing of Digital Models 
341
My suggestion is to take it slow. Start by producing some 3D prints of your 
work and see if that satisfies your desire to make a toy. If you’re committed to 
the idea, then make sure your toy is unique, has an audience, has the proper 
price point, and has a plan in place for distribution. Before producing my first 
toy, I had no idea there were so many costs involved. After all the units are 
created, you have to have them shipped from China, stored in a warehouse, 
and so forth. The initial cash flow of making a toy is out, out, out, out. You 
need to know that something is coming back, and the only way to do that is 
to research the market before you dive in.
Also know that you don’t have to go it alone. Find places like Applehead 
Factory and Varner Studios that have experience bringing products to market 
and work with them. I can’t imagine how difficult the process would have 
been if I had tried to do it on my own.
Since creating the Tofu figure, I’ve been fortunate to get work on toys for 
Pokemon, Polly Pocket, Littlest Pet Shop, several limited-run collectible toys,  
and more. As with anything else, the more digital models you take through 
the printing and prototyping process, the easier it becomes. It’s good to know 
that most of the toy industry is moving away from traditional sculpting, which 
opens the doors for digital modelers to build a career in this market. For some-
one who loves modeling and has a passion for toys, I can’t think of a better fit 
than modeling toys for a living.

[Chapter FIFteen]

getting a Job in Digital Modeling
With 40,000 new graduates coming out of art schools across the nation each 
year, combined with thousands of jobs going to studios overseas, it is now more 
important than ever to find out the career options available to you and learn 
how to apply your digital modeling skills to land your dream job.
In this chapter, I walk you through the markets that make up the CG industry 
and share tips on how to showcase your skills and understanding of your CG 
toolset to open as many job opportunities as possible.
© Disney/Pixar

344 
Digital Modeling
Overview of the Industry and Markets
How strong is this industry? When will artists stop finding good jobs? Both 
are very good questions. The short answer is that this industry is booming 
like never before, and there are plenty of jobs to be had for well-trained,  
professional digital artists.
When most people think about this industry, they think of feature films, 
television, and games, but these entertainment markets make up only a 
small portion of the industry as a whole. This leaves a variety of unexplored 
options that most artists are unaware of. To give you a better idea of the 
opportunities currently available, let’s take a look at some of the most popu-
lar markets that make up this growing industry. 
	
A movie is an important art form that tells a visual story. Although artists 
have always been involved in the production of films for things like story-
boards, set and prop design, costume design, and so on, their importance has 
increased dramatically over the years. Avatar, for example, required the skills 
of literally thousands of digital artists.
Based on worldwide gross revenue, 96 of the top 100 films of all time could 
not have been made without digital artists. That leaves only four films, and 
three of those were later updated and re-released with computer animation. 
That means 99 percent of the top 100 films relied on computer animation. 
(You are probably wondering who the lone gunman is. It’s Home Alone, and 
it truly stands “alone” in this category.)
With only a few exceptions, every CG film made thus far has been a financial 
success. Films are the driving force of the 3D industry, and advancements in 
this market directly influence every other market. What you see being done 
in a film today will trickle down to television and games tomorrow, and the 
other markets after that. 
There is nothing quite like being in a theater filled with people reacting to 
work that you helped create. Seeing your name in the credits also produces a 
unique feeling that lasts a lifetime.
Films can be broken down into three submarkets: feature, indie, and shorts.

[Chapter Fifteen] Getting a Job in Digital Modeling 
345
Features
A feature is made initially for distribution in theaters and has a running  
time of at least 40 minutes. The budgets behind these productions can reach 
into hundreds of millions of dollars and can take several years from concept 
to completion.
It’s not as difficult to break into this market as many would lead you to believe. 
All it takes is a strong reel that matches the quality of the work coming out 
of the studios that are currently working on features. I’ve placed quite a few 
recent grads in the industry whose first gig was a feature. 
My friend Erik Gamache at Digital Domain (www.digitaldomain.com) has 
worked on features such as Transformers: Revenge of the Fallen, The A-Team, 
I, Robot, and others. The crew at Digital Domain was responsible for all of 
the robots and environments in the feature film Real Steel. Figure 15.1 is a 
photo of Erik (center) and some of the crew at Digital Domain taking a break 
from their current production to enjoy the Real Steel premiere. They got to 
walk down the red carpet in Hollywood and see their work on the big screen. 
After the premiere, they spent time at the after party rubbing elbows with 
the likes of Hugh Jackman, Anthony Mackie, and Kevin Durand. 
[Figure 15.1] Some of the 
Digital Domain production 
crew enjoy an evening at 
the movies for the Real Steel 
premiere. From left to right: 
Dan Brimer, Paul George 
Palop, Maribeth Glass, Erik 
Gamache, Justin van der 
Lek, Geoffrey Baumann, 
Meagan Rotman, and  
Swen Gillberg.

346 
Digital Modeling
Indies
Indie films are usually made by independent production companies that are 
outside of the major film studio system. In most cases the financial and time 
budgets are much lower than those of a feature. They also usually get a limited 
release in theaters. Although these films have distribution and budget chal-
lenges, they also typically have the freedom to present unique story lines  
or work in styles that the major studios would see as too high of an invest-
ment risk.
This market has seen a massive increase in growth over the years, which  
has opened up thousands of opportunities for digital artists. One perk of an 
indie film over a studio feature is that artists can find these types of produc-
tions happening in their own backyard—not just in Los Angeles, New York, 
and Vancouver. 
Iron Sky (www.ironsky.net), a science fiction comedy produced by Blind Spot 
Pictures and Energia Productions, was on the forefront of a new wave of indie 
movies. The filmmakers were in direct contact with the audience even before 
the movie was out, using the power of online communities in both creating 
the movie and in funding it. 
Iron Sky required a great deal of digital modeling for an extensive array of 
virtual sets and spaceships. Figure 15.2 shows a small sample of the massive 
amount of digital modeling required to create Iron Sky. 
If you want to get experience working on a movie, there’s bound to be an 
indie film being produced in your area that you could work on. Although  
you may be paid less than working on a feature (or not at all), the experience 
and the shots you will have for your demo reel could end up paying for them-
selves in short order.

[Chapter Fifteen] Getting a Job in Digital Modeling 
347
[Figure 15.2] Virtual sets 
had to be modeled, textured, 
lit, and composited to  
marry them with the live 
action footage in Iron Sky 
(top). The Valkyrie ship  
(bottom) was one of the 
many spaceship models 
used in the film.

348 
Digital Modeling
Shorts
A short film is any film with a shorter running time than a feature. Most shorts 
are in the five- to ten-minute range and are a first step for new filmmakers. 
Ten years ago there were very few shorts being shown outside of film festivals. 
Now, thousands of new shorts arrive online daily.
Short films are a great calling card for artists, directors, and even studios. 
Some studios use shorts to explore new technology, software, and even a  
new production pipeline (the path and schedule that a production follows). 
Pixar uses its shorts to train artists and directors for advancement in their 
careers. Figure 15.3 shows Pixar’s story artist Peter Sohn’s first animated 
short, Partly Cloudy, which gave him an opportunity to direct and gave me 
my first Pixar credit as a character modeler.
Probably the coolest thing about shorts is that they allow anyone to tell a 
story, not just people with deep pockets or those with a connection to inves-
tors. You can produce a short with little or no money, but you’ll need lots of 
time and persistence. With a decent computer, software, and the right skill 
set, you can create your own film from the comfort of your home studio. 
Hundreds of individual artists have already proven this is possible.
Don’t let the word short fool you! Although these films are short, they must 
go through the same production pipeline as their big brothers and involve 
a lot of blood, sweat, and tears to produce. But their relatively manageable 
length makes them a perfect testing ground for new artists. I like to think  
of shorts as boot camp for features.
I’ve been involved in several animated shorts. Each time I work on one,  
I take away valuable experience that is equal to any larger production I’ve 
worked on. 

[Chapter Fifteen] Getting a Job in Digital Modeling 
349
[Figure 15.3] Pixar’s animated short, 
Partly Cloudy, was shown in theaters 
before the feature Up. 
© Disney/Pixar

350 
Digital Modeling
Television
The television market is currently on fire. You can’t turn on the television 
without being bombarded by the work of digital artists in every commercial 
and in a majority of the top-rated series. According to the A.C. Nielsen 
Company, the average American watches more than four hours of TV each 
day (or 28 hours per week, or 2 months of nonstop TV watching per year), 
so there is a large audience for this type of work. Television crews are much 
smaller than feature film crews and work with smaller budgets, yet they are 
asked to produce results similar to their film counterparts—every week. 
Although made-for-TV movies and other programs do use CG in their pro-
duction, let’s focus on television’s two main kinds of programming: series  
and commercials.
Series 
Whether a television series is fully animated, such as Nickelodeon’s Jimmy 
Neutron or Bubble Guppies, or has digital elements married with live action, 
like Falling Skies, CSI, and Terra Nova, digital artists are behind the scenes help-
ing to deliver this popular format for storytelling. The digital artists working 
on the popular children’s series CBeebies’ Waybuloo (www.waybuloo.com) 
blend stylized CG characters into live action (Figure 15.4).
CG elements appear in many shows without the viewer even being aware 
that there is any visual effects trickery. These hidden effects include digital  
set extension, CG vehicles like cars and planes added to shots, CG stunt 
doubles (one of my personal favorites), explosions, and more. AMC’s Breaking 
Bad is one of my favorite shows of all time, and I’m always pleasantly surprised 
when my friend Bruce Branit, founder of Branit|FX, points out shots with 
digital effects that his studio created, because even I hadn’t noticed.
All these elements are being created by digital artists, and the sheer number 
of shows starting to take advantage of digital imagery means a growing num-
ber of positions that need to be filled.
Working on a series as a digital artist can be intense. It is definitely not for 
everyone. It’s a fast-paced production with insane weekly deadlines. The 
payoff is that you get to see the work that you just created the same week you 
worked on it—and sometimes even on the same day of finishing the job.

[Chapter Fifteen] Getting a Job in Digital Modeling 
351
© The Foundation TV Productions Limited/Decode/Blue Entertainment 2011
[Figure 15.4] These frames 
from the children’s series 
Waybuloo show stylized 
digital character models 
composited with live  
action backgrounds. 

352 
Digital Modeling
Commercials
The average American watches over two million TV commercials by the age 
of 65. These commercials are sometimes fully animated, have digital charac-
ters or products, or use hidden effects that you aren’t aware of. Studios of all 
sizes work on commercials, from large houses like ILM, Rhythm & Hues, and 
Digital Domain, to small shops like my own studio, Applehead Factory.
Some of the most talented artists I know prefer to work on commercials rather 
than series work or even feature films. Why? Commercials usually take between 
4–8 weeks to produce, which means that an artist can potentially put 6–12 
completely unique productions under his or her belt each year. For example, 
Figure 15.5 shows two distinctly different commercials created by the same 
team at Branit|FX (www.branitfx.com). Another reason could easily be that 
the small crew sizes allow artists to work across departments, giving them a 
more generalist experience versus being tied to just one area of production. 
[Figure 15.5] These two 
commercials from Branit|FX 
provided digital modelers 
with both hard surface and 
organic modeling work.

[Chapter Fifteen] Getting a Job in Digital Modeling 
353
Games 
Since the first commercial video game development began in the 1970s, 
gaming has grown more than any other market and is making money like 
never before. The video game industry is even starting to overshadow feature 
films. Many artists from the film and television markets have migrated to 
gaming for its job security and longer development cycles. 
Although console and computer games still dominate this market, game apps 
for mobile devices and slot machine production have opened up new career 
options for digital artists to explore.
Console and computer games
The spotlight is definitely on the console and computer game sector of the 
gaming market. I like to think of console (PlayStation, Wii, Xbox, and so 
forth) and computer games as interactive storytelling where the viewer is 
no longer a passive observer but is an active participant. The artists I know 
working in the games industry have a passion for playing games, which in 
turn helps drive their creativity to produce them.
The production pipeline of a game is very similar to that of film and television, 
and usually requires large teams of artists. Games used to take 6–18 months to  
produce, but most modern games now take 1–3 years or more. Duke Nukem 
Forever may hold the record with a mind-blowing 14-year development cycle. 
Although this sector of the market is dominated by larger studios, an increas-
ing number of small shops are producing games commercially with great success. 
Many of these studios pull from the hobbyist modding (creating new content 
for existing games) communities, which is a great place for new artists to  
gain experience.
Nearly all games take advantage of real-time 3D graphics. From characters  
to environments and from weapons to props, digital modelers are needed to 
create every asset. This is good news for any modeler interested in finding  
work in gaming. Figure 15.6 shows a game mesh created by Baj Singh 
(http://bajsingh.wordpress.com), a digital modeler who has worked on games 
such as Runscape and Stellar Dawn.

354 
Digital Modeling
[Figure 15.6] This highly 
detailed game mesh  
created by Baj Singh is  
representative of the types 
of digital models being  
created for games.

[Chapter Fifteen] Getting a Job in Digital Modeling 
355
Mobile apps
Mobile application development is the new gold rush of gaming. Hundreds of  
these apps are released every week, developed for small, low-power handhelds, 
such as iPhone, iPad, and Android devices. New developers are sprouting up 
like weeds in every city, so opportunities for artists could be just around the 
corner—literally.
Digital artists work with either sprite sheets (a single large image containing 
several frames of an animation) for pre-rendered graphics or low-poly count, 
real-time assets. Working with teams that are developing apps is a great way 
to hone your skills in gaming art production. It can also be a lucrative area to 
be involved in if you know what you are doing. 
Dustin Adair—who worked on movies, TV, and video games, such as Fringe, 
Battlestar Galactica, Terminator: Sarah Connor Chronicles, Transformers: War 
for Cybertron, and Halo 3—developed an app called Poker with Bob (www.
pokerwithbob.com) that became an instant hit, allowing him to focus on 
his own intellectual property full time. This is an example of how you never 
know where your career will take you.
Figure 15.7 shows a mobile app developed by Frima (www.frimastudio.com) for 
FunGoPlay’s Powerhouse Punter, which runs on the iPad. The digital character 
models were used for both the online virtual world (www.fungoplay.com) and 
the mobile app.
[Figure 15.7]  
I created the digital character 
models for Frima’s Powerhouse 
Punter mobile app developed 
for FunGoPlay.

356 
Digital Modeling
Video slot machines
I’m hoping you’re still reading this section and didn’t pass it over due to the 
title. This is gaming’s best kept secret market. Video slot machines are not to 
be confused with the old-school gambling machines with three reels that spin 
when a lever is pulled. Rather, they are the more recent variant that is essen-
tially like playing a computer game with interactive elements and advanced 
3D graphics.
You won’t see your name on the big screen at the end of a movie or read 
about your game in GamePro or Game Informer magazines, but you could 
find yourself working on slot machine versions of Star Wars, Indiana Jones, 
Aliens, and other big name properties. These machines display graphics and 
cutscenes (a sequence in a game that breaks up the gameplay to advance the 
story, introduce new elements, or keep the player interested) that can include 
scenes from your favorite movies, re-created digitally. So you might find your-
self modeling Darth Vader one week and the Predator the next. One company 
flew Cassandra Peterson, the actress who plays Elvira, out to the studio to 
performance capture her for an Elvira video slot machine. 
The people I know working in this market are paid well, get great benefits, 
and have some of the best job security this industry can offer. They also 
produce the same type of work as other entertainment markets except the 
end product is for a different platform. Marv Riley (www.marvriley.com), for 
example, has created digital models for video slot machines for several years 
and has worked on titles like The Addams Family, Soul Train, Terminator, 
The Munsters, and more. Figure 15.8 shows a couple examples of the digital 
models he’s created for games.
Visualization
Visualization is the art of using images, diagrams, or animations to commu-
nicate a message. 3D graphic software development has helped to advance 
visualization, increasing the number of visualization markets over the years, 
which continues to open up new opportunities for digital artists. 3D visualiza-
tion has an endless array of applications in education, architecture, science, 
product, forensic, medical, military, archaeological, and many other areas. 
Two of the most popular visualization markets for digital artists are architec-
tural and product.

[Chapter Fifteen] Getting a Job in Digital Modeling 
357
Architectural 
Architectural visualization is used to show an image, animation, or real-
time walkthrough of a proposed architectural design or renovation. Digital 
artists make it possible for architects to experiment with a building’s visual 
aspects and design. The images and animations are used for presentations 
and greatly aid in real-estate sales. This can be a rewarding and secure career 
path for someone interested in hard-surface modeling. Figure 15.9 shows a 
couple of examples of architectural visualization work by Sylvain Saintpère 
(http://5500k.carbonmade.com).
[Figure 15.8] Artists work-
ing on video slots create 
everything from organic 
characters to hard surface 
vehicles, as shown here in 
some of Marv Riley’s digital 
modeling work.

358 
Digital Modeling
Product 
Like architectural visualization, product visualization uses graphics applications 
to generate virtual products that allow you to experiment with shape, color, 
materials, and mechanisms. 3D product visualization allows you to create a 
physical mock-up of the 3D model using rapid prototyping (3D printing) as 
well as product simulations, giving it several advantages over 2D drawings. 
[Figure 15.9] These images 
created by Sylvain Saintpère 
are excellent examples of 
the work being created by 
digital artists in the architec-
tural visualization market.

[Chapter Fifteen] Getting a Job in Digital Modeling 
359
Product visualization is ideal for market research, which is one of the benefits 
that my studio takes advantage of with product visualization. The ability 
to showcase a product before it is ever manufactured can allow for changes 
before manufacturing begins. We’ve done this for several years on products 
we’ve produced, such as the collectible vinyl figure Tofu the Vegan Zombie, 
as well as Drink Master Says SuperQuarters shown in Figure 15.10. 
Product visualization is big business, and its use can be found in every facet of 
our daily lives. In fact, the United States Mint in Philadelphia uses sculpting 
software, such as Freeform and ZBrush, to visualize and produce coins.
[Figure 15.10] This 3D 
render of the Drink Master 
Says SuperQuarters product 
was used to showcase the 
product before it was  
manufactured. 

360 
Digital Modeling
Print Graphics
A revolution has occurred over the last 15 years in the print graphics market: 
Software traditionally seen as an animation tool is being used by designers 
and illustrators to create imagery for print and illustration.
Creative artists have adopted the power of these applications to help quickly 
generate everything from photorealistic to stylized images for product shots, 
industrial imagery, magazine covers, newspaper infographics, children’s books, 
and any other media that traditional artists would normally produce illustra-
tions for. Figure 15.11 shows an illustration for M&M’s that I worked on 
with Joe Zeff Design at Splashlight in New York. This image was used in 
magazines, billboards, and other forms of print.
It’s common for people to mistake photo-real 3D illustrations for photographs. 
Art directors have picked up on this and now choose to hire a digital artist 
to create a 3D model and render a product rather than have a photographer 
photograph it. Almost all car ads and product shots used in the media today 
are digital illustrations. The render can be just as convincing, more affordable, 
and much more flexible than a full-scale photo shoot. 
[Figure 15.11] This 3D illus-
tration for M&M’s that  
I created digital models 
for was used in magazines, 
billboards, and other forms 
of print.

[Chapter Fifteen] Getting a Job in Digital Modeling 
361
Thousands of advertising agencies serve as potential clients for a professional 
digital artist, making this an ideal market for freelance digital artists. 
Demo Reels
	
Demo Reel Case and Sleeve
The case that houses your demo reel disc and the sleeve that decorates it are 
important. They give potential employers a first impression about you as an 
artist. How you handle your own work provides insight as to how you will 
handle the work they will task you with as an employee of the studio.
The case should be in pristine condition with no torn or scuffed plastic. This 
may seem obvious, but I’ve seen artists send out reels in cases that looked 
like their dog used it as a chew toy. I’ve also seen old Blockbuster rental cases 
used instead of purchasing a new, unused case. A standard DVD case is less 
than ten cents. There isn’t an excuse in the world that could justify saving 
ten cents when something as valuable as your career is on the line.

362 
Digital Modeling
Don’t feel like you need anything other than a standard black case. Some  
artists invest in very expensive cases thinking that it will make their reel 
stand out. That’s an unnecessary expense. I guarantee that a fancy case will 
play no role in whether you get an offer or not, so save your money for more 
important things. Keep it simple. 
I can’t stress enough how important your reel’s sleeve is. It’s your personal 
crowd barker, trying to “reel in” employers and get them to crack open the 
case to see your work.
When teaching students about the presentation of their demo reels, I used  
to use the comparison of walking the aisles of Blockbuster as an example, but 
that has become quite dated. So here’s the new and improved way I explain 
the power of the sleeve. Think about when you’re scanning through Netflix 
trying to decide which movie you’re going to stream. Movie cover art is basi-
cally a little ad trying to sell you on the movie and screaming “pick me, pick 
me!” This is similar to reels at a studio. Usually, the HR department delivers 
stacks of reels to the various departments, and the department heads have to 
squeeze in time during their busy schedules to watch them. They try to speed 
up the process by selecting reels that look like they might be the one based 
on the sleeve. Once they’ve found a reel that could be a fit, they may stop 
looking and place a call to bring in that artist for an interview, or even to go 
ahead and offer that artist a position.
Your sleeve should be attractive and instantly sell a studio on the quality of 
your work and the breadth of your skill set. Have an image of your best work 
on the front. It should be something that will get viewers excited about what 
they are about to see. The worst thing you can do is handwrite your informa-
tion on the case, no matter the level of your penmanship. Those reels usually 
end up getting thrown in the trash without a viewing.
Information that you’ll want on the front of your sleeve includes
 • Strong imagery, usually your best work
 • Your name in an easy-to-read typeface (Adobe Garamond, Trade 
Gothic, and so on)
 • A job title (Digital Modeler, 3D Generalist, and so on)
 • Your phone number, email address, and web address
 • Date, year, or at least season (example: Spring 2012)

[Chapter Fifteen] Getting a Job in Digital Modeling 
363
Whose work this reel represents, as well as how to contact that person, should 
be clear. It goes without saying that without the proper contact information, 
the chance of getting a job is zero. Make the date clear so that prospective 
employers know they have your latest reel. You can just include the year, but 
if you’re more specific, it could avoid confusion should you send an updated 
reel later that same year. 
Here’s what you want on the spine of your sleeve:
 • Your name
 • Title 
 • Date
I see quite a few reels with blank spines. If the studio shelves reels, a blank 
spine could easily be overlooked, even if someone is specifically looking for 
yours by name. Always make it easy for potential employers to know whose 
reel it is they are looking at, no matter what angle they are looking at the 
case.
Make sure the back of your sleeve contains the following:
 • Strong imagery, usually your best work
 • Your name in an easy-to-read typeface
 • Title 
 • Your phone number, email address, and web address
 • An optional shot breakdown 
You basically want the same information on the back that you have on the 
front. Why? Quite simply, you don’t know which side they will see first. You 
should use alternate imagery for the back to try to take advantage of the real 
estate and show more samples of your best work.
It’s become increasingly popular to include a demo reel breakdown on the 
sleeve, giving viewers details about each shot that they can read as they 
watch the reel. It’s not necessary, but it’s incredibly useful to the studio. 
Figure 15.12 shows an example of a demo reel sleeve with all the required 
elements for the front, spine, and back.

364 
Digital Modeling
Before you’re ready to print, you—or even better, a friend or two—need to 
proof your copy to ensure that there are no typos or other mistakes. It doesn’t 
send a good message to the studio if you don’t have enough interest in your 
own work to proof it. I once received a reel where the artist spelled his own 
name wrong; needless to say, he didn’t get the gig.
When printing the sleeve design, make sure the print doesn’t suffer from low 
ink, oversaturation, or any other quality issues. If you have to reprint it ten 
times to get it right, it’s worth the extra effort.
Take your time trimming the sleeve as well. Make sure it’s the correct size 
and that your cuts are straight and clean. Don’t let sloppy craftsmanship 
destroy a first impression of the quality of your work.
The ultimate goal you are trying to achieve with the sleeve is to get viewers 
to watch your reel. Again, keep it simple and make the information as clear 
as possible. Your sleeve is like a one-frame trailer for a movie; it’s got to sell 
the audience in a short amount of time.
[Figure 15.12] This demo 
reel sleeve mockup makes 
it easy for the viewer to 
contact the artist and know 
what the artist’s responsi-
bilities were for each shot.

[Chapter Fifteen] Getting a Job in Digital Modeling 
365
Demo Reel Content
If employers are watching your reel, it means you have accomplished the goal 
of having a professional-looking case and sleeve, and viewers have enough 
interest in your work to put the reel in the player. Now you have to do the 
hard sell. This is where the rubber hits the road.
Basic requirements the industry expects to see on the reel include
 • Beginning title card
 • Content
 • Demo reel breakdown 
 • Ending title card
Title cards
Title cards need to include your name and contact information—phone and 
email are the bare minimum. I like to include a job title under my name to 
make it as clear as possible what position I’m applying for. You can keep the 
design of the title cards to a simple black screen with white text, although I 
prefer to carry over the style of the front of the sleeve design for consistency, 
as shown in Figure 15.13.
[Figure 15.13] Having a 
title card at the beginning 
and end of your reel allows 
the viewer to easily collect 
your name and contact 
information. 

366 
Digital Modeling
The title card at the beginning only needs to stay onscreen long enough to 
read all the information. If it stays on too long, it only delays the viewer from 
seeing your work.
The title card at the end should be identical to the intro card but last much 
longer. The show is over, and you want to give the viewer enough time to 
write down your info without having to pause the reel. 
Main content
A demo reel should contain only your best work. Your content should match 
the quality of the studio you are applying to. If it doesn’t, don’t send it. This 
isn’t a race. Don’t rush to get a reel out that isn’t up to the standard needed to  
get a job. Also, don’t make viewing your demo reel an exercise in panning for 
gold; make sure your best work is visible right away.
Avoid using work created from tutorials. Tutorials are a great resource for 
enhancing your skills but make for weak demo reel material, because they 
don’t offer any information about your skill set to the viewer other than the 
fact that you can follow steps.
When showcasing your digital models, displaying the mesh’s wireframe to 
give viewers an idea of the efficiency of the model is important. They’ll be 
looking at polygon count as well as polygon flow. 
I also like to include a lower-third that is visible throughout the entire con-
tent section that has my name and contact info. This allows viewers to easily  
contact me while they are watching the reel. Make sure it is subtle and doesn’t 
detract attention from the content by taking up too much of the screen real 
estate. Figure 15.14 shows an example of a subtle lower-third.
Demo Reel Breakdown (DRB)
Immediately following your content, you’ll need to explain exactly what you 
did for each segment of your reel in a DRB. Leave no question in the mind of 
the viewer. It’s also useful to the studio if you include the date of the produc-
tion and the software used. I like to display a small thumbnail of the model 
or shot next to this information to make it easier for the viewer to recall 
what I’m describing in the DRB. Here are some DRB description examples:

[Chapter Fifteen] Getting a Job in Digital Modeling 
367
 • “Kanakas Animated Pilot” (2011): I created all aspects using LightWave 
3D and After Effects.
 • “Bigby Animated Pilot” (2010): I created the character model, rig, and 
animation using LightWave 3D.
 • “Zombie Dearest” (2007): I created the characters using LightWave 3D.
Figure 15.15 shows an example of a DRB that would follow the main content 
of a demo reel. 
[Figure 15.14] Adding your 
name and contact informa-
tion throughout your reel 
allows viewers to easily 
contact you while they are 
watching the reel.
[Figure 15.15] DRBs leave 
no question in the mind of 
the viewer about what your 
involvement was for each 
shot shown.

368 
Digital Modeling
Demo Reel Length
Demo reel length has been debated for years, and all artists have their own 
idea of how long a reel should be. Trying to lock down how long a reel should 
be is really the wrong way to approach creating a strong reel. If I say a reel 
should be between two and four minutes, most artists would try to fill their 
reel with enough content for a four-minute reel. 
Remember that you only want to put your best work on your reel. Padding it 
with mediocre work just to add length will only diminish the overall quality 
of the reel and can leave a bad impression on viewers. They may think that 
the mediocre shots are true examples of the quality of your work and that you 
just got lucky on the better examples.
There is no limit to how short a reel should be. If you have an amazing ten-
second clip on your reel with nothing else, it could be enough to land your 
dream job. 
With that said, the average reel is between one and two minutes long. Make 
sure you spend enough time on each model or shot for the viewer to be able 
to fully take in what you are trying to show. Just be careful about spending 
too much time on each model or shot. You don’t want the viewer to become 
bored looking at the same content and move on to another artist’s reel.
Demo Reel Audio
Don’t get too caught up in finding the perfect sound track to complement 
your images. Most studios could care less about music on a demo reel—in 
fact, they usually turn off the sound!
If you’re going to add music to your reel, make sure it’s appropriate. I’m a 
huge KRS-One fan, but I’d never use one of his songs on a reel, because not 
everyone agrees with the messages in his lyrics. However, movie sound tracks 
are very popular and seem to be a good fit for reels. Choose music that won’t 
dominate the reel, and find audio that blends into the background and lets 
your work take center stage.

[Chapter Fifteen] Getting a Job in Digital Modeling 
369
Demo Reel DVD Burning and Labeling
The final steps in the creation of your demo reel are to burn a DVD and print 
a DVD label. When burning your reel, make sure you use the auto play and 
looping options so that the viewer can watch your material again without 
having to reach for the remote. For similar reasons, avoid using any kind of 
menu system. 
Most importantly, test each reel that you burn to ensure that it actually plays. 
I’ve received several reels over the years that simply didn’t work. Why go 
through all the trouble to create a demo reel and not take the time to make 
sure it plays correctly?
Burn copies on an as-needed basis, because there is no  
all-purpose reel. Creating 100 copies at one time might 
seem efficient, but you won’t have the freedom to 
customize each reel for the intended studio. You 
also run the risk of having several copies of an 
outdated reel, which is a waste of materials.
You want the label to be consistent with the 
sleeve so if they get separated it’s easy for 
someone to pair the two back together. It’s 
also important to include your name and con-
tact information so that if all the studio has is 
the disc, they can still reach you. Figure 15.16
shows a label design with the required information 
that matches the design on the example sleeve.
Your demo reel is your number one resource for  
getting a job. Take as much time to create the  
reel that is needed to land the job you are aiming  
for. Anything less is unacceptable.
[Figure 15.16] Having your name and contact information 
on your DVD label is helpful, especially when it gets separated 
from the case.

370 
Digital Modeling
Personal Site
Right out of school, I landed my first job as a designer/illustrator for a large  
ad agency in Houston, Texas. Occasionally, the on-staff artists would be 
asked to create illustrations in a range of styles to present the clients with 
more options. However, when a client wanted a look that we couldn’t 
deliver, we would reach for The Directory of Illustration, a veritable yellow 
pages for artists, featuring samples from hundreds of illustrators and their 
contact information. It was an invaluable tool for business, and an even  
better tool to help artists get business. 
I bought a half-page ad in the directory for one year for $3,000 dollars. Although 
it was a lot of money to me, I knew it was worth the gamble. Later that year, 
I landed two clients who found me through my ad. The work those two cli-
ents generated easily covered the cost of placing the ad and helped me get 
my name in front of more people than I could possibly ever hope to meet.
But although source books are still a great way to get exposure to clients, 
one of the best tools for self-promotion, especially for digital artists, is the 
Internet. The source books are not as successful for a few reasons: many 
struggling artists can’t afford the expense of buying an ad, the books have  
to compete with the Web, and the industry has evolved.
The traditional way to get work as a commercial artist was to put a physi-
cal portfolio of your work together and personally visit the agencies in your 
city. It required a great deal of time pounding the pavement and going door 
to door. It’s always been the case that creating amazing work isn’t enough to 
succeed; you have to get said work in front of as many people as possible.
The introduction of the Internet opened the door for artists to have their 
work instantly seen by people worldwide. Whether you’re looking for a staff 
position or a freelance gig, having a personal site is no longer an option—
it’s a necessity. It is akin to mailing out millions of portfolios that never get 
thrown out. Your site can be filed away by potential clients or employers and 
called up in seconds. 

[Chapter Fifteen] Getting a Job in Digital Modeling 
371
A personal Web site can showcase your work, resume, personal information, 
links to other sites that showcase your work, and much more. Digital artists 
have compressed downloadable versions of their demo reels and movies on 
their site for easy offline viewing. Having a personal site is the most afford-
able and fastest way for you to get your work in front of employers.
Your site’s link may go to thousands of people without your even knowing 
about it. For example, if one person discovers your Web site and sends a 
link to eight people who may be interested in your art, they can forward it 
to eight people, and so on. The distribution channel is endless. This type of 
pass-along is called viral marketing, and the Internet is the best place to take 
advantage of it.
Sending a one-link portfolio to potential clients or employers, for example, 
is much easier then compiling a collection of images and writing a long, 
detailed email every time you pitch a new client. In fact, put the link in your 
email signature and profile on online forums. If clients or employers see an 
image posted in a forum that they like, they can easily visit your site to see 
more samples or, if you’re so inclined, your entire collection of work. 
Any artist with a site has a huge advantage over an artist with just a portfolio 
or demo reel. Whether you’re a student ready to break into the industry or a 
seasoned professional, having a Web site can help get your work in front of 
the right people. Today, a personal site is probably the strongest marketing 
tool you can have. Hardware and software companies figured this out years 
ago and invest a great deal of time and money in their sites.
I’ve helped place many graduates, and those who have personal sites make it 
very easy for me to shoot off links to contacts, letting them know that these 
artists will be graduating soon and will be available for hire. I can get imme-
diate feedback. It’s unlike anything that was available when I graduated.
If you have trouble building a site and don’t know someone who can help, try 
using some of the template tools that ship with Adobe Photoshop, or you can 
take advantage of template Web sites like WordPress (www.wordpress.com), 
Blogger (www.blogger.com), or other free online resources. These options are 
very inexpensive and are a cinch to set up. Both my personal and company 
sites were created with WordPress, as shown in Figure 15.17.

372 
Digital Modeling
Unless you are promoting your Web creation skills, a simple site that show-
cases your work without any bells and whistles will suffice. It doesn’t have to 
be flashy. You want viewers to notice your art, not your Flash programming.
These sites are great examples of personal sites:
 • Glen Southern: www.southerngfx.co.uk
 • Ryan Etter: www.ryanetterillustration.com
 • Chris ORiley: www.chris3d.com
 • Jason Lee: www.jasonallenlee.com
 • Kory Heinzen: http://retroactivities.blogspot.com
[Figure 15.17] My personal site (left) and the Applehead Factory site (right) were both  
created using WordPress.

[Chapter Fifteen] Getting a Job in Digital Modeling 
373
The overused phrases keep it simple and less is more hold true for personal 
sites. Here are a few basic guidelines that I’ve found useful when setting up 
an online portfolio:
 • The most important rule to remember when creating a personal online 
site is to make sure your contact information is easy to locate. If some-
one finds your site and loves your work but can’t get in touch with you, 
what’s the point?
 • Have an easy to remember and easy to spell Web address. Using your 
name is a great idea unless your name can be spelled in different ways, 
and then some potential visitors to your site might misspell your address.
 • Remember that your site is your “professional” portfolio. Don’t be afraid 
to make it a visually fun site that shows off your personality, but keep 
professionalism in mind.
 • Show only your best work. Follow the same basic rules you would when 
creating a printed portfolio or demo reel.
 • Compress your content for easy downloads. If a site takes too long to 
download, you will lose visitors. Most people have a short attention 
span (just like my dog Jack). If they have to wait too long to see your 
work, they will simply move on. Use JPEG, GIF, or PNG file formats, 
and if you host your demo reel online, keep the file size small, but don’t 
compress your work too much because it will degrade the quality.
 • Always keep your site updated with your latest work and contact infor-
mation. If you update your site when you finish new work, you’ll never 
become overwhelmed with a backlog of projects to upload.
 • Be sure to check the spelling on your site. Take the time to run a spell 
checking program on all the text that will be added to your site.
 • Use small images that initially load in and link to larger versions. This 
allows your page to load quickly, and visitors can decide what they want 
to see in more detail without having to wait.
 • Don’t have music on your site unless you offer visitors a quick and easy 
way to turn it off. Music can drive people away faster than slow downloads.
 • Visit your Web site daily to make sure that it is still live. Your hosting 
server could be down, and you wouldn’t know it.

374 
Digital Modeling
When it comes to self-promotion, a Web site can be your greatest promo-
tional tool. Over the years, I’ve received freelance work and job offers, and 
established many long-lasting, professional relationships through my various 
personal sites. I’m certain job hunting would have been much more difficult 
without them.
Remember to start simple and be sure to get the word out that you have an 
online presence. Adding your URL to your email signature is an easy way to 
let people know about your site.
The Seven Deadly Job Search Sins
Over the years, I’ve given guidance to hundreds of students and colleagues in 
search of jobs as digital artists, and I’ve seen many mistakes that could easily 
have been avoided. I’ll discuss some of these common blunders here and offer 
suggestions on how to avoid them when you’re searching for work—whether 
it is your first CG position or the next rung up on your career ladder. 
Each of the seven items I discuss in this section are key to landing a gig in 
this field and are the most common areas where I have seen artists go wrong. 
You may have personal goals and restrictions that may not allow you to be as 
flexible in each area described, and that’s OK. The goal is to be open to each 
as much as possible for the maximum number of job opportunities.
Sin #1: Homesickness
I’ve seen some amazingly talented artists go jobless by limiting themselves to 
one city when looking for work. Especially early on in your career, you want 
to be as open as possible to relocating for work.
Anyone who knows me will tell you that I’m very vocal about how much I 
love Texas and how proud I am to be a Texan. But I left Texas back in 2000 
to work for a game company up north. A great opportunity came up that fit 
with my career goals and I took it, although it meant leaving the motherland. 
Your current location will determine the likelihood that you’ll have to move 
in order to get work. Someone living in Los Angeles, California, is probably 
less likely to have to relocate compared to someone living in Santa Fe, New 

[Chapter Fifteen] Getting a Job in Digital Modeling 
375
Mexico. Unless of course you happened to live in California when DNA 
Productions was hiring artists to work on Jimmy Neutron in Texas.
Remember that you don’t have to move to a given city for the rest of your 
life. It might just be a temporary relocation, or you might find that you really 
enjoy living there. A friend of mine from Texas moved up north and was sur-
prised to find that he liked it better. Shame on him.
Being open to relocation greatly increases the pool of jobs that you can apply 
for and could speed up the job search process. Remember that it’s all about 
location, location, location.
Sin #2: Greed
We all want to make as much money as possible, but we need to enter into 
each job search with a realistic idea of what is possible for our current experi-
ence level. I’ve seen a recent graduate turn down an amazing first job because 
he heard that the starting salary was $1,000 a week but was only offered 
$850. Even if this offer was more than he had ever made before, he was 
“insulted” and turned down the position. 
On the other hand, I’ve seen graduates go to work for companies for free as 
interns, just to get a foot in the door, and weeks later be offered staff positions 
working on feature films. Have patience, work hard, and prove to the studio 
that you’re worth more. Don’t be in such a rush to make your millions, and 
you’ll get there much faster.
Something I’ve heard more times than I’d like to admit is, “I can’t afford to 
work for that little pay!” Meanwhile, the artist goes several months, some-
times more, without a job in the field. Ask yourself whether you can afford to 
not be working at all. Every position you accept builds your resume and your 
demo reel for the next position. With realistic budgeting, you might be sur-
prised at how far your money will take you. Sometimes sacrifices are neces-
sary when trying to attain your goals. Peanut butter and bread can go a long 
way (for those with peanut allergies, it’s Ramen noodles).
Being realistic about the wages you can expect will help get you into a job 
quicker than holding out for the massive salary that may not come your way 
early on in your career. Wages and experience are directly linked.

376 
Digital Modeling
Sin #3: Inflexibility
When I first saw what Will Vinton Studios was doing with computer anima-
tion, I knew I had to dive head first into 3D. My main passion has always 
been character work, but there was little or no work like that in Houston 
at the time, so I spent a few years creating animation for the oil and gas 
industry.
It wasn’t exactly what I wanted to do, but I was excited that I was being paid 
to grow my 3D skills, and it quickly led to the character work I was after. Too 
often I see artists pass up great opportunities while they sit and wait for the 
ultimate job to come their way. Take, for example, the guy who has turned 
down more offers than you can imagine, holding out for a character modeling 
job, only to end up unemployed for almost three years. No one is suggesting 
that you give up your dream of working in a particular area of production. 
Simply work toward that goal while doing some kind of work in the industry.
One thing I have learned over the years is that you’re more likely to get 
work if you’re already working. But why is that? It could be that when you’re 
working, you have a larger social network, or maybe it’s that your confidence 
is better when you’re working. When you’re working, you are constantly 
expanding your network of contacts in the industry and staying on the minds 
of those contacts. When employers have work that needs to be done or a 
position opens up, you will be on their minds, while the guy sitting at home 
waiting for a great job to open up may get passed over. Whatever the reason, 
it’s good to always have employment, even when you’re looking for work. 
Your first and/or second gig might not be the exact position you’re looking 
for, but don’t let that keep you from kicking off your career.
I can also tell you that if you have generalist skills, you’ll find that you have 
more options. Be a skilled digital modeler, but be able to handle all aspects 
of production. I’ve seen some of the best hard surface modelers take work as 
technical directors to get in the door and found that they moved over to the 
modeling department once they had worked for the company for a while.
One last example is a good friend of mine who had always wanted to work in 
the game industry but was having trouble getting his start. He landed a job 
at an architectural visualization firm, and his lighting skills improved tenfold. 

[Chapter Fifteen] Getting a Job in Digital Modeling 
377
After a year of being happily employed and increasing his skill set, he landed 
a job in the game industry, making much more than he had originally been 
asking for. Again, wages and experience are directly linked.
Being flexible with the type of work you take on early in your career can be a 
faster route to landing the type of work you have always dreamed of doing.
Sin #4: Putting All Your Eggs in One Basket
When looking for work, don’t limit the number of places that you apply to. 
The majority of recent graduates send out a handful of reels and sit back to 
wait for one of those places to contact them. If you apply my previous rules 
to your job search, you will find that there are an unbelievable number of 
places that you can apply to.
This doesn’t mean that you should send out hundreds of reels randomly. 
Make sure that you are a fit for the type of work the studios would be looking 
for, but if you do your homework, you will find that a lot of options are avail-
able. When I graduated years ago, I sent out 75 portfolios and was offered 
seven job opportunities. If I had sent out seven portfolios I might not have 
had a single offer. Target the companies that are currently looking to fill open 
positions, but also send your reel to companies not currently advertising. 
For artists new to the industry, make sure the work on your reel matches 
the work coming from the studios you are applying to. I see a lot of recent 
grads limiting their reels to Pixar, ILM, Digital Domain, Weta Digital, and 
other top studios, and they can’t figure out why they haven’t found work. 
It’s great to have goals of working at these studios, but look at the path that 
most of the artists who work at those places have taken. You might find that 
you can start working at a smaller studio doing amazing work, getting your 
skill set up to speed, and be working towards your end goal of a job at Pixar 
or DreamWorks. You might also discover along the way that you are quite 
happy at the smaller studio. 
Artists who do their homework and send out their reels to a wide audience 
will find that more opportunities will arise.

378 
Digital Modeling
Sin #5: Sloppiness
This sin is the big one! It’s sad to say, but I’ve seen a lot of jobs slip through 
artists’ hands due to poor presentation. Even if you have the best material  
on your demo reel, if the case is sloppy, viewers may never watch it. The 
number one pet peeve of mine (and many companies) is handwritten labels, 
which for some reason still show up. If you’ve read any information about 
demo reels, you’ll find this one on the list of dont’s—yet it still happens. 
Cover letters are another area where artists seem to struggle. Do your home-
work and create a cover letter that is professional and aimed at the target stu-
dio. I hear complaints from studios all the time that “Studio A” has received 
a cover letter that is addressed to “Studio B.” This kind of mistake speaks to a 
lack of attention to detail—not a good quality in an employee.
Presentation also includes the personal interview. If you visit the studio, 
your personal appearance is a factor. Don’t overdress for the studio and the 
industry, but find something that is business casual and not wrinkled. And 
although I shouldn’t need to say it, bathe before you go to the interview.  
No one wants to work with the “stinky guy,” although I think we all have  
at some point in our careers.
Be prepared for the interview, whether it is over the phone or at the studio. 
Research the studio before the interview so that you have good questions to 
ask, and listen carefully to the questions being thrown your way. Listen to the 
information being conveyed by the interviewer so that you don’t ask a ques-
tion that has already been answered. Your work is not enough to land you the 
job in most cases. The majority of studios are also looking for whether or not 
you will gel with the other artists on the team.
Artists who present themselves and their work professionally are more likely 
to seal the deal when looking for a job.
	
Lack of follow-through is probably the most unforgivable job search sin. 
Follow-through can consist of staying on top of all the studios you’ve applied 
to as well as studios that show an interest in you. Keep records of all the 
studios to which you have applied and their responses. If a studio asks you to 
should get back in touch in a few months, that is an open invitation to keep 

[Chapter Fifteen] Getting a Job in Digital Modeling 
379
in contact with that studio. If you haven’t heard back from the studio, a sin-
gle call (no stalking!) a couple weeks after you send your reel is a good way to 
make sure that the studio received the reel and to see whether the studio has 
any questions or would like to see more examples of your work.
If a studio shows interest in you, stay on top of anything the studio throws at 
you. I’ve seen artists lose the opportunity to work at a studio simply because 
they didn’t follow through on the next stage of discussions.
If a studio sends you a “test,” you should jump on it. That means the studio is 
excited about you but wants to make sure you can handle the work they need 
you to do. I’ve seen more artists drop the ball during this stage than any other, 
simply by not taking the test seriously or by not taking the test at all.
Drop everything you’re doing to follow up with a studio that is interested in 
you. You may have to go through several interviews and send additional work 
or references. Whatever the studio is asking for, make sure you tackle it right 
away. Think of it as a tennis match. You want to get the ball back in the stu-
dio’s court as fast as possible. Remember not to drop the ball at this stage of 
the game.
Artists who keep records of all communication and follow through with the 
studios where they have applied are more prepared when job opportunities arise.
Sin #7: Sloth
Energy and persistence conquer all things. Lack of persistence is a seductive  
job search sin. After you’ve sent out a batch of your reels, the last thing 
you should do is sit and wait. Continue to research the job market to find 
new studios and be ready to submit your reel as new jobs hit the boards. 
Sometimes being quick to respond to a job post is the key to landing the job.
You should also continue to work on new projects to build up your skills. It’s 
very common for studios that have had your reel for a while to contact you 
and ask to see what you’ve been working on. Having nothing new is a giant 
red flag to studios. 
Constantly working on new projects also lets you refine your reel over time. 
Remember that if the fish aren’t biting, it may be time to change your bait.  
If the company you want to work for just landed the Battlestar Galactica series, 

380 
Digital Modeling
it may be time for you to add a Cylon to your reel. Don’t wait for a job posting 
—be proactive, update your reel often, and stay knee deep in production while 
you’re looking for work. Enter contests and share your work in online galleries 
and magazines. Artists who realize that searching for work is a full-time job 
usually find work quickly.
Get a Job!
The more you can work at not falling victim to the seven deadly job search 
sins, the more likely it is that you will find work. I’ve yet to see an artist who 
really wants to work, and works hard at finding a job, not land a gig in this 
industry. In the end, the ticket to finding work is to be flexible, put every-
thing you have into searching, and be persistent. You can be a success story 
and make a living doing what you truly want to do. 
Staying Current
Like a shark, your career should be in perpetual motion. If you don’t stay cur-
rent in this industry, your career will sink. Every digital artist should keep on 
top of several areas in order to have longevity in this industry. This section 
discusses these areas.
Skill Set
Your skill set is the easiest area in which to stay current if you are working at 
or for a studio. Every project you work on will help you hone your skills to 
become a better artist. If you’re not currently employed in the industry, you 
should still be working on personal projects to keep your skills sharp.
Unfortunately, digital modeling isn’t the same as riding a bike. Even the best 
modelers can lose valuable skills if they aren’t exercised on a regular basis. 
Improving your skills is only the first part of keeping your skill set current. 
You also want to add new skills and techniques to your bag of tricks that will 
allow you to take on bigger and more challenging work.
So many sources are available today in the forms of books, magazines, DVDs, 
online resource sites for digital artists, and more that can aid you in evolving as 
an artist. Take advantage of these resources and soak up as much information 
as you possibly can to increase your knowledge in as many areas as possible.

[Chapter Fifteen] Getting a Job in Digital Modeling 
381
A good way to test whether you are advancing as an artist is to go back and 
review a model you were most proud of six months to a year ago and make a 
list of aspects you would do differently to improve on it. If you can’t come up 
with anything, you may be stagnating as an artist.
As a digital artist, you can only produce to the level of your skill set, so you 
want to keep improving to raise the bar on your work.
Software
As mentioned earlier in the book, like an artist’s skill set, software is constantly 
evolving, and new software is released every year. It would be impossible to 
master all the applications that are associated with this industry, but it is 
more than possible to be aware of the majority of them.
As an artist working in this industry, you will constantly be tasked with proj-
ects that require you to solve new problems. Knowing the available software 
gives you more options to pull from and could save you a massive amount of 
time when devising a plan of attack on your current project.
The software you currently use will eventually be updated as well. You want 
to keep informed on these updates as they come out; otherwise, more and 
more new components will be added over time, and you will find your knowl-
edge of the software to be as outdated as the old version you’re using.
Being an early adopter of new software can also lead to advancing in your 
career. You can quickly become one of the most knowledgeable artists in that 
software, which can lead to interesting opportunities. I got my big break in 
the game industry this way.
Over ten years ago, the Croteam released the first Serious Sam game, and I 
immediately fell in love with it. Having never worked in the game industry, 
I started teaching myself level design using the Level editor that came with 
the game. As I learned the Serious Sam Level editor, I posted my findings to 
share with the online community, and within three weeks a large game studio 
contacted me with an offer using the Serious engine as a level designer on 
Carnivores Cityscape. This was how I got my start working in the game industry 
where I later became a producer.
Software will always play a role in a digital modeler’s career, so remaining  
current with your applications should be one of your top priorities.

382 
Digital Modeling
Networking: Online Communities
Networking refers to meeting and associating with people, and making con-
nections with them to strengthen your network, both personally and profes-
sionally. You’ve heard, “It’s not what you know, it’s who you know.” But in 
the world of CG, it’s not who you know but who knows you. 
I would never have sculpted Pokemon and Littlest Pet Shop toys, given 3D 
training to Dick Van Dyke, or written this book if it weren’t for the people 
who know me. Those people recommended me to someone that was not part 
of my network at the time.
Your network needs to evolve and expand more than anything else discussed 
here. The people you know and the people who know you are important 
when looking for a job or advancing in your career.
You can expand your network by attending industry events and conferences, 
and participating in social networking sites like Facebook (www.facebook.
com), LinkedIn (www.linkedin.com), Google Groups (groups.google.com), 
and any other avenue that involves meeting, conversing, and talking busi-
ness with people.
When my career in 3D was beginning, I set out to meet others who shared 
a passion for art and animation like me, and wanted to make a career of 
their craft. What I found was a flourishing art community online. Many 
CG forums consist of talented artists and animators who share ideas, offer 
feedback and critique, and help others with tools and techniques to work 
around creative design and animation challenges. Not only are these portals 
excellent information resources, but they are a way to get your art in front of 
literally thousands of people. The only investment you have to make is your 
time, but with a little perseverance, the commitment can really pay off.
Several years ago, I became active in a handful of online forums, many of 
which I am still involved with today, as a way to get my art in front of other 
artists and animators for their feedback. I began by posting sample sketches, 
works in progress, and final renders. At the time, my goal was simply to meet 
other artists who shared my passion for the medium and maybe exchange a 
few modeling and animation tips. It never occurred to me that I was actually 
showcasing my work to potential clients.

[Chapter Fifteen] Getting a Job in Digital Modeling 
383
 

384 
Digital Modeling
 • Give constructive critiques and be ready to hear both positive and nega-
tive feedback about your work.
 • Fill in your profile with your real name and offer a way for others to 
contact you. Someone may be interested in hiring you and will need a 
way to reach you.
 • Dedicate time each week to spend with one or more online communi-
ties. Stay updated with what is being shared in the community and be a 
regular presence.
By being proactive and helpful in online forums, not only will you be giving 
back to the community, but it could lead to a contract project or even a full-
time job. Remember that everyone—from students and hobbyists to studio 
artists and owners—are members of forums. You never know when someone 
will notice you.
I’m a big fan of online networking. These communities have opened up many 
doors for me, both personally and professionally. Online community forums 
are some of the best promotional tools for CG artists. If you’re trying to get 
established in your career and community, it’s a no-brainer!
Networking may not come easy to you, but it is an important skill to hone. 
As with most things, the more networking you do, the easier it gets.
Staying on Top of Industry Trends and News
As animation and visual effects continue to change and expand, it is impor-
tant to remain updated on information regarding this industry.
One of the easiest ways to stay up to date on industry trends is to visit several 
of the CG-related news sites daily and absorb as much information as you 
can. Think of it this way: Someone who has invested a large sum of money 
in the stock market wouldn’t go a day without checking what’s happening in 
the market, so why do any different with your investment in your career?

[Chapter Fifteen] Getting a Job in Digital Modeling 
385
Some industry details to look for include
 • Studios and the projects they are working on
 • Artists’ names and their titles
 • Event announcements
 • Software news
 • New technologies being developed
 • Anything else that directly (or indirectly) plays a role in your career
As mentioned earlier, some sites that I visit daily are 3DTotal (www.3dtotal.com),  
CG Society (www.cgsociety.org), CG Arena (www.cgarena.com), and software-
specific sites. It’s never been easier to stay on top of industry news, and the best 
part is that it’s free. Subscriptions to trade magazines like 3D World, Cinefx, 
3D Artist, and Computer Graphics World are another way to discover what’s 
happening in this industry, and they’re tax deductible, which can help justify 
the expense.
Remember to take advantage of your network. A good portion of the industry 
news that I find out about comes to me by email from artists within my  
network. It’s important to keep in touch with these contacts and keep the 
relationships active, so be sure to pass along news that you discover as well.
Reel and Resume
Keeping your reel updated is extremely important when looking for a job, but 
it’s also something to think about doing even when you’re happily employed. 
You never know when you’ll need an updated reel, and it’s always easier to 
update as you finish new work along the way than to try and do it all at once 
after too much time has passed.
Sometimes it can be too late to get finished frames or content from a pro-
duction you worked on if you postpone asking the studio for them. In those 
unfortunate cases, you’re limited to low-resolution footage from compressed 
files or simply not having any version to use.

386 
Digital Modeling
I worked on a project a couple of years ago for an online interactive Web 
site, and by the time I went to get screen shots of the site for my online  
gallery, the project had already run its course and was removed. I then had  
to jump through some exhausting hurdles to get them from the client.
If you have trouble remembering dates and other important information that 
is useful on your resume, you should frequently update it as well. It’s also a 
good idea to request letters of recommendation on a regular basis to keep on 
file for future use. I’ve regretted not doing this in the past on projects that I’m  
extremely proud of. I’ve also missed getting one in time to use for an interview.
Keeping your reel and resume current can help you to avoid running into 
similar situations and will allow you to gain the upper hand when you find 
you need updated versions quickly.
Health
Our health is one of the most important and also the most overlooked areas in 
this industry. As digital artists, we spend the majority of our time in the studio 
on a computer. If we’re not working on a paying gig, we’re either improving  
our skill set by practicing or keeping up to date with the latest game or movie. 
That doesn’t leave much time to stay on top of the one thing that allows us 
to do all of this—our health.
Make sure that you work some form of exercise into your daily schedule. Take 
frequent breaks throughout a modeling session to get up and stretch, or even 
to take a walk. Not only will this help you to avoid back problems later in 
life, but it will also allow you to come back with a fresh perspective to what 
you’re working on. I love to take my chocolate lab, Jack, for long walks at 
least twice a day, and find that I do some of my best problem solving during 
those trips.
Regrettably, it’s taken me years to realize the importance of attending to this 
part of my life. A healthy body leads to a healthy mind, which then leads to 
being able to think clearer when problem solving.
If you’re like me, you have a bucket list of things you’d like to do in your career, 
and keeping up with your health allows you more time to accomplish them.

[Chapter Fifteen] Getting a Job in Digital Modeling 
387
Advancing in Your Career
Staying current is key to advancing in your career, but there are other measures 
you can take to climb the ladder. An easy one for those passionate about 
their job is to take on more responsibilities and do more than is expected of 
you. If a director or supervisor is looking for someone to take on a special 
assignment or if another department is falling behind schedule, offer assis-
tance. The trick is to be aware of what’s happening on the project and offer 
help before being asked to do it. Be careful not to step on the toes of your 
colleagues because no one appreciates someone butting in with, “I can do 
that,” all the time.
On the other hand, if you are unsure about a task or are having problems, 
don’t hide it from your team or supervisor; be honest and up front before 
the issue gets worse. A great way to handle this situation is to deliver every 
problem with a possible solution. Hiding a problem is a quick way to bring 
the production to a screeching halt and may be the quickest way to end your 
time at that studio.
If the studio you’re working at offers on-the-job training or there are courses 
you can take to learn important skills needed for a higher position, sign up. 
Learn as much as you can about the studio and its production pipeline, and 
try to find ways to enhance the process and reduce expenses for the company. 
An obvious way to advance your career in a studio is to simply ask to be 
moved into a higher position. Be prepared to give solid reasons to justify why 
the company should promote you and make sure your superiors view you as 
an indispensible resource. 
If you find that you have gone as far as you can go in a studio, know when to 
move on. It’s very common for an artist to outgrow a studio. If you are hon-
estly doing everything you can to advance in a studio and there doesn’t seem 
to be any forward progress in your career after a few years, a new studio may 
be just the thing you need. 
Even if you’re satisfied with your job, there is never a time you should feel 
that your job hunting days are over. It’s a good idea to keep current with what 
is happening in the job market because you never know what the future holds.

388 
Digital Modeling
In closing I’d like to add one more valuable suggestion that may be the most 
important: A lot of people have this idea that the 3D industry is extremely 
large; they couldn’t be more wrong. The markets we work in are quite small, 
and only a few degrees of separation lie between all of the artists that make 
up our industry. Word travels fast throughout this network, so make sure any 
words spoken in regards to you and your work are positive. I’ve seen a lot 
of artists unnecessarily burn bridges and think their actions wouldn’t follow 
them, only to find that within 24 hours the news had spread like wildfire. 
Your reputation can be your most powerful asset when trying to advance in 
your career, so take good care of it. You only have one!
Always remember that you are in control of your career and that you have to 
treat yourself like a valuable commodity. You need to market this commodity, 
improve it, and most importantly, sell it.

This page intentionally left blank 


Final thoughts
It was bound to happen. The cat’s out of the bag! You’ve reached the end of 
the book and discovered that there is no real secret to producing professional 
digital models. You now know that creating efficient, production-ready models 
is easy. When you apply good observation, do a little preplanning, and foster 
solid problem-solving skills, the process of making a production-ready model 
can be a walk in the park.
In this final chapter, I leave you with a few closing thoughts and suggestions 
before setting you loose on the world of digital modeling.
One of the most important suggestions I’d like to pass on to you is to never stop 
learning. Remember that experience comes from the repetition of modeling 
and constantly challenging yourself. As a digital modeler, you will face new 
challenges with every new project; many will require new and innovative  
solutions that you must discover on your own. Remember what I always say:  
“I know everything I need to know to do the things I’ve already done.”
As you’ve seen throughout the chapters in this book, there is more to digital 
modeling than learning the specific tools that make up 3D software, and there 
is more than one way to go about modeling.
I hope this book has left an impression on the way you will approach future 
modeling assignments. As a digital modeler, you play an important role that 
carries a great deal of responsibility, not only to yourself, but most importantly,  
to the entire production team. 

392 
Digital Modeling
Don’t forget what the working professionals shared in Chapter 2. Each had invalu-
able information about how they viewed a modeler’s role and how a modeler’s 
work affects them. When you complete a model, always think back to what those 
artists said and ask yourself if they would call your model “production ready.”  
At this point it might be a good time to revisit Chapter 2 and see how much 
more prepared you are now that you have a better understanding of professional 
modeling practices.
Remember to apply the concepts you have learned throughout this book to all  
of your modeling projects, whether they are for personal or professional use. 
Always be mindful of your models’ poly-count and topology, giving great care  
and thought to every piece of geometry you create. Don’t forget to be organized, 
pay attention to detail, and gain full control over the mesh. Taking pride in own-
ership will allow you to be a successful artist in this field and will set you apart 
from the average modeler.
The most important advice I can leave you with is to have fun. Digital modeling 
is an amazingly cool job. Be an artist, explore, and create. Remember that the 
more models you create and the more modeling methods you add into the mix, 
the more proficient you will be as a professional modeler. 
I’d like to thank you for investing the time you have in reading this book, and 
I encourage you to return to it from time to time, not only as a refresher, but to 
check on your progress and to see how far you advance as a digital modeler over 
time. I also encourage you to 
contact me through my Web 
site www.pushingpoints.com, 
share your thoughts on this 
book, and keep me posted on 
your modeling work. I’d love 
to hear from you! 
It’s now time for me to give 
Jack the long outing I’ve 
been promising him ever 
since I started writing this 
book. As you can see in 
Figure 16.1, he’s been  
waiting patiently.
[Figure 16.1] My best friend Jack is extremely happy that 
the book has come to an end and he gets to hit the road!

This page intentionally left blank 

This page intentionally left blank 

395
Index
of stylized character, 239–263 (See also 
3D characters)
3D polygonal objects, 180–195
3D printers, 322–327, 338
3D printing, 321–341
cost considerations, 327
defined, 321
file format considerations, 331
guidelines, 332–334
how it works, 322–327
preparing digital model for, 329–334
producing toys via, 334–341
sealing considerations, 326–327
service bureaus, 327, 331
ways of using, 328–329
3D product visualization, 358–359
3D scanning, 131–133
3D.sk, 91
3ds Max, 14
3D software, 14
3D space, 72
3D text, 168–179, 198–204
3DTotal, 11, 383, 385
3D visualization, 356–359
3D World, 385
3-point polygons, 109, 156–157, 270, 278
4-point polygons, 156–157, 262
A
active scanners, 132
Adair, Dustin, 355
additive manufacturing, 322
ADG (Art Directors Guild), 69, 70
2D animatics, 37
2D base mesh, 170–174
2D paint programs, 9, 14, 15
2D software, 15
2D to 3D conversions, 72–73, 74, 174
3D animatics, 37
3D Artist, 385
3D Art to Part, 327
3D characters, 239–263
and box modeling method, 240–241
building body for, 253–256
and clean geometry, 239
creating head for, 242–246
detailing face for, 247–253
reviewing/changing, 262–263
3D-Coat, 282, 300
3D films, 344
3D gaming, 299–300. See also game 
modeling
3D graphics, 5
3D graphics programs, 9
3D illustration, 321
3D meshes, 4. See also 3D models; meshes
3D modeling. See also digital modeling
applications, 9, 10
hardware required for, 10–12
3D models. See also digital models
for computer games, 299 (See also game 
modeling)
creating, 4
examples of, 6
of human head, 213–237 (See also head 
model)
reference materials for, 78–81
sources of, 4

396 
Digital Modeling
Adobe Photoshop
and 2D paint/image manipulation, 15
adjusting color/levels with, 96
alternatives to, 15
applying skin details with, 48
mirroring images with, 218
scaling/rotating images with, 217
template tools, 371
and texturing, 48
Adventures of Tintin, The, 70
Agency typeface, 198
alpha maps, 317
alphas, 283
anatomy, digital model, 102–112, 286, 302
anatomy reference, 85, 89
Android devices, 355
animated shorts
production pipeline for, 24
recording scratch track for, 36
as testing ground for new artists, 
348–349
voice recording for, 39
animatics, 37–38
animation
common departments for, 23
importance of audio in, 64–67
post-production stage, 61–75
pre-production stage, 25–39
production stage, 40–61
and rigging process, 45, 53
animation director, 50
Animation Factory, 80
animation tools, 134–137
animators, 50, 52
API (Application Programming Interface), 
11
Applehead Factory
content directories, 143
creating logo for, 168–179
reference collection, 89
storyboarding at, 34–35
toy manufacturing experience, 338, 341
Application Programming Interface (API), 
11
architectural visualization, 357–358
armatures, 282–283
art department, virtual, 69–72
art directors, 28, 40
Art Directors Guild (ADG), 69, 70
attribute-driven models, 114
audio engineers, 64
audio recording
scratch voice, 35–36
voice, 39
Autodesk, 383
Avatar, 69, 70
B
Baker, Rick, 39
Barker, Clive, 39
base mesh, 112, 170–174
base pose, 45, 162–164
bases, model support, 333
Battle for Terra, 72, 74
Battlestar Galactica, 59, 63
beveled edges, 199, 222
Bézier curves, 109, 111, 172
binding agents, 322, 325, 326
Blair, Linda, 39
Blender, 14
blocking, 52
Blogger, 371
blueprints, 25, 33, 268–270
blurry images, 92–93
boat images, 92
bones, 135–136
bookstores, 89

Index 
397
bottle caps, 275–276
bottles, 266, 268–279
Boughen, Nicholas, 58
box modeling
creating character models with, 126–
127, 240–241
creating head models with, 214–215
first step in process, 126
as Holy Grail of modeling, 122
vs. edge extend method, 214–215
Branit, Bruce, 350
Branit|FX, 350, 352
Breaking Bad, 350
brushes, sculpting, 283–284. See also ZBrush
B-splines, 110
Bubble Guppies, 350
build out method, 122–124
bump maps, 180, 317
business cards, 87
C
CAD (computer-aided design), 111, 128, 
268
cameras, 85–86, 96
Cameron, James, 69, 70
Canon PowerShot, 85
Captain America, 74
career advancement, 387–388
careers, digital modeling, 5, 344–361
Carnivores Cityscape, 381
cartoon characters, 118, 127. See also 
character models
CBeebies, 350
CG (computer graphics)
careers in, 7
online communities, 11, 383, 385
production pipeline, 41
software, 13–14
CG Arena, 385
CG_Content folder, 143–144
CG Society, 11, 383, 385
chamfers, 175
Chan, Alan, 26–27, 81
character designers, 31
character models, 239–263
box modeling, 240–241
building body for, 253–256
for console games, 299
creating hands for, 256–262
creating heads for, 242–246
detailing face for, 247–253
gathering reference material for, 84–85
prepping for production, 40–41
questions to ask about, 82
reviewing final mesh for, 262–263
character technical directors, 43
Christmas Carol, A, 70
Cinefx, 385
Clarke, Jamie, 89
Clay Buildup brush, ZBrush, 302
Clay Polish brush, ZBrush, 304
clay sculptures, 29, 321
clean modeling, 147–159
cloning, 111, 318
closed meshes, 329–330
cloth effects, 55
clothespin model, 205–211
color correction, 61, 63
color maps, 106, 315–316
color stylists, 29
color texture maps, 315–316
color theory, 61
commercials, 352
compositing, 61–64, 98
compositing programs, 64
compositors, 61
compound curves, 268
computer-aided design (CAD), 111, 128, 268

398 
Digital Modeling
computer games, 353
computer graphics
careers in, 7
online communities, 11, 383, 385
production pipeline, 41
software, 13–14
Computer Graphics World, 385
computer processor speed, 10
concept artists, 29
conferences, industry, 382
console games, 353
construction-driven models, 114
contact information, 373
contact scanners, 131–132
content directory structure, 142–147
contests, 380
contiguous mesh, 103, 107
control cage, 112
copyrighted material, 91
cores, 10
CPU speed, 10
creature models, 284–319
adding surface detail to, 294–297
creating creature sculpt for, 300–305
creating UVs for, 314–315
doing second pass for, 292–293
generating maps for, 315–319
performing retopology for, 305–313
producing 3D sketch for, 284–285
sculpting arms for, 288–289
sculpting head for, 289–292
sculpting legs for, 286–288
cropping images, 98
CSI: Crime Scene Investigators, 133, 350
CT scans, 132–133
curves, 109, 110, 111, 172, 268
cutaways, 35
cut-ins, 35
cutscenes, 356
Cyberware, 131
D
Davis, Jarrod, 55–56
death mask region, 231
Deep Exploration, 331
deformations, 158
Demo Reel Breakdowns (DRBs), 366–367
demo reels, 361–369
burning, 369
case/sleeve for, 361–364
essential content for, 365–367
importance of, 361
labeling, 369, 378
offering online versions of, 371, 373
recommended length for, 368
sending out, 377
sound track for, 368
updating, 385–386
depth artists, 74
depth effect, 203
diamond polygons, 157
DiDomenico, Joe, 34–35
digital cameras, 85–86, 96, 99
digital creature maquettes, 284–297
adding surface detail to, 294–297
doing second pass for, 292–293
producing 3D sketch for, 284–285
sculpting arms for, 288–289
sculpting head for, 289–292
sculpting legs for, 286–288
Digital Domain, 345
digital modelers. See also digital modeling
hard surface vs. organic, 113–117
job market for, 5, 343–361
networking with other, 382–384
as problem solvers, 17
role of, in production pipeline, 40–42
skills required for, 7, 141, 147
tools used by, 78–84, 134–137, 381
digital modeling

Index 
399
defined, 128, 281
Glen Southern’s approach to, 282–283
of heads, 289–292
of legs, 286–288
for next-gen game model, 300–305
programs/tools, 122, 132, 282–284, 300
second pass, 292–297
ways of using, 128–130, 281
directories, content, 142–147
directors, 26, 28, 67–68
Directory of Illustration, The, 370
directory structure, 142–145, 147
displacement maps, 330
Documents folder, 144
“Do My Job” button, 17, 78
Drag Rectangle option, ZBrush, 294
Draw mode, ZBrush, 290
DRBs (Demo Reel Breakdowns), 366–367
dual monitor setups, 11–12
DVDs, burning/labeling, 369
DVD training videos, 15
Dynamesh feature, ZBrush, 284–285, 289, 
304
dynamics, 136–137
E
ears, 232–234, 251–252
Ebay, 89
edge extend modeling, 123–124, 214–215
edge loops, 154–155, 199, 202
edges, 107–108
edge weights, 107–108
editors, 37, 67–68
effects artists, 53–56
Einstein, Albert, 153
elemental effects, 53
EPS files, 169, 198
Etter, Ryan, 372
careers in, 5, 344–361
changing your thinking about, 16–19
defined, 4–5
examples (See digital modeling 
examples)
hardware required for, 10–12
industry insights (See industry insights)
industry overview, 344–361
key to succeeding in, 16, 391
knowledge/skills required for, 7, 9, 
77–78, 147, 380–381
methods, 121–139
production pipelines, 22–75
staying current on, 380–386
teamwork required for, 21–22
digital modeling examples
3D polygonal object with seams, 
180–195
3D polygonal text, 168–179
3D text with SubDs, 198–204
digital sculpting, 281–297
game modeling, 299–319
product modeling for print graphics, 
265–279
realistic head, 213–237
stylized character, 239–263
SubD object, 205–211
digital models
3D printing of, 321–341
preparing for production, 159–165
as reference material, 94
terminology, 102–112
types of, 102
digital reference material, 89
digital sculpting, 281–297
adding surface details, 294–296
of arms, 288–289
creating creature maquette with, 
284–297

400 
Digital Modeling
G
Gamache, Erik, 345
game industry, 353–356, 381
game modeling, 299–319
creating creature sculpt, 300–305
creating UVs for low-poly model, 
314–315
generating maps for low-poly model, 
315–319
Glen Southern’s approach to, 300
growth of, 299
next-gen, 299, 300
performing retopology, 305–313
GIF files, 373
GIMP, 15
Google, 89
Google Groups, 382
Gordon, Johnny, 52–53
GPU-based rendering, 11
graphics cards, 11
Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) 
technology, 11
graphics tablets, 282
grayscale images, 283, 317
greed, 375
Grid Iron Gladiators, 116
H
hair fibers, 53
handheld devices, 355
hands, 152, 256–262
hard surface modeling, 113–117
hard surface objects, 116
Harryhausen, Ray, 90
head model, 213–237
build out approach to, 122
challenge to creating, 213
events, industry, 382
exercise, 386
extrusion, 111, 203
eye masks, 225
eyes, 219–225, 247, 330
F
fabric dynamics, 53
Facebook, 382
faces, 108, 213, 247–253. See also head 
model
facial animation, 53, 106
facial expressions, 216
Falling Skies, 350
feather effect, 55
feature films, 345
FGP virtual world, 181
fillets, 175
film industry, 344–349
film terminology, 35
final edit, 67
final pass, 160
fingers, 256–262
fire effect, 53, 55
Flash, 111, 372
focal shift, 292
Foundation 3D, 11, 383
Foundry, 64
four-point polygons, 156–157, 262
four-point triangles, 157
Freeform, 132, 359
Frima, 355
FunGoPlay, 116, 117, 134, 181, 355
fur effect, 55

Index 
401
Images folder, 145
indie films, 346–347
industry conferences/events, 382
industry insights (by contributor)
Boughen, Nicholas, 58
Chan, Alan, 26–27
Davis, Jarrod, 55–56
DiDomenico, Joe, 34–35
Gordon, Johnny, 52–53
Heinzen, Kory, 29–32
Ladnier, K. C., 65–67
Maldonado, David, 74
McDonough, 46–47
Nieves, Angel, 49–50
Powers, Rob, 70–72
Smith, Kurt, 44–45
Southern, Glen, 41–42
Stringer, Lee, 63–64
Tsirbas, Aristomenis, 38
Welch, Farrah L., 59–61
industry insights (by topic)
animatics, 38
animation, 52–53
compositing, 63–64
effects artists, 55–56
lighting, 58
render artists, 59–61
rigging, 44–45
role of 3D modelers, 41–42
set decoration, 46–47
sound design, 65–67
stereoscopic 3D, 74
storyboarding, 34–35
story development process, 26–27
texturing, 49–50
virtual art departments, 70–72
visual design, 29–32
industry news/trends, 384–385
Inflate brush, ZBrush, 292
choosing modeling method for, 
214–215
choosing style for, 118–119
for creature maquette, 289–292
defining surface of, 108
modeling components of, 219–237
reference photos for, 97, 216–218
ways of using, 213
health considerations, 386
Heinzen, Kory, 29–32, 372
Hellhound creature, 300–319
creating creature sculpt for, 300–305
creating UVs for, 314–315
generating maps for, 315–319
performing retopology for, 305–313
hinge joints, 45
hi-res textures, 11
homesickness, 374–375
horse illustration, 93
How to Train Your Dragon, 72
human head. See head model
I
Illustration, The Directory of, 370
illustrations, 93–94
Illustrator, 111, 169, 198
image-based meshing, 132
image manipulation software, 14, 15, 96
images
adjusting color/levels for, 96–97
compositing multiple, 98
cropping, 98
naming, 99
overprocessing, 97
rotating, 97
scanning, 96
sizing, 97–98

402 
Digital Modeling
layout foundations, 186–190
Lee, Jason, 372
legs, 286–288
“less is more” rule, 153
letterforms. See text
level design, 381
libraries, 89
light, color of, 63
lighting artists, 56–58
lighting conditions, photos with extreme, 
92–93
lighting technical directors, 56
LightWave 3D, 14, 15, 71, 157, 367
lines, 102, 107
LinkedIn, 382
lip sync, 53
Littlest Pet Shop, 341
localized detail, 151–152
logos, 168–169
loops, edge, 154–155, 199, 202
low-poly models
creating UVs for, 314–315
generating maps for, 315–319
poly-count considerations, 306
Lucasfilm, 63
Luxology, 383
M
magazines, trade, 385
Makerbot, 327
Maldonado, David, 74
maps
alpha, 317
bump, 180, 317
color, 106, 315–316
displacement, 330
morph, 106
normal, 300, 318–319
inflexibility, 376–377
Inhance Digital, 22, 59
ink jet 3D printers, 322–324
Inside the Living Baby, 133
Internet
forums, 11
as source of reference images, 89
as tool for self-promotion, 370
internships, 375
interviews, job, 378
iPad, 355
iPhone, 355
Iron Sky, 346
J
Jack the Giant Killer, 70
jawlines, 231–232
Jimmy Neutron, 350
job interviews, 378
job opportunities, digital modeling, 5, 
344–361
job search sins, 374–380
Joe Zeff Design, 360
joints, 338
JPEG files, 373
K
keys, 79
Kraftwurx, 327
L
Ladnier, K. C., 64–67
laugh lines, 228
layout artists, 37, 45, 46, 52

Index 
403
microphone model, 136–137
MicroScribe G2 scanner, 131
Minolta Vivid Laser scanner, 132
mirroring, 218, 224, 278
M&Ms, 219, 360
mobile apps, 355
model classification, 113–117
modelers, 5–7, 40, 141. See also digital 
modelers
modeling. See also digital modeling
3D polygonal object with seams, 
180–195
3D polygonal text, 168–179
3D text with SubDs, 198–204
clean, 147–159
departments, 40
edge extend, 123–124, 214–215
game, 299–319 (See also game 
modeling)
methods (See modeling methods)
pilates, 83
practices (See modeling practices)
preparing for career in, 77–78
product, 265–279
realistic head, 213–237
to scale, 159–160
software/tools, 13–15, 42, 78–84, 134–
137, 381
stylized character, 239–263
SubD object, 205–211
supervisors, 40
modeling methods, 121–139
3D scanning, 131–133
box, 122, 126–127, 214–215, 240–241
build out, 122–124
digital sculpting, 128–130, 291–297
mixing, 138–139
patch, 127–128
primitive, 124–125
selection, 107
texture, 15, 48, 104, 315–316, 330
UV, 40, 48, 104
vertex, 103–107
weight, 40, 105–106
maquettes, 284–297
adding surface detail to, 294–297
defined, 29
digital sculpting of, 129
doing second pass for, 292–293
producing 3D sketch for, 284–285
sculpting arms for, 288–289
sculpting head for, 289–292
sculpting legs for, 286–288
Mars Needs Moms, 70
mattes, 63
Maya, 14
McDonough, Ed, 46–47
measuring, 86–87
medical illustrations, 132–133
memory, 10
MeniThings, 38
Merton, Robert K., 16
meshes
closed, 329–330
contiguous, 103, 107
controlling poly-count for, 148
delivering production-ready, 40
hard surface vs. organic, 113–117
hiding portions of, 292–293
image-based, 132
polygonal, 112
position/rotation of, 160
tools for generating, 13–14
metal printing, 327
metal spring model, 209–211
Method Studios, 58
micro-bevels, 174–177

404 
Digital Modeling
Nickel, Jon-Troy, 129
Nickelodeon, 350
Nieves, Angel, 49–50
noncontact scanners, 132–133
Non-Uniform curves, 109
normal mapping, 300, 318–319
noses, 225–227, 245
notebooks, 87–88
Nuke, 64
NURBS surfaces, 102, 109–112, 127
nurnies, 60
NVIDIA graphics cards, 11
O
objects, naming, 146–147
Objects folder, 145
OBJ files, 312, 315
observational skills, 81–82
offline rendering, 148–149
online communities, 382–384
online forums, 11, 382, 383
online reference material, 89
OpenGL, 11
open source software, 14
organic modeling, 113–117
organic models, 117
organization skills, 147
origin, centering model at, 160
O’Riley, Chris, 80, 94, 372
P
Paint.net, 15
Paint Shop Pro, 15, 96
Partly Cloudy, 126, 240, 241, 348–349
patching, spline, 272–277
Patchkey Kidz, 4
modeling practices, 141–165
clean modeling, 147–159
directory structure, 142–145
naming conventions, 142, 145–147
preparing model for production, 
159–165
models
creating multiple versions of, 165
positioning, 160
preparing for production, 159–165
as reference material, 94
terminology, 102–112
types of, 102
model sheets, 29, 40
model styles, 117–119
Modo, 14, 282
monitors, 11–12
morph maps, 106
mouths, 228–230, 246
Move brush, ZBrush, 286
movie industry, 344–349
movie reference, 90
MTM, 49
Mudbox, 42, 122, 282, 300
multi-core CPUs, 10
multi-knots, 109
N
naming conventions, 99, 142–147
National Geographic Channel, 133
networking, 382–384
news, industry, 384–385
NewTek, 15, 71, 383
NextEngine 3D Scanner, 131
NextFab, 327
next-generation models, 299, 300
n-gons, 49, 109, 149, 157, 201

Index 
405
polygons
and 3D printing, 332
controlling flow of, 156
counting, 149–151
deciding on number of, 151–153
defined, 102, 108
patching in, 201–202, 272–273
and rule of three, 158–159
sharing of edges by, 107
sharing of points by, 103
and texturing, 49
types of, 109
and visual effects, 55
Polypaint feature, ZBrush, 316
PolyTrans, 331
Ponoko, 327
portfolios, 361, 370, 373, 377. See also demo 
reels
poses, 45, 162–164
Postcards from the Future, 26, 81
post-production stage, 61–68
audio, 64–67
compositing, 61–64
final edit/delivery, 67–68
powder prints, 326
Powerhouse Punter, 355
PowerPoint, 198
Powers, Rob, 69, 70–72
Praying Mantis, 80
pre-production stage, 25–39
animatics, 37–38
purpose of, 25
scratch voice recording, 35–36
storyboarding, 33–35
story development, 25–28
visual design, 28–32
voice recording, 39
primitive modeling, 121, 124–125
printed reference material, 89–90
patch modeling, 127–128
persistence, 379–380
personal Web sites, 370–374
perspective, 31
photo-real models, 118
photos, reference, 97, 216–218, 268
Photoshop
and 2D paint/image manipulation, 15
adjusting color/levels with, 96
alternatives to, 15
applying skin details with, 48
mirroring images with, 218
scaling/rotating images with, 217
template tools, 371
and texturing, 48
physics-based simulations, 136
PICNIC, 19
piecewise polynomial curves, 110
pilates, modeling, 83
Pixar, 25, 36, 126, 240, 348
Pixologic, 15, 282
Pixomondo, 44
PlayStation, 353
PNG files, 373
point by point modeling, 123
points, 102–103
Pokemon, 341
Poker with Bob app, 355
pole polygons, 157
Polly Pocket, 341
Polycount, 383
poly-count, 148
poly-flow, 153, 156
polygonal mesh, 112
polygonal modeling, 167–195
polygonal models, 102, 108–109. See also 
polygons
polygon-count, 148–153
polygon flow, 153, 156, 282

406 
Digital Modeling
professional digital modelers, 5–7, 141. See 
also digital modelers
project folders, 143–145
protrusions, 332
proxy models, 37
pushingpoints.com, 392
pyramids, 184–185
Q
quads, 109, 156
queue managers, 59
Quick Forge, 327
R
RAM (random access memory), 10
raster images, 169
Ratatouille, 36
real-time 3D gaming, 299–300
real-time rendering, 149
reels. See demo reels
Reference folder, 144
reference material, 84–99
copyright considerations, 91
as digital modeling tool, 78
gathering, 84–95
for head models, 97, 216–218
importance of, 78–81
naming/organizing, 99
preparing, 96–99
for product modeling, 268–270
reference photos, 97, 216–218, 268
reflections, 265
relaxed pose, 164
rendering
GPU-based, 11
offline, 148–149
print graphics
product modeling for, 265–279
role of digital artists in, 360–361
printing, 3D. See 3D printing
printing service bureaus, 327, 331
problem solving, 82–84
production
illustrators, 29
pipelines (See production pipelines)
preparing model for, 159–165
stage (See production stage)
production-driven models, 113–114
production pipelines, 22–75
defined, 22
evolution of, 68–75
graphical representation of, 24
post-production stage, 61–68
pre-production stage, 25–39
production stage, 40–61
production stage, 40–61
animation, 50–53
effects, 53–56
lighting, 56–58
modeling, 40–42
purpose of, 40
rendering, 59–61
rigging, 43–45
scene setup, 45–47
texturing, 48–50
product modeling, 265–279
advantages over photography, 265
creating splines for, 270–271
details to avoid in, 266–267
final details for, 278–279
goals for, 267
reference types for, 268–270
spline patching in, 272–277
product visualization, 358–359

Index 
407
in manufactured toys, 338
modeling 3D object with, 180–195
UV, 161
selection maps, 107
selection sets, 40, 107
self-fulfilling prophecies, 16
self-promotion, 370, 374
Serious Sam, 381
service bureaus, 3D printing, 327
set decorators, 45–47
shaders, 48
shadows, 94–95
shapes, 171
ShapeWays, 327
Shoemaker, Dave, 39
short films, 348–349. See also animated 
shorts
Sifaka World, 33
Silo, 14, 282
simplicity, 153, 159, 373
simulations, physics-based, 136
Singh, Baj, 353–354
Sister Act logo, 168
sizing images, 97–98
skeleton rigs, 135
sketch artists, 29
sketchbooks, 87–88
skin details, 48
sloppiness, 378
sloth, 379–380
smartphones, 87
Smith, Kurt, 44–45
smoke effect, 53, 55
soccer ball, 180–195
social networking sites, 382
software
animation, 134–137
digital sculpting, 122, 132, 282–284, 
300
real-time, 149
render nodes, 59
render wranglers, 59–61
resin, 326, 327
resolution, 96
resumes, 371, 385–386
retopology, 122–123, 305–313
RGBA color information, 106
Rhythm + Hues Commercials, 46
rigged characters, 43
rigging, 43–45, 53, 105, 162–165
rigging artists, 43
Riley, Marv, 356
Romano, Lou, 36
rotating images, 97
rule of three, 45, 158–159
Runners, 33–34, 36
S
Saintpère, Sylvain, 357–358
scale, 159–160
scanners, 131–133
scanning, 96, 131–133
scenes, animating, 52–53
scene setup, 45–47
Scenes folder, 145
Schneider, Joseph, 67–68
scratch tracks, 35–36
scratch voices, 35–36
screenplays, 25, 26
scripts, 25
Sculpteo, 327
sculpting. See also digital sculpting
brushes, 283–284
programs, 122, 132, 282, 359
Sculptris, 300
seams
avoiding, in product shots, 266–267

408 
Digital Modeling
stereoscopic 3D, 72–75
sticky notes, 25
STL files, 331
stop-motion animators, 90
story
artists, 33
constructing timeline for, 25
developing, 27–28
fleshing out, 33
importance of, 25
reels, 37
Storyboard folder, 144
storyboards, 33–35, 144
strawberry model, 94
Stringer, Lee, 63–64, 90, 142
stunt doubles, 350
styles, model, 117–119
stylized characters, 239–263
and box modeling, 240–241
building body for, 253–256
creating hands for, 256–262
creating head for, 242–246
detailing face for, 247–253
reviewing final mesh for, 262–263
stylized models, 118. See also stylized 
characters
subdivision surfaces, 102, 112. See also 
SubDs
SubDs, 197–211
edge weighting, 107–108
modeling 3D text with, 198–204
modeling clothespin with, 205–211
purpose of, 112, 197
vs. NURBS surfaces, 197
subtractive manufacturing, 322
support edges, 199–200
surface names, 161–162
symmetry, 218, 224, 242, 285
modeling, 13–15, 42, 78–84, 134–137, 
381
open source, 14
staying up to date on, 381
this book’s approach to, 13–14
wars, 13
Sohn, Peter, 36
sound designers, 64
sound effects, 64. See also audio
Sound “O” Rama, 64
source books, 370
Southern, Glen, 41–42, 128, 282–283, 300, 
372
SouthernGFX Limited, 41, 372
Spiderbait character, 104
Splashlight, 360
spline patching, 272–277
splines
creating, 270–271
defined, 111
and NURBS surfaces, 110
as shape-creation technique, 172
ways of using, 111
Spoonman, 53–54
spring model, 209–211
sprite sheets, 355
stages of production, 22–75
overview, 22–25
stage 1: pre-production, 25–39
stage 2: production, 40–61
stage 3: post-production, 61–68
stars, 44
Star Wars, 63, 90
static objects, 153–154
Steinbichler Comet 5 White Light scanner, 
132
stereo artists, 72
Stereo D, 74
Stereo Lighography file format, 331

Index 
409
U
United States Mint, 359
Unity 3 game development tool, 300, 319
Up, 72
UV layout, 161
UV maps, 40, 48, 104
UV options, 162
UV seams, 161
UV unwrapping, 49–50, 312
V
VAD (virtual art department/direction), 
69–72
Varner, Steve, 132, 338
Varner Studios, 132, 338, 341
vector curves, 111
vector graphics, 169
vertex maps, 103–107
vertices, 102
video games, 353–356
video slot machines, 356
Viewsonic monitors, 11
virtual art department/direction (VAD), 
69–72
visual design, 28–32
visual development artists, 29
visual effects artists, 53–56
visualization, 82–83, 356–359
viz-dev artists, 29
voice recording, 35–36, 39
Volumedic, 132–133
W
Wacom graphics tablets, 282
Walt Disney Studios, 33, 65
Warren, April, 215
T
tape measures, 86–87
teapot images, 95
technical directors (TDs), 40, 58
Teddy Scares, 28, 39, 56
television market, 350–352
terminology, digital model, 102–112
Terra Nova, 350
tests, studio, 379
tetrahedrons, 184–185
text
modeling 3D, with SubDs, 198–204
modeling 3D polygonal, 168–179
texture artists, 48, 49, 160
texture displacement, 134–135
texture maps, 15, 48, 104, 315–316, 330
texturing, 48–50, 160–162
Thor, 74
three, rule of, 45
three-dimensional models. See 3D models
three-point polygons, 109, 156–157, 270, 
278
Titanic, 74
title cards, demo reel, 365–366
Tofu the Vegan Zombie, 15, 25, 335–341, 
359. See also Zombie Dearest
Toms, Graham, 93
topology, 44–45, 49, 153–159, 244, 282. See 
also retopology
toys, 334–341
T-pose, 45, 163
trade magazines, 385
training videos, 15
Tralfazz, 4
Transpose feature, ZBrush, 290–291, 294
trends, industry, 384–385
triangles, 109, 149, 157
Tsirbas, Aristomenis, 38
TV commercials, 352

410 
Digital Modeling
Move brush, 286
and noncontact scanners, 132
performing retopology with, 122
Polypaint feature, 316
posing figures in, 295
and product visualization, 359
training videos, 15
Transpose feature, 290–291, 294
Web site, 14
ZSphere tool, 306–308
Z Corporation, 327
Z-depth information, 72–73
Zoic, 89, 133
Zombie Dearest
animated sequence of Addie in, 50–51
audio engineer for, 65
character models for, 40–41, 335
compositing for, 61–62
model sheet/maquette for, 29
proxy models for, 37
script for, 25–26
set decoration for, 46
skin details for, 48
stereo 3D conversion for, 72–73
viewing, 15
Zorro masks, 225
ZPrinter, 327
ZSphere tool, ZBrush, 306–308
water effect, 53, 55
Waybuloo, 350, 351
Web addresses, 373
Web sites, personal, 370–374
weight maps, 40, 105–106
Welch, Farrah L., 59–61
Whole Body Color 3D Scanner, 131
wide-screen monitors, 12
Wii, 353
Will Vinton Studios, 376
WordPress, 371, 372
workstations, 11–12
X
Xbox, 353
XSI, 14
Y
Young, Greg, 36
YouTube, 90
Z
ZBrush
alternatives to, 282, 300
built-in brushes, 284–285
Clay Buildup brush, 302
Clay Polish brush, 304
creating Hellhound creature with, 
300–305
creators of, 282
Drag Rectangle option, 294
Draw mode, 290
Dynamesh feature, 284–285, 289, 304
Inflate brush, 292

This page intentionally left blank 

Unlimited online access to all Peachpit, 
Adobe Press, Apple Training and New 
Riders videos and books, as well as content 
from other leading publishers including: 
O’Reilly Media, Focal Press, Sams, Que, 
Total Training, John Wiley & Sons, Course 
Technology PTR, Class on Demand, VTC  
and more.
No time commitment or contract 
required! Sign up for one month or  
a year. All for $19.99 a month
Sign up today
peachpit.com/creativeedge


friends...why not earn some $$ doing it! 
If you have a website, blog or even a Facebook page, 
you can start earning money by putting a Peachpit 
link on your page. 
If a visitor clicks on that link and purchases something 
on peachpit.com, you earn commissions* on all sales!
Every sale you bring to our site will earn you a 
commission. All you have to do is post an ad and 
we’ll take care of the rest.
ApplY And get stArted!
It’s quick and easy to apply.  
To learn more go to: 
http://www.peachpit.com/affiliates/
*Valid for all books, eBooks and video sales at www.Peachpit.com
J

AffiliAte teAm!

