Human–Computer Interaction Series
Phil Turner
J. Tuomas Harviainen    Editors 
Digital 
Make-Believe
www.allitebooks.com

Human–Computer Interaction Series
Editors-in-chief
Desney Tan, Microsoft Research, USA
Jean Vanderdonckt, Université catholique de Louvain, Belgium
www.allitebooks.com

HCI is a multidisciplinary ﬁeld focused on human aspects of the development
of computer technology. As computer-based technology becomes increasingly
pervasive – not just in developed countries, but worldwide – the need to take a
human-centered approach in the design and development of this technology
becomes ever more important. For roughly 30 years now, researchers and
practitioners in computational and behavioral sciences have worked to identify
theory and practice that inﬂuences the direction of these technologies, and this
diverse work makes up the ﬁeld of human-computer interaction. Broadly speaking
it includes the study of what technology might be able to do for people and how
people might interact with the technology. The HCI series publishes books that
advance the science and technology of developing systems which are both effective
and satisfying for people in a wide variety of contexts. Titles focus on theoretical
perspectives (such as formal approaches drawn from a variety of behavioral
sciences), practical approaches (such as the techniques for effectively integrating
user needs in system development), and social issues (such as the determinants of
utility, usability and acceptability).
Titles published within the Human–Computer Interaction Series are included in
Thomson Reuters’ Book Citation Index, The DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
and The HCI Bibliography.
More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/6033
www.allitebooks.com

Phil Turner • J. Tuomas Harviainen
Editors
Digital Make-Believe
123
www.allitebooks.com

Editors
Phil Turner
School of Computing
Edinburgh Napier University
Edinburgh, UK
J. Tuomas Harviainen
Management and Organization
Hanken School of Economics
Helsinki, Finland
ISSN 1571-5035
Human–Computer Interaction Series
ISBN 978-3-319-29551-0
ISBN 978-3-319-29553-4
(eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-29553-4
Library of Congress Control Number: 2016937642
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of
the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology
now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or
the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any
errors or omissions that may have been made.
Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer International Publishing AG Switzerland
www.allitebooks.com

Contents
1
Introduction .................................................................
1
Phil Turner and J. Tuomas Harviainen
2
A Make-Believe Narrative for HCI .......................................
11
Phil Turner
3
Make-Believing Virtual Realities .........................................
27
Susan Turner, Chih-Wei Huang, Luke Burrows,
Turner
4
Fiction for Design: Appropriating Hollywood Techniques
for Design Fictions..........................................................
49
Tom Flint
5
Designing for Service Experiences ........................................
67
Satu Luojus and J. Tuomas Harviainen
6
Gameworld Interfaces as Make-Believe..................................
89
Kristine Jørgensen
7
Make-Believe in Gameful and Playful Design ........................... 101
Sebastian Deterding
8
The Role of Make-Believe in Foley ....................................... 125
Lindsey Carruthers and Phil Turner
9
Enactive Mechanism of Make-Belief Games ............................ 141
Zuzanna Ruci´nska
10
Immanent Story Worlds: The Making of Punchdrunk’s
The Drowned Man: A Hollywood Fable ................................... 161
Carina Westling
v
and Phil
www.allitebooks.com

www.allitebooks.com

Contributors
Luke Burrows achieved his M.Sc. in User Experience from Edinburgh Napier
University and is now an independent consultant.
Lindsey Carruthers is a lecturer in the School of Life, Sport, and Social Sciences
at Edinburgh Napier University. She specialises in cognitive psychology, with
particular interests in creativity, attention, ADHD, memory, and pretending in
adults.
Sebastian Deterding is a researcher and designer working on facilitating human
ﬂourishing through playful and gameful design. He is a reader/senior research fel-
low at the University of York’s Digital Creativity Hub, associate of the international
design agency Hubbub, founder and organizer of the Gamiﬁcation Research Net-
work, and editor (with Steffen P. Walz) of The Gameful World: Approaches, Issues,
Applications (MIT Press, 2015). Dr. Deterding lives online at codingconduct.cc.
Tom Flint is a lecturer at the School of Computing at Edinburgh Napier University,
aligned to the Make-Believe laboratory. Tom has worked in Higher Education for
over 10 years, before this he has enjoyed a variety of occupations. This has included
time as a BT technician, founder and publisher of cult magazines The Lock and
Sleaze Nation, and a period working with urban outﬁtters when they ﬁrst established
themselves in Europe. Tom’s teaching and research centre on physical computing
and storytelling, particularly focusing on where these two disciplines complement
each other.
J. Tuomas Harviainen is a development manager for the city of Vantaa, Finland,
and a postdoctoral researcher at Hanken School of Economics. He currently focuses
especially on the organizational learning aspects of games, but often ventures into
service design, management, information systems, or sexology. He is also one of
the three editors of the journal Simulation & Gaming.
Chih-Wei Huang achieved her M.Sc. in User Experience from Edinburgh Napier
University and is now User Experience Designer at ZyXEL, Taiwan.
vii
www.allitebooks.com

viii
Contributors
Kristine Jørgensen is as of 2015 a researcher at University of Bergen and project
manager of the Games and Transgressive Aesthetic research project. She is the
author of Gameworld Interfaces (MIT Press 2013) and A Comprehensive Study
of Sound in Computer Games (Mellen Press 2009). She received her Ph.D. in media
studies from University of Copenhagen in 2007.
Satu Luojus has a Ph.D. in Information processing science. She is a principal
lecturer and head of the Master’s Degree Programme in Customer-Centered Service
Development at Laurea University of Applied Sciences. Her areas of expertise
are user experience (UX), user-centered design (UCD), service design (SD), and
user research in living lab ecosystems. Her research interests include UX, user
studies, conceptualization, user-centered design, and living lab research methods.
She has over 20 years working experience as a lecturer as well as over 10 years
experience in conducting user-centered R&D – projects as a researcher and as a
project coordinator/manager/scientiﬁc leader.
Zuzanna Ruci´nska is a lecturer of philosophy in Leiden University, the Nether-
lands. She was an early stage researcher of the Marie Curie Initial Training Network
‘TESIS’ at University of Hertfordshire, UK, working alongside Dan Hutto and
Shaun Gallagher on the enactive account of pretence. Her research interests include
pretence and imagination, embodied and enacted cognition, dynamical systems
theory, sensorimotor theory, and theory of affordances. She is currently working
on the application of the enactive account of pretence to the ﬁelds of sports and
therapy.
Phil Turner is a reader in the School of Computing at Edinburgh Napier University
and research leader of the make-believe group.
Susan Turner has 30 years experience of the human aspects of interactive systems.
Her specialisms have included, in broadly chronological order: usability, user-
centered design and evaluation, CSCW, presence and place, and user experience.
She has recently retired from a senior lecturer post at Edinburgh Napier University.
Carina Westling based at the University of Sussex, researches interaction design
with Punchdrunk theatre company, pioneers in immersive interactive theatre. Her
broader research interests include digital and live interaction and experience design,
in which she is also an active practitioner with The Nimbus Group, where she acts
as Creative Director. Past projects include live indoors and outdoors performance
events in the UK and Scandinavia with participant numbers ranging from 150
to 200,000. Carina also collaborates with human-computer interaction researchers
with a particular focus on complex embodied affective states and responses during
interaction.
www.allitebooks.com

Chapter 1
Introduction
Phil Turner and J. Tuomas Harviainen
1.1
Make-Believe: The Quest for Verisimilitude?
We occupy two worlds, maybe more. We live in the everyday world of work, family,
crowded trains, mobile phones, over-priced coffee and fast food and we deal with
these things with scarcely a thought, “we walk and read aloud, we get off and on
street cars, we dress and undress, and do a thousand useful acts without thinking
of them” (Dewey 1922). This world is public, routine and apparently primary.
Wittgenstein tells us that “The world is everything that is the case”, that is, the
world is precisely those states of affairs which do exist, fast food and all. The other
worlds are those of the imagination and of make-believe. Small children seem to
spend their time ﬂuidly moving between them and adults routinely escape to make-
believe worlds by reading a novel, playing a game on their phones, or going to the
movies. Take a commuter train in the evening and just see how many people have
escaped into these other private worlds.
These secondary worlds are peculiarly human and may be one of the reasons
our species has been so successful. This is evidenced by our ability to decouple
ourselves from the primary world and to engage in make-believe which liberates us
from the moment and the restrictions of the primary world. We argue that make-
believe is all too frequently and mistakenly dismissed as the stuff of fairy-tales. We
note that these make-believe worlds are not boundless – there are limits – and they
often rely on props for their creation (Walton 1990). Donald (1991) calls these props
P. Turner ()
School of Computing, Edinburgh Napier University, Edinburgh, UK
e-mail: p.turner@napier.ac.uk
J.T. Harviainen
Management and Organization, Hanken School of Economics, Helsinki, Finland
e-mail: tuomas.harviainen@hanken.ﬁ
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
P. Turner, J.T. Harviainen (eds.), Digital Make-Believe,
Human–Computer Interaction Series, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-29553-4_1
1
www.allitebooks.com

2
P. Turner and J.T. Harviainen
“exograms” and found them in the caves of our ancient ancestors. We now encounter
them as the stuff of the stories we read, or as the colourful, animated screens of a
game.
The worlds are separate but interleaved. The primary is generally thought to be
more important despite the scant conscious attention we pay it – operating, instead,
on the basis of a kind of lightly monitored “autopilot”. The secondary worlds are
mistakenly treated as idle fantasy, while being apparently trivial, they demand a
good deal more of our cognitive resources to create and maintain – hence their need
to rely on external resources (props) to scaffold them.
We are not alone in our enthusiasm for make-believe as it has been adopted, in the
form of “make.believe” (note the separating dot rather than a hyphen), as the global
brand strategy for the electronics corporation Sony
®. They write, “make.believe
symbolizes the spirit of our brand. It stands for the power of our creativity, our
ability to turn ideas into reality, and the belief that anything we can imagine, we can
make real”. Sony tell us that between “make” and “believe” is “where imagination
and reality collide” (Sony 2009).
Corporate strategy and advertising copy aside, we all pretend and make-believe
everyday. We pretend when we act as though or behave as if. Unlike pretending,
make-believe relies on things to act as a prop or a trigger (such as a good book,
a “light sabre” or a paper prototype) from which to spin a make-believe episode.
Walton calls this the “principle of generation”.
It is our contention in this book (with the occasional dissenting voice) to argue
that pretending/making-believe is a form of cognition complementary to the more
familiar faculties of problem solving, language and so forth which allows us to
create and access these other worlds. More than this it is also provides an intuitive
form of interaction and a tool for innovation.
1.2
Why Do We Make-Believe?
Cosmides and Tooby (2000) tell us that evolutionary psychology is not a speciﬁc
subﬁeld of psychology but, “It is a way of thinking about psychology that can be
applied to any topic within it”. Buss (1995, p. 2) agrees observing, “Because all
behaviour depends on complex psychological mechanisms, and all psychological
mechanisms, at some basic level of description, are the result of evolution by
selection, then all psychological theories are implicitly evolutionary psychological
theories”. While evolutionary psychology is not without its critics, it is agreed that
recognisably modern humans have been around for approximately 250,000 years.
It has been said that if we were to take a man from that time, clean him up
and dress him appropriately, he would pass more or less unnoticed amongst us.
This similarity is, however, only skin deep as behaviourally and culturally he
would be quite different, that is, until about 45,000 years ago when modern
human behaviour appeared almost overnight (e.g. Klein 2002; Lewis-Williams
2004 among many more). For example, Klein (2002, p. 24) writes “ : : : the most

1
Introduction
3
recent event [in our evolution] occurred about 50,000 years ago : : : it produced the
fully modern ability to invent and manipulate culture”. Tattersall (2006, p. 67–68)
writes in a similar vein, “When the ﬁrst Cro-Magnons arrived in Europe some
40,000 years ago, they evidently brought with them more or less the entire panoply
of behaviors that distinguishes modern humans from every other species that has
ever existed. Sculpture, engraving, painting, body ornamentation, music, notation,
subtle understanding of diverse materials, elaborate burial of the dead, painstaking
decoration of utilitarian objects : : : ”. Although there is some debate about the
timing, it is generally agreed that abstract thinking; planning; magick and religion;
technological innovation; and symbolic behaviour witnessed a ﬂowering about then.
More recently, Mithen (2014) has added make-believe to this list. Mithen has
proposed a number of changes to our species and to our ancestors which were
needed to facilitate the emergence of what he describes as imagination.1 (We won’t
quibble about whether this is “imagination” per se or the ability to make-believe.)
These changes enabled us to acquire a theory of mind, true language, and what
he calls a cognitive ﬂuidity enabling external artefacts are treated as part of our
cognition. Whether or not we agree with every detail of this, what does emerge is
that make-believe is a key cognitive facility. We suggest that make-believe brings
into focus abstract thought, and our abilities to plan, innovate, reason symbolically
and perhaps a little magick.
In this book, we discuss the ways in which we also exploit these world as the
basis of our interactions with technologies and services, as well as a vehicle for
inventing new ones.
1.3
Pretending and Make-Believe
In June 2015, six scientists who had been living under a dome on the slopes of a dormant
volcano in Hawaii emerged into the fresh air. It had been their intention to simulate what
life might be like in Mars and it was the ﬁrst time they had left their dome without donning
a space suit for eight months. It was reported that crew member Jocelyn Dunn said, “When
we ﬁrst walked out the door, it was scary not to have a suit on – We’ve been pretending for
so long”. (Telegraph newspaper 2015)
Earlier we proposed that pretending involves acting as though or behaving as
if. So, for example, I can (with varying degrees of difﬁculty) pretend to like sound
1Deﬁning imagination has proved to be very difﬁcult. A number of celebrated thinkers, such as
Walton who, after listing a wide variety of different forms of imagining writes, “What is it to
imagine? We have examined a number of dimensions along which imaginings can vary; shouldn’t
we now spell out what they have in common? – Yes, if we can. But I can’t” (1990, p. 19). One
of the problems with deﬁning (much less understanding) imagination is that it might reasonable
include day-dreaming, visualising, wishing and a whole host of other slippery concepts. And, of
course, we are quite able to imagine without pretending and to pretend without imagining. Faced
with these difﬁculties we will conﬁne ourselves, in the main, to pretending and making-believe.

4
P. Turner and J.T. Harviainen
of bagpipes; I can pretend to be a kangaroo; I can pretend that our department’s
restructuring makes sense. And evidence of these forms of pretending is my
behaviour towards the players of bagpipes, my hopping with both feet held together
and my sitting quietly at departmental meetings respectively. It is not lying and
even young children (Rakoczy et al. 2004) can tell the difference between behaving
or trying for real and pretending. To pretend is to act as though. This emphasis
on acting and behaving suggests that pretending is an expression of our embodied
cognition and as such reﬂects the capabilities and restrictions imposed by our
bodies.
Pretending is almost exclusively studied in the context of child development
where it is taken to be a synonym for pretend play (e.g. Leslie 1987; Nichols
and Stitch 2000; Harris 2000). The focus on pretend play relies on the generally
agreed position is that it is essential to a child’s cognitive, affective and social
development and this ability appears quite early. Leslie (1987, p. 412) tells us that
it can be observed at “the very beginning of childhood”, while Harris tells us it
appears later and equates it with the development of language. The importance of
play is identiﬁed by Russ (2004) who tells us many of our cognitive and affective
processes rely on it. Speciﬁcally, play involves the exercise of alternating cycles of
divergent and convergent thinking which is the ability to generate different ideas,
story themes, and so forth and then to weave them together. Pretend play also
facilitates the expression of both positive and negative feelings, and the ability
to integrate emotion with cognition (e.g. Jent et al. 2011; Seja and Russ 1999).
When children take on different roles in pretend play it allows them to acquire
and practice the skills of communication, problem solving, and empathy (Hughes
1999). However of particular interest to the current discussion are the following
deﬁnitions of pretend play. We begin with Garvey (1990) who tell us that pretend
play is the “voluntary transformation of the here and now, the you and me, and the
this or that, along with any potential action that these components of a situation
might have”. While Harris (ibid) tells us that, “Children’s pretend play is [ : : : ] an
initial exploration of possible worlds” and Rutherford et al. (2007, p. 1025) suggest
that pretend play is “acting as if something is when it is not”. These themes of the
“voluntary transformation of the here and now”, “possible worlds” and acting as
though “something is when it is not” are central to our argument.
Make-Believe
Props play a central role in Walton’s (1990) theory of make-believe. Props enable
us to create stories and episodes of make-believe. Props include everything from
childhood toys to works of art. Thus a child is better able to make-believe a character
from the Star Wars™movies when armed with a “light sabre” than rushing about
claiming to be an unarmed Jedi master. While these are well established concepts,

1
Introduction
5
we can also characterise the use of props as “thinking with things”. The artefact
scaffolds the pretend behaviour by, arguably, relieving some of the cognitive effort
required of pretending. Here, virtual reality or a very detailed videogame, for
example, must offer considerable amounts of cognitive scaffolding.
This idea has been developed to a degree within HCI by Scaife and Rogers
(1996). They have observed that we often make use of external artefacts as part
of our everyday problem solving and we do so by way of “interaction[s] between
internal and external representations” (p. 188). They describe this as computational
ofﬂoading, i.e. the extent to which external representations can reduce the amount
of cognitive effort required to solve a problem, complete a task and (we add), make-
believe which is likely to be quite demanding computationally. In their paper they
suggest that different forms of representation – speciﬁcally, re-representation, can
make scaffold comprehension. The use of graphs is an obvious example. Florence
Nightingale, a reforming nurse working during the Crimean Wars of the nineteenth
century, used graphs to communicate the extent of casualty ﬁgures to British
members of parliament. She had found that signiﬁcantly more casualties were being
incurred from disease and poor medical treatment than from enemy action. This was
poorly understood but her use of pie-charts changed that.
Indeed HCI is replete with examples such as these. We can present and re-present
the same idea as a narrative description through a storyboard, low-ﬁdelity prototypes
or an interactive digital mock-up. Each has it power and its own constraint but
collectively they offer their own means of thinking.
This “thinking with things” is, of course, currently the subject of sustained
research in cognitive science though space prevents a thorough treatment of this
subject (e.g. Clark 2008; Kirsch 1995, 2010; Malafouris 2013 among others). Kirsh
(1995, 2010) who has also been very active in researching this issue has presented
evidence that we make, for example, the “intelligent use of space” to simplify
everything from how we prepare a salad, assemble ﬂat-pack furniture, and complete
a jigsaw by using the things themselves to help reduce the complexity of the task.
For example, when confronted with a jigsaw puzzle, we tend to group the pieces
with a straight edge into a single pile, or all the examples of sky.
Pretending, Make-Believe and Motor Cognition
One last thought, just how real is pretending/make-believe? We believe that
pretending/make-believe rely on the self-same neural pathways and established
motor cognition routines as real world behaviour, and there is a signiﬁcant body
of empirical work which can be used to support this position.
Decety, for example, compared real and simulated tasks from the perspective of
timing, autonomic responses and cerebral blood ﬂow. He found that when he asked
people to mentally “walk” toward points placed at different distances, they found

6
P. Turner and J.T. Harviainen
that the time it took to perform this task varied according to the actual distance
of the target. Repeating this task in the real world, it was found that the times were
highly correlated with the task carried out in the imagination (Decety et al. 1989). In
a second round of experiments, people were asked to imagine themselves walking
while carrying a variety of different loads. Again, it was found that people took
longer to reach a target carrying a heavy load than when asked to imagine walking
the same distance while carrying a lighter load (Decety 1996). These ﬁndings
suggest that motor imagery and motor production rely the same representations.
Decety went on to propose that motor images, that is, skilled motor actions – such
as playing cricket, drinking tea – share the same neural mechanisms as those that
are also responsible for preparation and programming of actual movements. His
argument being that motor acts are represented centrally and as such are available
for modiﬁcation, retrieval and execution. Motor imagery and motor execution
differing only in that the former is blocked prior to execution. These initial ﬁndings
were subsequently developed by Jeannerod (2001) to create his “theory of neural
simulation of action” which argues that real and imagined actions are mediated
by the same cortical areas. Jeanerod’s hypothesis is that the motor system is part
of a simulation network that is activated when we intend acting or when we have
observed others engaged in an activity or other. He continues that the function of
this simulation not only shapes the motor system in anticipation of execution, but
is also to provide information as to both the feasibility and the meaning of potential
actions.
Schredl and Erlacher (2008) have extended this discussion by examining the
hypothesis that REM dreams also call upon these same neural substrates. They
found abundant anecdotal evidence from studies of the reported dreams of ath-
letes – who have reported “practicing” difﬁcult or demanding procedures in lucid
dreams – and clinical evidence from people suffering from REM sleep behaviour
disorder.
From this evidence we may conclude that pretending/make-believe are not just
epiphenomenal but are an intrinsic part of the normal functioning of our cognition.
1.4
Introducing This Book
This volume of very diverse chapters on digital make-believe offers a glimpse at
a new way of thinking about human-computer interaction. Bruner (1991, p. 4)
writes that “unlike the constructions generated by logical and scientiﬁc procedures
that can be weeded out by falsiﬁcation, narrative constructions can only achieve
‘verisimilitude’”. This volume of ten chapters is not in the business of truth and
falsehood: instead we seek the “appearance of truth”, though we might settle for
plausibility.
In A make-believe narrative for HCI Phil Turner begins by noting that HCI is a
discipline with three distinct but overlapping faces. HCI as theory; HCI as practice;
and HCI as experience. HCI as theory arose from the cognitive revolution of

1
Introduction
7
the 1950; HCI as practice, in contrast, is concerned with designing interactive;
and ﬁnally, HCI as experience is concerned with, for example, how technology
provides access to the virtual. This presents HCI as both a fragmented discipline
and one which lacks a unifying story. Just what is HCI about? Turner argues that
one such story (though there may be others) is that it relies on make-believe to
create/experience and account for these digital technologies.
In Make-believing virtual realities Susan Turner and her colleagues explore how
make-believe, largely through the medium of schemata, supports the experience
of presence. This is illustrated by two case studies of desktop virtual environ-
ments, which despite their minimal nature, afforded a relatively high degree of
sense of presence. In their discussion, they highlight intriguing evidence from
neuropsychology that may suggest that similar neural features underlie all mental
phenomena involving projection into locations or states other than that immediately
to hand.
Tom Flint’s Fiction for design considers a very familiar tool in HCI, the scenario
and asks do they need a back story? Scenarios, and the many variations on them,
are a ubiquitous tool in both HCI and other design rich activities. A scenario is
a little story which, by default, is not so. It is make-believe. For a scenario to be
credible and useful, it needs to be believable. Flint poses and answer the question
as to whether a “backstory” is need to make this so. Flint draws on examples from
beyond HCI to illustrate his case.
In Designing for service experiences, Satu Luojus and J. Tuomas Harviainen
explain the constant presence of make-believe in service design and the usefulness
that has for HCI. By introducing readers to the logics and frameworks of service
design, they illustrate the ways in which designers envision new forms of service and
new interfaces, how they use data to imagine both customers and user experiences,
and how the users themselves later interact with ﬁrst prototypes and then actual
touchpoints and interfaces through a logic ﬁrmly based on make-believe. They
furthermore provide three examples of tools – probes, design games and LEGO®
SERIOUS PLAY® – that showcase varying types of design make-believe in
action.
Gameworld interfaces as make-believe introduces us to the design of interfaces
to gameworlds. Kristine Jørgensen discusses the ways in which imagination con-
nects with types of information in the game environment and the ways in which we
interact with it. Focusing on the balancing act between rules and make-believe, the
chapter analyses how game-play requires the simultaneous use of two “mindsets”.
Using Kendall Walton’s prop theory, Jørgensen then shows how the gameworld
itself is a prop that enables enjoyable make-believe, as well as how different players
engage in different types of imagining during play.
Blurring the line between the two worlds discussed in this introduction, Sebas-
tian Deterding’s Make-believe in gameful and playful design examines gamiﬁca-
tion and playiﬁcation, the introduction of game and play-like traits into other
activities, from the perspective of make-believe. By adding rules, goals and
tracking systems like leaderboards into mundane tasks, people are trying to increase
their level of engagement and motivation. As pointed out by Deterding, while

8
P. Turner and J.T. Harviainen
make-believe is strongly present in gamiﬁcation, it is rarely noted in design
theory. To address this, the chapter provides ideas for how to both recognize that
connection – and to utilize it in design.
As we have seen in the introduction to this chapter, pretending and make-
believing has largely been treated as though there were the sole provenance of
children. We can see children pretending and engaged in make-believe in every
school playground but are these abilities lost to adults?
Lindsey Carruthers and Phil Turner report a study of professional, adult make-
believers. Their chapter The role of make-believe in Foley describes the work of
Foley artists who design and perform those everyday sounds in a movie. This
chapter offers a perspective on the work of real life, adult pretenders. These artists
act (re-enact) the actions of on-screen actors in order to create the sounds associated
with them. They describe their work as hovering between the wholly real and the
wholly make-believe.
Zuzanna Ruci´nska’s, Enactive mechanism of make-belief games challenges a
fundamental assumption underpinning much of the thinking in make-believe and
pretending. Psychological accounts of pretending all rely on labelling make-believe
content as such and maintaining the division between what is so, and what is not.
Enactive accounts, in contrast, reject the notion of representation, so an enactive
account of make-believe is a radical rethinking of how it might operate.
Carina
Westling’s,
Immanent story worlds: the making of Punchdrunk’s The
Drowned Man – A Hollywood Fable is the ﬁnal chapter of this volume. Westling
illustrates just how diverse a ﬁeld digital make-believe is. She discusses the work of
Punchdrunk, which is a British theatre company, and which has pioneered a form of
“immersive” theatre. Drawing upon practical experiences and theoretical insights
she wonders how this kind of theatre can be translated into the digital.
During the peer review process, Suellen Adams, David Benyon, Lynne Hall,
Richard Hetherington, Jonna Koivisto, Richard N. Landers and Olle Sköld offered
their valuable critique and feedback on chapters in progress. We are very grateful for
their comments, as well as those of the authors who suggested critical improvements
to each other’s works.
We believe that this volume of very diverse chapters on digital make-believe
offers a glimpse at a new way of thinking about human-computer interaction and
we very much hope you enjoy it.
References
Bruner J (1991) The narrative construction of reality. Crit Inq 18:1–21
Buss DM (1995) Evolutionary psychology, p. A new paradigm for psychological science. Psychol
Inq 6(1):1–30
Clark A (2008) Supersizing the mind. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Cosmides L, Tooby J (2000) Consider the source: the evolution of adaptations for decoupling and
metarepresentation. In: Sperber D (ed) Metarepresentations: a multidisciplinary perspective.
OUP, Oxford

1
Introduction
9
Decety J (1996) Do imagined and executed actions share the same neural substrate? Cogn Brain
Res 3:87–93
Decety J, Jeannerod J, Prablanc C (1989) The timing of mentally represented actions. Behav Brain
Res 34:35–42
Dewey J (1922) Human nature and conduct: an introduction to social psychology. Modern Library,
New York, pp 172–180
Donald M (1991) Origins of the modern mind. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA
Garvey C (1990) Play. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA
Harris P (2000) The work of the imagination. Blackwell, London
Hughes FP (1999) Children, play, and development. Allyn & Bacon, Needham Heights
Jeannerod M (2001) Neural simulation of action: a unifying mechanism for motor cognition.
Neuroimage 14:103–109
Jent JF, Niec LN, Baker SE (2011) Play and interpersonal processes. In: Russ SW, Niec LN (eds)
Play in clinical practice: evidence-based approaches. Guilford Press, New York
Kirsh D (1995) The intelligent use of space. Artif Intell 73:31–68
Kirsh D (2010) Thinking with external representation. AI Soc 25:441–454
Klein RG with Edgar B. (2002) The dawn of human culture. Wiley, New York
Leslie A (1987) Pretense and representation: the origins of “Theory of Mind”. Psychol Rev
94(4):412–426
Lewis-Williams D (2004) The mind in the cave. Thames & Hudson, London
Malafouris L (2013) How things shape the mind: a theory of material engagement. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA
Mithen (2014) Imagination: our greatest skill. New Scientist, September 17th edition.
Nichols S, Stich S (2000) A cognitive theory of pretense. Cognition 74:115–147
Rakoczy H, Tomasello M, Striano T (2004) Young children know that trying is not pretending:
a test of the “behaving-as-if” construal of children’s understanding of pretense. Dev Psychol
40:388–399
Russ SW (2004) Play in child development and psychotherapy. Earlbaum, Mahwah
Rutherford M, Young G, Hepburn S, Rogers S (2007) A longitudinal study of pretend play in
autism. J Autism Dev Disord 37(6):1024–1039
Scaife M, Rogers Y (1996) External cognition: how do graphical representations work? Int J Hum
Comput Stud 45:185–213
Schredl M, Erlacher D (2008) Relationship between waking sport activities, reading and dream
content in sport and psychology students. J Psychol 142(3):267–276
Seja AL, Russ SW (1999) Children’s fantasy play and emotional understanding. J Clin Child
Psychol 28:269–277
Sony (2009) http://www.sony.net/SonyInfo/News/Press/200909/09-100E/. Last retrieved 14 Oct
2015
Tattersall I (2006) How we became human. Sci Am Spec 16(2):66–73
Telegraph Newspaper (2015) http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/science/11673542/Mars-project-
scientists-emerge-from-dome-after-8-months.html. Last retrieved 6 Oct 2015
Walton KL (1990) Mimesis as make-believe: on the foundations of the representational arts.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA

Chapter 2
A Make-Believe Narrative for HCI
Phil Turner
2.1
Introduction
The last 30 years have seen extraordinary and radical developments in human-
computer interaction, not only in technology, but in the sheer diversity of theoretical
positions which have been ﬂirted with, examined, appropriated and adopted.
Without wishing to turn this chapter into a sea of references we have seen
a narrow laboratory focus, reﬂecting the contribution of cognitive psychology,
being challenged by the adoption of anthropological perspectives (e.g. Suchman
1987; Hutchins 1995) and the appearance of Activity Theory (e.g. Engeström
1987; Bødker 1987). These have led researchers to recognise roles for context,
mediation and distribution in HCI. Similarly, Sheets-Johnstone (2009) tells us that
she introduced the term the “corporeal turn” in the 1980s in response to what
she describes as centuries of Cartesian misrepresentation in portraying the body
as the “material handmaiden of an all powerful mind”. Her work “rehabilitated”
the body and helped us think about the possibilities of such things as embodied
interaction. The 1990s also witnessed yet another turn, this time to the social.
This “turn to the social” was triggered by the emergence of computer supported
cooperative working and the accompanying appropriation of sociological theory
and practice (e.g. Dourish 2001). Cognitive science has made its contribution too by
suggesting that our cognition is scaffolded by technology (Scaife and Rogers 1996)
or that it extends into the external world (e.g. Clark 2008). Affect too has enjoyed
a renaissance and is no longer ignored or regarded as a vestigial embarrassment
(Norman 2004). Its role in decision making, user experience, preference formation,
(tele)-presence and our fondness for playing computer games has ﬁnally been
P. Turner ()
School of Computing, Edinburgh Napier University, Edinburgh, UK
e-mail: p.turner@napier.ac.uk
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
P. Turner, J.T. Harviainen (eds.), Digital Make-Believe,
Human–Computer Interaction Series, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-29553-4_2
11

12
P. Turner
recognised (e.g. Damasio 1999; Lindgaard et al. 2006; Turner 2015b). Finally, the
very notion of interaction as taking place between an intelligent agent and external
technology is being challenged by the ﬁrst tentative appearance of “cyborgs” which
are the result of blending the organic and synthetic (Clark 2003). These successive
anthropological, corporeal, social, external and affective turns have taken us a long
way from Card et al. (1989) and their “model human processor” account. While we
are now confronted by an HCI which is vibrant, truly multi-disciplinary and perhaps
a little unmanageable, there remains the questions of how all of these different pieces
ﬁt together. We can no longer draw a neat, idealised and simpliﬁed “human” on one
side and “technology” on the other separated by the word of “interaction”. Indeed,
this research has served to both expand and to fragment HCI.
This is further compounded by HCI itself having a number of different faces
(cf. Long and Dowell 1989): ﬁrstly there is HCI as practice, including interaction
design, user centred design, designing for accessibility and so forth; secondly, there
is HCI as an academic discipline complete with theories, conceptual frameworks
and specialist vocabulary and ﬁnally, there is HCI as the source, mediator and
evaluator of a variety of user experiences.
Taken together, HCI is revealed as a disparate collection of concepts, tools and
frameworks which makes it difﬁcult to understand as a single, coherent piece.
Indeed, it also seems unlikely that we can synthesize these different and occasionally
incongruent elements into an over-arching super-theory or architecture, or by
creating HCI’s very own metaphysics. We need to look elsewhere and one avenue
might be to adopt a narrative approach rather than conducting further scientiﬁc
analyses.
Narrative here should not to be dismissed as just telling stories but as a
description of one of the ways in which we think. For example, Bruner (1986)
describes our two kinds of thinking which he calls analytic and narrative. He tells
us that they represent the world to us in quite different ways. The former is well
suited to dealing with the everyday world and is responsible for, among other things,
scientiﬁc reasoning: the other makes sense of the world for us by telling us stories
about it.
We have just seen the power of our analytic thinking applied to HCI – it has
resulted in lots of detail but surprisingly little coherence, so what does the narrative
aspect have to say about it? As our narrative thinking is about telling plausible
stories, which story do we tell here? It is proposed that a narrative centred on make-
believe may unify these different pieces.
It is not our intention to adopt Bruner’s perspective wholesale but to recognise
that it may be that our narrative thinking which is responsible for ability to make-
believe (or, as it is suggested in the introduction to this volume, be a manifestation
of motor cognition).
Make-believe is, for example, the means by which the characters and scenes of
a scenario or persona are brought to life. Our analytic minds may have identiﬁed
the necessary characters, their attributes and the settings for a successful scenario
as part of a design episode, but it is our ability to make-believe which gives
the scenario meaning, life and usefulness. Similarly, the Wizard of Oz technique
www.allitebooks.com

2
A Make-Believe Narrative for HCI
13
(Green and Wei-Haas 1985) which is used to evaluate the behaviour of low-ﬁdelity
prototypes goes a little further as it explicitly instructs us to pretend. The participants
in a Wizard of Oz session make-believe that the prototype they are using is just like
the “real thing” and they are instructed to “ignore the man behind the curtain” who
is actually providing the computation, that is, simulating the opening and closing of
“windows” and responding to the pressing of “buttons”.
Numerous authors have told us (and still do) that we invoke a mental model to
guide our use of interactive devices (e.g. Norman 1988). The mental model is used
to reason about the steps we should take but we often “animate” these models, that
is, we have the impression of rehearsing or practicing what we would expect to do
and the steps we expect to take when using the technology. This is make-believe at
work.
We also explicitly embraced pretence when we agreed that the graphical user
interface is called the desktop. It is not a desktop, it does not particularly look like
a desktop, it does not involve an analogy or metaphor of a desktop – instead we
pretend it is. We behave towards it as if it were. This “behaving as if it were” is a
deﬁning characteristic of pretending.
Then, of course, if we regard interactive movies, video games, and virtual
environments as existing along a loosely deﬁned continuum of digital media, it
becomes plausible that we are making-believe when we successfully engage with
them. For example, it is difﬁcult to conceive that we actually believe that playing a
video game involves doing harm to others and that we must somehow suspend these
beliefs while playing them. It is much more plausible that we are simply making-
believe. Similarly, very few of us believe that the Force in the Star Wars™movie
series is real but we are all happy to make-believe that it can be used by the Jedi to
restore peace to a troubled galaxy – eventually.
So, not only is it likely that our ability to make-believe bring to life our designs,
visualisations, prototypes and scenarios but it also provides the means by which we
engage with digital content (in movies, games and virtual environments). If make-
believe does indeed have this pivotal, though silent and unrecognised, role in HCI,
then it can also be seen as offering a connecting narrative which can bring together
these very different aspects of HCI. After all it is what playing video games, the
Wizard of Oz technique, the use of scenarios and personae, the use of “metaphor”
in the design of graphical user interfaces, video games, virtual environments have
in common. Having sketched the central argument of this chapter, we continue with
a description of make-believe itself in this context.
2.2
Make-Believe
There is little shortage of terms describing our ability to create and embrace
things which do not exist. We regularly day-dream, engage in reverie, imagine and
fantasise to pass the time or to work out our frustrations. At night we are even more
engaged elsewhere, babies spend most of their time in REM (or dreaming) sleep

14
P. Turner
and even adults enter it approximately ﬁve times every night. These many different
forms of “escape” may be related in that they share common brain structures, or
are forms of neural or cognitive “garbage collection” or they may simply be the
epiphenomena of our febrile minds or we might just ﬁnd the world too much.
While this is still a matter of debate, we can be fairly sure that when children
pretend, besides having fun, they are probably doing so for a purpose – to rehearse
the necessary skills to manage social interaction (e.g. Jent et al. 2011); or to deal
with their emotions (e.g. Seja and Russ 1999) or facilitate some aspects of their
cognitive development (e.g. Lillard et al. 2012). Pretending has been researched
and written about (primarily as pretend play) extensively but make-believe has not
generally been treated as a psychological phenomenon demanding of this kind of
attention as witnessed by the distinct absence of a research corpus. (Imagination, a
term we have been careful to avoid, has also had a good measure of attention (e.g.
Harris 2000; Byrne 2005).) We will argue that make-believe is at work within HCI
and provides a rich domain of study for make-believe.
We argue that make-believe is not simply an expression of our cognition as it
involves the exploration of possible worlds afforded by the use of a prop such as a
hobby-horse, a “light sabre”, or more seriously, a mathematical model or a what-if
scenario. These artefacts do not merely shape the form the make-believe takes but
both enable it and constrain it. A light sabre enables children (and far too many
adults) to engage in Star Wars™themed episodes of make-believe but explicitly
not a Star Trek™themed one. This is despite the fact that they are both examples
of space-travelling fantasy involving exotic aliens and an array of energy-based
weapons. The same is true of a make-believing with a mathematical model. Suitably
armed a mathematician might be able to describe a new kind of space involving one-
dimensional strings but to a very limited audience only.
Walton’s (1990) make-believe theory it is not a psychological account, instead, it
addresses the problem of representation in the arts. A key concept in his account
is the concept of the prop (Walton 1993). Props can be found in instances of
art such as paintings, sculpture, novels and so forth as well as in children’s toys
including dolls, teddy bears, and magic swords. These props provide the “seeds”
from which an episode of make-believe can be spun. Despite these worlds not being
the case, their make up and behaviour is governed by rules. Indeed, Walton also
tells us that games, cinema, and a variety of other media are subject to their own
“principles of generation” which are also “reality-oriented”. This reality principle
is, unsurprisingly, based on the similarity between make-believe and the real world.
This principle ensures that make-believe worlds are comprehensive and ultimately
believable (see Turner et al. 2015, for an extended discussion of this). However to
facilitate the fantastic and make it believable, Walton also proposes the “mutual
belief principle” which is based on a tacit agreement between the make-believer
of these worlds and those who experience them. So, for example, travelling at
faster than the speed of light is impossible in the real world, but we can agree to
it for the sake of a story, a mathematical make-believe or to explore a possible
world in physics. These principles, we argue, can be seen perhaps most directly
in the spoken and unspoken contracts among participants in pretend play. Children

2
A Make-Believe Narrative for HCI
15
regularly agree to object substitution, for example, water becomes coffee, and mud
becomes chocolate, or a banana become a telephone. As we have already noted,
this is not conﬁned to the arts or children at play, as Toon (2010) has shown in
explicitly adopting Walton’s account to consider how theoretical models are used in
scientiﬁc reasoning. He argues that these models are props in games of make-believe
in a manner which “prescribe speciﬁc imaginings” that is, they afford and constrain
particular kinds of reasoning analogous to the ways in which, say, Ninja Turtles
(often rigidly) prescribe the pretend play of children. Further examples of make-
believe in scientiﬁc reasoning include Einstein’s famous thought experiment which
involved him chasing a beam of light which ultimately contributed to the theory of
special relativity and Kekulé’s daydream about an ouroboros which offered him a
clue as to the structure of benzene.
We would like to say the use of make-believe in HCI is quite distinct from playing
with mud pies or the stuff of fairy-tales. But it is not. A fairy-tale is ﬁlled with scenes
we have invented, and populated with characters who may or may not exist and who
engage in a variety of ordinary and extraordinary things in a fairly ordered, rule-
governed manner. We must stress that we are not drawing a fanciful parallel between
telling fairy-stories (or equivalent) and the creation of, say, the next generation of
smart phones instead we argue that making-believe is that form or mode of cognition
common to both which enables us to create, reason about and experience things
which are not the case. Thus, our interest here is not in trolls and wicked witches
as such but in our ability to create and reason about things which do not yet (or
might never) exist and to act as though they did. To this end, we recognise that
make-believe has two components, the ﬁrst is primarily behavioural and affective
(i.e. pretending or acting as if or feeling as though) and the other is essentially what
Clark (2008) would call extended cognition, that is, thinking with things – whether
it is a Feynman diagram, a magic sword, or a work of art.
2.3
A Role for Make-Believe in HCI
As we noted earlier, in addition to the very many theoretical facets of current HCI,
there are a number of different though fairly consistent and well-deﬁned faces,
namely:
1. HCI as practice. Here we include the range of tools and techniques which enable
us to envisage and evaluate digital technology. The key tools are variations on
scenarios, personae, and prototypes.
2. HCI as theory. We shall argue that the use of on-screen metaphor, such as the
desktop, might be better thought of as “a ﬁction”. We suggest that make-believe
may have an important role in how we ﬁrst engage with unfamiliar technology.
3. HCI as (user) experience. We will show that make-believe brings to life
technology and the digital worlds it creates. The digital worlds found in games or
as a product of virtual reality are transformed from moving pictures to engaging

16
P. Turner
vistas by virtue of our ability to make-believe. For example, we do not point the
cross-hairs of our plasma riﬂes at animated patches of pixels but at aliens trying
to kill our comrades in the space corps.
Our aim in this section is to examine examples of published work in both of these
areas and offer alternate make-believe interpretations.
HCI as Practice
Design, like pretend play, is often characterised as alternating patterns of convergent
and divergent thinking (e.g. Lawson 2005; Moggridge 2007). Coyne (2003), for
example, observes that designers see the design process as a “series of successive
rehearsals and revisions” and that design involves “a to-and-fro dialogical game”.
The former is solution focussed, while the latter is an example of “what-if” thinking.
Kinsley (2012, p. 1557) tells us that all design relies upon make-believe in the
process of reifying that which is not (yet), by drawing upon “anticipatory techniques
[which] are a means of establishing the presence of what has not happened and may
never happen : : : ” and “stage the possible through some form of acting, gaming
or pretending” (p. 1559, ibid.) From the early days of interactive systems design,
designers have drawn upon a relatively unchanging collection of such envisionment
tools in the exploration, communication and evaluation of systems, applications and
user interfaces.
Scenarios and Personae
Scenarios were deﬁnitively documented as a design method in Carroll’s Scenario
Based Design (1995). They work by capturing potential use by way of stories.
Scenarios have a beginning – user goals or intentions – a middle – interaction
with the application features – and an end – realisation of the goal. In their richest
form, their protagonists have roles (shift supervisor, shopper, parent : : : ) display
a modicum of characterisation (apprehensive, in a hurry, short-sighted : : : ) and
a backdrop of physical or organisational context may be evident (in an airport
departure lounge, as part of a new work recording system). And, of course, much of
this is typically make-believe.
For requirements engineers, scenarios are primarily a means of expressing and
verifying user needs, while for designers they have a multiplicity of purposes from
working through the practicalities of features and functionality in realistic use, to
communication with colleague and client, and as the basis upon which to structure
design evaluation with users. Each of these purposes demands different degrees of
detail but all are grounded in knowledge, or at least assumptions, about the real
world in which a design will be used.
In their evaluation guise – acknowledging that design and evaluation are iterative
and intertwined – scenarios typically script episodes in which users “interact”

2
A Make-Believe Narrative for HCI
17
with prototype representations of the application in question. However there are
interesting variants here from the perspective of our argument. Howard et al. (2002)
and Svanæs and Seland (2004) are among a number of sources which describe
scenarios which are fully “acted out” by third-party actors or role-playing users,
as resources for collaborative design. In the former example designers suggest
innovations which are the means of “moving the design discourse between the poles
of ‘science ﬁction’ (where all user problems are solved by a magical omnipotent
device) and ‘plausible ﬁction’ (where the device imagined may not be ideal, but is
both tractable and innovative).” (Howard et al. 2002). As both these contributions
note, embodied scenario enactment was not a new development but dates back at
least to the ﬁrst participatory design initiatives (for example, among many others,
Ehn and Kyng 1991). However, the rise of interactive technologies as consumer
products and signiﬁers of personal identity in the last years of the twentieth century
demanded a variation of the standard scenario to create a new representation
technique which better reﬂected the nuances of user personalities and lifestyles,
namely, personae. Popularised in Pruitt and Adlin (2006), although their genesis
lies in the work, among others, of Cooper (1999), personae encapsulate individuals
typical of one or more broad types who may use the technology in question. While
the actors in scenarios may have absent or at best sketchy personalities, personae
have names, ages, socio-economic proﬁles, likes, dislikes, values and aspirations,
frequently complemented by an picture of the imaginary individual. This is not
unlike a “proﬁle” in a social media site although it is worth remembering that the
person being described is typically make-believe. As in the case of scenarios, the
most valuable personae rely on data about potential users in the real world. Their
breadth and depth of detail serves not just to reﬁne requirements on design, but, to
allows designers “to put themselves in other people’s shoes”. To pretend to be that
persona and to make-believe episodes of their “lives”.
This is true, for example, every time we create personae “who”, in the main, are
not real people but may draw upon people we know or on information our focus
groups have revealed, they are made-believe. Blyth and Wright (2006) have written
of pastiche personae which draw upon ﬁction – including the Miss Marple stories,
A Clockwork Orange and Nineteen Eighty-Four. They argue that these works of
ﬁction add a believable “felt-life” aspect to their personae.
Prototypes
If scenarios and personae concern what is being played out, for what purpose,
and by whom, prototypes demonstrate how this might achieved through interactive
technology. In short, although many different typologies have been proposed, the
primary dimensions concern the degree of interactivity afforded, the ﬁdelity to
the ﬁnal intended implementation, the prototyping medium and the purpose of the
prototype. This being said, while simple sketches and video prototypes primarily
afford a means of expressing and communicating design concepts, most forms
of prototype make-believe interaction to some degree. “Wizard of Oz” prototypes

18
P. Turner
perhaps entail the strongest make-believe effects, relying upon “the man behind the
curtain” to make systems “work”. Of most interest for the current discussion are the
variants of low-ﬁdelity prototyping, whether mediated through paper or specialist
prototyping software and the design team. A mock-up of the application interface
screens and the more signiﬁcant widgets is prepared, often literally on paper (Snyder
2003 offers a comprehensive account). Typically, users are briefed about the process
to be followed and their role in it, the properties of the prototype and its limitations,
and the scenario to be explored in the prototyping session, The session then unfolds,
users attempting the speciﬁed as-if “tasks” (which may simply be exploratory) by
moving, touching or simply pointing at interface objects while a member of the
design team manipulates the prototype in response (if paper) or by clicking on
interactive areas of the screen if software-mediated. Users are generally asked to
comment concurrently or after the session on their perceptions of the interaction
and “functionality” afforded, any difﬁculties encountered and ﬁt with the real world
equivalent of the situation being simulated. In sum, this is an active, collaborative,
participative process being carried out “as if” the application would be used in
everyday life, or “as though it were for real” as a well-regarded textbook has it
(Rogers et al. 2011). The Wizard of Oz is an excellent example of explicit role-
playing, which very closely resembles the structure and dynamics of a children’s
tea-party. Each participant holds a role which they act out. We see the substitution of
objects in both: toy cups and water for coffee, paper prototypes for digital systems.
Children pretend to drink coffee: we pretend to withdraw cash from an ATM. While
children may be learning about social interaction, turn-taking and simply having
fun, our more sober pretending can reveal problems with the sequencing of the
transaction at the ATM. And, of course, we do not leave this use of Wizard of Oz
at the purely behavioural as our next steps are to reason about what went well and
what revealed problems in the design of the system. We typically apply ourselves to
thinking with the prototype to determine whether we would trust/enjoy/ﬁnd usable
the design of such a system. And when we are done, we walk away, no tea has been
split, no money withdrawn, and no software written.
It should be note that this “as if” quality is often unnoticed and usually
unvoiced: the international standard ISO 9241-2010 for the human centred design
of interactive systems advises that “When prototypes are being tested, the users
should carry out tasks using the prototype rather than just be shown demonstrations
or a preview of the design” (BSI (2010) clause 6.5.4, our italics.) They are not,
of course, carrying out the tasks, but pretending to do so. They are acting out the
purchase of tickets or watching a movie or searching for a ﬂight to Rio. But no
tickets are booked, no movie is watched and no ﬂight schedule is searched.
HCI as Theory
As we have already discussed, HCI has an abundance of theories, fragments of
theory and multiple theoretical perspectives. This section will brieﬂy consider
three different theoretical perspectives: the role of make-believe in the operation of

2
A Make-Believe Narrative for HCI
19
mental models; make-believe rather than metaphor and the make-believe in initial
engagement with digital technology. Again, we do not offer fresh empirical evidence
but we do suggest alternative interpretations.
Mental Models
A mental model, as a description of how we use and think about interactive
technology, was adopted in the 1980s within HCI with the publication of Norman’s
Psychology of Everyday Things (1988). The original idea, however, lies with Craik’s
The nature of explanation (1943) in which he describes them as a “small-scale
model” of external reality in our head with which we are “able to try out various
alternatives, conclude which is the best of them : : : ” (p. 61). This concept was
adopted by Johnson-Laird in his Mental Models (1983) in the service of deductive
reasoning and by Gentner and Gentner (1983) to account for our use of interactive
technology. The idea was readily adopted by other researchers and mental models
became a popular means to account for how people reasoned about and used a
wide range of interactive systems and devices. Speciﬁcally, a mental model is a
(supposed) cognitive structure which enables people to make predictions about how
things will work and guides their use of them.
From the perspective of HCI, it is assumed that we acquire a mental model of a
given technology by exposure to it. This might take the form of formal instruction,
observation, reading the manual, or by trial and error. So, having internalised the
operation of the technology, what then? It is supposed that we then “run” it, that
is, we are able to step through the operation of the model. There is no consensus
as how this might actually be achieved though Thagard (2010) has proposed that
mental models may be the result of patterns of activation in populations of neurons.
Perhaps they do support our reasoning but phenomenologically, we often appear
to animate the models in our “mind’s eye”. We might envision the steps we might
take at the ATM or how we might save a ﬁle to “the Cloud” or change our printer
from the local machine to the full colour network printer. Clearly there is some
form of “everyday reasoning” or problem solving at work here but this is often
accompanied by an unacknowledged episode of mental rehearsal, or as we prefer to
phrase it, make-believe.
The Use of Metaphor
Less than 50 years ago, computers were unfamiliar, frightening and not something
with which that the average man or woman had much contact. With the invention
of the desktop metaphor in the 1970s, a means was established to provide a
comprehensible interface to computers for the non-specialist. The desktop metaphor
is now so well established that the current generation of users are probably more
familiar with it than they are with the ofﬁce desktops upon which it was based.
Smith (1985), in an early retrospective, wrote of the ﬁrst graphical user interface

20
P. Turner
embodying the desktop metaphor on the Xerox Star system: “Every user’s initial
view of Star is the Desktop, which resembles the top of an ofﬁce desk, together
with surrounding furniture and equipment. It represents a working environment,
which current projects and accessible resources reside. On the screen are displayed
pictures of familiar ofﬁce objects, such as document folders, ﬁle drawers, in-baskets
and out-baskets. These objects are displayed as small pictures or icons.” This use
of the desktop “metaphor” is a very good idea but makes for it makes a great story
not a metaphor.
A great deal has been written about the use of metaphor at the user interface to
interactive technology, which is not conﬁned to the desktop alone, much of which
has been critical. Indeed it is difﬁcult to see how the operation of the desktop
is metaphorical as it does not correspond to any of the existing theories of how
metaphor works. For example, Holyoak and Thagard (1989, 1995) tell us that a
metaphor relies on an underlying analogy which maps a “source” to a “target”. So,
for example, the metaphor “my job is a prison”, maps the source – a prison with
the attributes of a cell, fellow inmates, pointless repetitive work, counting off the
months to release, to the target – an ofﬁce, workmates, pointless repetitive work,
the prospect of retirement. There is a mapping but it is not perfect, for one thing
my employers allow me to go home every evening, but what are the corresponding
source and target of the desktop metaphor? A real world desktop and a graphical
representation of another desktop? More recently, Lakoff and Johnson (1999) have
proposed that metaphors are expressions of our bodily (sensorimotor) experiences.
Specially, they tell is that “spatial-relations are at the heart of our conceptual system”
(1999, p. 30) and that we learn about these relations through bodily interactions
with the world. In turn, knowledge of these relations help us to make sense of the
external world and are based on bodily projections such as “in front of us”, “behind
us”, “to our right” – and so on. Our experiences of the world are not, of course,
limited to spatial relationships but also afford direct experience of such concepts
as FULL-EMPTY and BIG-SMALL. There is a simpler explanation. This “desktop
metaphor” is not a metaphor and never has been. It works because we pretend, that
is, we act as though it were a desktop. An odd desktop admittedly but it is where we
put ﬁles and folders and the anomalous trashcan. Much the same is true of the other
metaphors that are scattered about the landscape of a graphical user interface, e.g.
scissors for cutting, a clipboard for pasting, a drawing pin for posting, a paperclip
for attaching. We treat these all as though there were what they appear to be – there
really is no need for a more complicated answer.
Engagement Precedes Interaction?
In recent years HCI has expanded its interest beyond usability to embrace all manner
of desirable experiences one might have when using interactive technology, and
engagement has emerged as an experience of recurring interest (e.g. Sutcliffe 2009).
Though deﬁnitions of engagement vary, it is assumed that it is a consequence of
sustained use of technology. This next anecdote suggests that this need not always
be the case.

2
A Make-Believe Narrative for HCI
21
Fig. 2.1 An unknown green
device
We conclude this section with a story (a version of this story originally appears
in Turner 2010). A number of years ago my wife and I were on holiday in
Western Sweden and sometime during the second week we decided to have lunch in
Göteborg and took the train there. On the return leg of our trip we encountered the
following items of technology attached to partitions near the doors of the commuter
train we were travelling on (Figs. 2.1 and 2.2).
Neither device was accompanied by instructions but both had the air of being in
use, the blue device (on the right) having an active LCD display reading Kortfråga.
I felt compelled to investigate.
I took Kort to mean ticket (card) and having travelled on the Copenhagen
metro system I was familiar with their Klipkort system which physically removes a
portions of the ticket. I stood up and closely examined each device in turn looking
for an opening or slot into which to slide my ticket and have it stamped, clipped
or punched. There was none. I pressed the buttons. I waved my tickets in front of
each wondering if the magnetic strip might activate something. Nothing happened.
I tried to match the number system of the green artefact to the map of the journal

22
P. Turner
Fig. 2.2 An unknown blue
device
posted above it – assuming that it operated a zoning system like most metro systems
but again nothing. At this point I noticed that no one else had tried to use either
device so I sat down. In due course the ticket inspector appeared and clipped our
tickets. I took the opportunity to ask her about the devices and she told me that
they were no longer used. Images of an Englishman waving his tickets at defunct
technology, perhaps, but I had spent a little time engaging with both devices without
successfully interacting with either. From this I conclude that it was quite possible
that engagement precedes interaction. I had been engaged throughout this episode
and this was predicated on making-believe potential use. I had constructed a number
of scenarios of possible use, and anyone confronting a left-luggage machine at a
railway station, ticket machines for an unfamiliar metro system, a self check-in
system at an airport, or out of hours car park has had the same experience. Make-
believe, the affordance and constraints offered by the technology are likely to guide
our behaviour in these situations.
www.allitebooks.com

2
A Make-Believe Narrative for HCI
23
HCI as Experience
This aspect of HCI has come to the fore most recently, for example, McCarthy and
Wright’s Technology as Experience (2004) demonstrated that there was a good deal
more to our encounters with technology than tasks, usability and mental models. In
their book they introduced the HCI community to the work of Dewey and his “four
threads of experience” which greatly expanded the consideration of the range of
human experience which might arise in response to technology. HCI now actively
designs for, and evaluates, the range of aesthetic and affective experiences which
technology affords. We have witnessed “a turn to the phenomenological” identiﬁed
ﬁrst by Dourish (2001). The decades of objective usability testing are now being
supplemented by a careful consideration of “felt experience”, and questions as such
“was it fun?” are now not only recognised as legitimate but are actively contributing
to our understanding of how technology is experienced.
In parallel with this has been an extraordinary growth in digital entertainments
such as games and, of course, the many different forms of virtual reality. While
these technologies have quite distinct histories, it is impossible to deny that their
boundaries are becoming blurred, allowing us locate all of them on a digital media
continuum.
And, of course, we would argue that all of these different experiences typically
involve acts of make-believe on our behalf.
Fun, aesthetics, the affective, and pleasure (for example): in short, those expe-
riences associated with “user experience”, we argue, rely on people making-
believe. Being presented with items of technology and then asked, “which is more
attractive?” or “which looks like the most fun to own?” requires people to make-
believe themselves into situations where they feel able to make such judgments. A
user’s experience has been found to be closely identiﬁed with such issues as self-
presentation and identity which also require the ability to make-believe oneself into
another situation or role. “Is this phone really me?” is the kind of question which
a potential purchaser will ask of themselves and to answer it will need to make-
believe themself at the ofﬁce, with their friends, out having fun. Hassenzahl (2004)
calls this aspect of user experience “hedonic quality (identiﬁcation)” and “self-
presentation”. He writes that, “identiﬁcation addresses the human need to express
one’s self through objects” and that, “self-presentational function of products is
entirely social; individuals want to be seen in speciﬁc ways by relevant others”
(p. 222). Space does not permit the development of these arguments in full but this
sense of projection is discussed in more detail by Susan Turner and her colleagues
in the next chapter.
The other part of this argument (with respect to digital media) has also been
developed elsewhere in some detail and the interested reader is directed to Turner
(2015a). However, in brief, the role of make-believe in experience is as follows : : :
when we engage with games, movies, virtual environments (and other digital media)
we decouple from everyday reality and embrace another. This embrace may result
in immersion, or a sense of presence or we might even ﬂow.Further, when we are

24
P. Turner
engaged with a digital medium we are, by deﬁnition, making-believe. All of the
hallmarks of make-believe are present. When we play a computer game we make-
believe that we are killing aliens or driving a high performance motorcar. Similarly,
being immersed in a virtual environment or an IMAX movie might lead us to believe
that we are on the surface of Mars or deep underwater. In each instance, we act as
though we were present or ﬁghting or driving despite never having been actually
transported beyond the bounds of the cinema, computer laboratory, or our bedroom:
we are making-believe.
This is probably at its most striking when we consider the experience of presence,
early deﬁnitions of which have included Slater et al.’s (1994) “the (suspension of
dis-)belief” of being located in a world other than the physical one”. The theme of
the suspension of disbelief crops up periodically and is one which we challenge and
would replace with active making-believe. To date there has been no suggestion of
evidence that people actively disbelieve when they queue to see the latest Hollywood
“blockbuster” and then suspend this disbelief during it, returning to their disbelief
afterwards. Besides being suspicious of a double negative (suspension of disbelief),
a simpler, more plausible explanation is that people “play along with” what they
watch as active make-believe. As an argument there is no reason to believe that
it does not apply to playing video-games or experiencing presence in a virtual
environment too.
2.4
In Conclusion
This chapter began by observing that HCI as a discipline had become very
fragmented, to the extent that it was becoming difﬁcult to see it as a uniﬁed
body of work. We suggested that what it needed was a story or narrative to help
us to understand the many disparate parts of HCI. We have proposed that this
story is based on make-believe. We have argued that make-believe is a form or
mode of cognition which operates in conjunction with props which in turn, shape,
direct and constrain the substance of the make-believe episode. These episodes
follow what Walton calls the “principles of generation”. They have their own logic,
structure and rules. Breaking these rules, as we have argued elsewhere, leaves us
open to straying from make-believe into something which is unbelievable. This is
particularly important as pretending/making-believe involves decoupling ourselves
from the veridical to other (close, adjacent but ultimately make-believe) realities.
Our argument is challenging but is it credible? Do HCI professionals really spend
their time making-believe? If we compare this with what Russ (2004) tells us about
pretending, namely, it “involves the exercise of alternating cycles of divergent and
convergent thinking, that is, the abilities to generate a variety of different ideas, story
themes, and so forth and to weave them together”, then we can only conclude that
they do.

2
A Make-Believe Narrative for HCI
25
References
Blyth MA, Wright PC (2006) Pastiche scenarios: ﬁction as a resource for user centred design.
Interact Comput 18(5):1139–1164
Bødker S (1987) Through the interface: a human activity approach to user interface design. CRC
Press, Boca Raton
Bruner J (1986) Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
BSI (2010) Ergonomics of human-system interaction, Part 210: human-centred design for interac-
tive systems (BS EN ISO 9241-210:2010). BSI, London
Byrne MJ (2005) The rational imagination. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Card SK et al (1989) The psychology of human computer interaction. Erlbaum Associates,
Hillsdale
Carroll JM (ed) (1995) Scenario-based design: envisioning work and technology in system
development. Wiley, New York
Clark A (2003) Natural born cyborgs. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Clark A (2008) Supersizing the mind. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Cooper AL (1999) The inmates are running the asylum: why high-tech products drive us crazy and
how to restore the sanity. Sams, Indianapolis
Coyne R (2003) Mindless repetition: learning from computer games. Des Stud 24(3):199–212
Craik K (1943) The nature of explanation. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Damasio A (1999) The feeling of what happens: body and emotion in the making of consciousness.
Harcourt Brace and Co., New York
Dourish P (2001) Where the action is. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Ehn P, Kyng M (1991) Cardboard computers – mocking-it-up or hands-on the future. In:
Greenbaum J, Kyng M (eds) Design at work: cooperative design of computer systems.
Lawrence Erlbaum, New York
Engeström Y (1987) Learning by expanding: an activity-theoretical approach to developmental
research. Orienta-Konsultit, Helsinki
Gentner D, Gentner DR (1983) Flowing water or teeming crowds: models of electricity. In: Gentner
D, Stevens A l (eds) Mental models. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale
Green P, Wei-Haas L (1985) The rapid development of user interfaces: experience with the wizard
of Oz method. Proceedings of the Human Factors Society-29th Annual Meeting, Santa Monica,
470–474
Harris P (2000) The work of the imagination. Blackwell, London
Hassenzahl M (2004) The interplay of beauty, goodness and usability in interactive products. Hum
Comput Interact 19:319–349
Holyoak KJ, Thagard P (1989) Analogical mapping by constraint satisfaction. Cogn Sci
13:295–335
Holyoak KJ, Thagard P (1995) Mental leaps. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Howard S, Carroll J, Murphy J, Peck J (2002) Using ‘Endowed Props’ in scenario-based design.
In: Proceedings NordiCHI 2002. Aarhus, Denmark
Hutchins E (1995) Cognition in the wild. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Jent JF, Niec LN, Baker SE (2011) Play and interpersonal processes. In: Russ SW, Niec LN (eds)
Play in clinical practice: evidence-based approaches. Guilford Press, New York
Johnson-Laird PN (1983) Mental models: towards a cognitive science of language, inference, and
consciousness. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Kinsley S (2012) Futures in the making: practices to anticipate ‘ubiquitous computing’. Environ
Plan A 44:1554–1569
Lakoff G, Johnson M (1999) Philosophy in the ﬂesh. Basic Books, New York
Lawson B (2005) How designers think: the design process demystiﬁed, 4th edn. Architectural
Press, Oxford

26
P. Turner
Lillard AS, Lerner MD, Hopkins EJ, Dore RA, Smith ED, Palmquist CM (2012) The impact of
pretend play on children’s development: a review of the evidence. Psychol Bull 139(1):1–34
Lindgaard G, Fernandes G, Dudek C, Brown J (2006) Attention web designers: you have 50
milliseconds to make a good ﬁrst impression! Behav Inform Technol 25(2):115–126
Long J, Dowell J (1989) Conceptions of the discipline of HCI: craft, applied science, and
engineering. In: Sutcliffe A, Macaulay L (eds) People and computers V: Proceedings of the
5th conference of the British Computer Society. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Moggridge W (2007) Designing interactions. MIT Press, MA
Norman DA (1988) The psychology of everyday design. Basic Books, New York
Norman DA (2004) Emotional design. Basic Books, New York
Pruitt J, Adlin T (2006) The persona lifecycle. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco
Rogers Y, Sharp H, Preece J (2011) Interaction design, 3rd edn. Wiley, Chichester
Russ SW (2004) Play in child development and psychotherapy. Earlbaum, Mahwah
Scaife M, Rogers Y (1996) External cognition: how do graphical representations work? Int J Hum
Comput Stud 45:185–213
Seja AL, Russ SW (1999) Children’s fantasy play and emotional understanding. J Clin Child
Psychol 28:269–277
Sheets-Johnstone M (2009) The Corporeal turn: an interdisciplinary reader. Imprint-Academic,
Exeter
Slater M, Usoh M, Steed A (1994) Depth of presence in virtual environments. Presence 3:130–144
Smith DC (1985) Origins of the desktop metaphor: a brief history. Panel Presentation. The desktop
metaphor as an approach to user interface design. In: Proceedings of ACM annual conference,
548
Snyder C (2003) Paper prototyping: the fast and easy way to design and reﬁne user interfaces.
Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco
Suchman LA (1987) Plans and situated actions: the problem of human-machine communication.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Sutcliffe A (2009) Designing for user engagement: aesthetic and attractive user interfaces. Morgan
Claypool, San Rafael
Svanaes D, Seland G (2004) Putting the users center stage: role playing and low-ﬁprototyping
enable end users to design mobile systems. In: Proc. CHI 2004. ACM Press, New York, pp
479–186
Thagard P (2010) How brains make models. In: Magnan L, Carnielli W, Pizzi C (eds) Model-based
reasoning in science and technology, vol 314, Studies in computational intelligence. Springer,
Berlin/Heidelberg, pp 447–461
Toon A (2010) Models as make-believe. In: Frigg R, Hunter M (eds) Beyond mimesis and
convention. Boston studies in the philosophy of science. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 71–96
Turner P (2010) The anatomy of engagement. Proc. ECCE 2010, 59–66
Turner P (2015a) Presence: is it just pretending? AI & Society, 2015, 1–10
Turner P (2015b) Affect, availability and presence. In: Lombard M, Biocca F, Freeman J,
IJsselsteijn W, Schaevitz RJ (eds) Immersed in media. Springer, New York
Turner P, Hetherington R, Turner S, Kosek M (2015) The limits of pretending. Digital Creativity
26(3–4):304–17
Walton KL (1990) Mimesis as make-believe: on the foundations of the representational arts.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA
Walton KL (1993) Metaphor and prop oriented make-believe. Eur J Philos 1(1):39–57

Chapter 3
Make-Believing Virtual Realities
Susan Turner, Chih-Wei Huang, Luke Burrows, and Phil Turner
3.1
Introduction
A current concern in human-computer interaction lies in understanding how we
experience virtual reality (VR). This chapter proposes that the VR experience relies
on make-believe. The necessary decoupling from the real world to the make-believe
world is costly in terms of the cognitive resources required but VR ofﬂoads some
of the computation cost into the virtual environment (VE) itself. This is particularly
true of high ﬁdelity, immersive virtual environments. However, our ability to make-
believe allows us to ‘ﬁll-in’ the gaps in quite simple VR environments, with
surprisingly effective results: we argue that this is because we have a propensity
to see the world, including ﬁctional and artiﬁcial worlds, as schematic.
We start by focusing our discussion by an introduction to that class of virtual
environments that aim to provide an experience of real, or at least realistic, places.
We then brieﬂy review the concept of ‘sense of presence’ in this context. This leads
to a consideration of how we decouple from real to technologically mediated worlds
and – the main contribution of this chapter – how make-believe, and in particular its
S. Turner ()
Make-Believe Lab, Edinburgh Napier University, Edinburgh, UK
e-mail: susturner@gmail.com
C.-W. Huang
ZyXEL Communications Corp., Hsinchu, Taiwan
e-mail: vicky.huang@zyxel.com.tw
L. Burrows
Edinburgh Napier University, Edinburgh, UK
e-mail: luke-burrow@hotmail.com
P. Turner
School of Computing, Edinburgh Napier University, Edinburgh, UK
e-mail: p.turner@napier.ac.uk
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
P. Turner, J.T. Harviainen (eds.), Digital Make-Believe,
Human–Computer Interaction Series, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-29553-4_3
27

28
S. Turner et al.
schematic nature, plays a part in the experience of ﬁctional worlds in general and
virtual environments in particular.
Moving from theory to practice, the supporting role of schemata is illustrated
by two case studies of the experience of simple, low ﬁdelity desktop virtual
environments that have nonetheless produced effective user experiences. The ﬁrst
of these relies on everyday schemata of travel abroad, the second on a schema
adopting the artiﬁcial perspective of what Urry (2002) has termed the ‘tourist gaze’.
We conclude by extending our discussion of the role of schemata in make-believe
to the contribution of episodic and autobiographical memory in what has been
characterized as ‘a capacity for self-projection’ (Rabin et al. 2010).
3.2
Virtual Reality, Presence and Place
Many virtual environments are created to re-present real, or at least realistic, places,
including, but not limited to: tourist destinations, museums, war zones, hospitals,
ships, construction sites, and classrooms (among many other examples, Alsina-
Jurnet and Gutièrrez-Maldonado 2010; Cohen et al. 2013; Goulding et al. 2012;
Guerra et al. 2015; Rizzo et al. 2014; Sylaiou et al. 2010; Turner and Turner 2002),
as contrasted to, say, fantastic landscapes or cities of the imagination. The purposes
underlying the mediated experience of these virtual places broadly fall into the ﬁelds
of education, training, tourism and psychotherapy.
Applications of Realistic Virtual Environments:
Two More Speciﬁc Examples
By way of illustration of the variety of individual applications, we delve further
into just the last two of this list. Guttentag (2010) identiﬁes six types of touristic
use: planning and management of tourist locations; marketing of destinations;
education, including many applications which seek to recreate historical sites;
enhancing the accessibility of locations; heritage preservation, and, of less interest
to our theme, entertainment whilst visitors are actually in the destination. In a very
different domain, the recent review in Spagnolli et al. (2014) of psychotherapeutic
applications identiﬁes the role of VR in the treatment of anxiety, addiction, eating
disorders, various phobias, and stress. Among the most striking of these therapeutic
environments are those for the treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder among
military personnel returned from the battlefront. Rizzo and his colleagues (2014) for
example, describe Bravemind, a system for prolonged exposure therapy. The system
has customisable views of combat arenas in Iraq and Afghanistan and provides
“Humvees, MRAP (mine- resistant ambush-protected) vehicles, or helicopters;
vehicle-to-foot patrol transitioning; expanded weather and time-of-day controls;

3
Make-Believing Virtual Realities
29
customizable sound trigger proﬁles”, complemented by directional 3D audio, vibra-
tions and smells as appropriate. The authors also note that “higher-ﬁdelity graphic
art and animation have enhanced the stimulus content’s realism and credibility”.
This may be a notably rich example of a virtual environment, but by far the larger
proportion of other systems of the type identiﬁed in this short review employ high
resolution visual effects of this nature, coupled with high ﬁdelity audio, if not
vibrations and, thankfully, smells. Coupled with this comprehensive content is a
reliance on heavy weight technological platforms, at the least head-mounted dis-
plays (HMDs) and in many instances cave automatic virtual environments (CAVEs)
which surround their users and allow movement around a room-sized space.
It will be evident, therefore, that the scope of applications for virtual represen-
tations of the real world is manifold and ranges from the trivial, commercial and
meretricious to applications critical to human well-being. But whether explicitly or
implicitly, the success of all such applications is predicated on evoking a sense of
being in the environment in question, in other words a ‘sense of presence’.
Being There: Presence
‘Presence’ has been a central issue in the VR research community from the emergent
years of virtual environments and tele-operation technologies. Landmarks in the
development of the concept may be found, among very many others, and in
chronological order, in Heeter (1992), Steuer (1992), Slater and Wilbur (1997),
Lombard and Ditton (1997), Witmer and Singer (1998), Biocca et al. (2003),
Slater (2009), Riva et al. (2011), and Turner (2015). As Riva and his colleagues
have observed recently, presence – often ‘telepresence’ in earlier work – was ﬁrst
conceived as the sense of being in a remote environment experienced by the operator
of remotely controlled tools (Riva and Mantovani 2014). This conceptualisation
of presence is indeed evident in the full title of the principal journal in the area,
Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments.
However, the original scope of the concept has long since been extended by
presence researchers to apply to the experience of technologically mediated envi-
ronments in the very broadest sense, from books through movies and television to
full-spectrum virtual environments and to include social presence, the sense of being
with others. The widely-used ITC-SOPI questionnaire instrument, for instance, was
explicitly designed to span a wide span of media forms (Lessiter et al. 2001). In this
chapter we follow Riva and Mantovani who distinguish this sense (which they term
media presence) from the concept of presence as the general, foundational means of
an individual’s making sense of their place in the world (Riva et al. 2011) and extend
the argument in Turner (2015) that presence necessarily entails make-believe.
Presence plays a dual role in empirical work with virtual environments and their
implementation, treated both as a marker for the success of the user experience
and, explicitly or implicitly, as a pre-requisite for the efﬁcacy of any underlying

30
S. Turner et al.
therapeutic, educational, ludic, social or other purpose. As we have seen, many
virtual applications mediate an experience of real, or realistic places, and here sense
of presence becomes localised: one is not only present somewhere else, but present
somewhere in particular. It is interesting to note, however, that while the concept
is deeply entrenched in the broad ﬁeld of the design, implementation, application,
evaluation and theorisation of virtual environments, and has now attracted attention
in the study of the performing arts (e.g. Poissant 2015) it has less currency in some
apparently closely related ﬁelds, among them games research.
Contributory factors that support a sense of presence are generally held, after
several decades of research endeavour, to comprise all or most of: realism, natu-
ralness, a sense of being ‘in’ the physical space portrayed (a.k.a. spatial presence),
of being ‘with’ other beings (social presence), engagement and immersion. These
two last factors are of particular interest from the perspective of make-believe. Many
researchers consider immersion and engagement to be positively associated with the
degree of technologically-mediated sensory richness and interactivity facilitating
isolation or decoupling from the real world. Slater and Wilbur (1997) add the
factor of plot, deﬁned as “the extent to which the VE in a particular context
presents a story-line that is self-contained, has its own dynamic, and presents an
alternate unfolding sequence of events : : : ”. However, just as evidence is mixed
for the effects of ever-closer ﬁdelity to the real sensory world, so it is for the
completeness of the plot. The project manager for the full-spectrum, high-ﬁdelity
therapeutic Bravemind application discussed above, for example, emphasises that
the virtual environment should be “real, but not too real. If the scenarios are too
detailed, patients can’t ﬁll in the blanks with the parts of their experience they need
assistance with.” (Ungerleider 2014). In other words, there needs to be space for
make-believe. We now move to a consideration of the relationship between make-
believe and the experience virtual reality. In so doing, we observe that this moves the
debate about the nature of presence from a focus on external factors – technology
and story – to a focus on the experiencing individual’s role in constructing other
realities.
3.3
Decoupling, Make-believe and Schemata
in Virtual Reality
To engage with virtual reality is to engage with, or be present in, a ﬁction:
someone strolling through virtual Edinburgh, Hong Kong or New York is not
necessarily located in that particular city. VR is thus one mode of instantiation of
a ﬁctional world, where engagement and immersion rely on the power of narrative
supplemented by make-believe, just as in video games, movies or indeed, the simple
black and white symbols on a printed page that comprise a book.

3
Make-Believing Virtual Realities
31
Decoupling from One World, Engaging with Another
A feature of the VR experience, but one which is rarely recognised, is that it involves
de-coupling from the real world in order to engage with the ﬁctional one. We simply
cannot be present and engaged in the real world while being present and engaged in
a virtual world simultaneously. Our attention or awareness, by deﬁnition, must be
focussed in one or the other. Thus while we are engaged by media (of whatever kind)
our experience of the real world is attenuated. Of course, decoupling from the real
world is something we have all experienced. Occasionally we read a book which is
so exciting and so compelling that we become immersed in it. While time passes
without us noticing, we are not so decoupled from the everyday that we would miss
a ﬁre alarm or a cramped and complaining limb.
However, to decouple from the everyday and to maintain this separation
requires signiﬁcant cognitive (and potentially, affective) resources (Stanovich 1999;
Stanovich et al. 2010). And here is the great power of VR as it can assume some of
this burden. For example, in reading War and Peace we have to maintain and track
a substantial cast of characters, locations, battles and so forth. This is cognitively
demanding but a movie of War and Peace (an interactive VR version is yet to
be created, as far as we are aware) would alleviate some of that effort by having
principal characters reproduced on the screen, shifting the cognitive load from
memory to perception and from recall to recognition. We recognise Napoleon,
and we recognise a retreat when we see one. It is clear that such cognitive off-
loading is supported by the realism and near full-spectrum sensory inputs afforded
by high-ﬁdelity immersive environments, but it is less immediately obvious how
less technologically sophisticated environments succeed in holding us in thrall and
isolated – decoupled – from the real world around us.
While there is little extant discussion of decoupling in the context of presence and
VR, the phenomenon of being decoupled from the world has been long explored in
relation to make-believe in the theorisation of ﬁction and narrative. Thus for Walton
(1990) a ﬁctional text is a “prop in a game of make-believe” while Ryan (2008)
considers that interactive digital ﬁctions are founded on an “act of make believe
whose prototype can be found in children’s role playing games”. Make-believe not
only transports the ‘reader’ to the ﬁctional world, but serves to ﬁll in the plot, the
“gaps in the text” (Gerrig 1993), since even the most comprehensive of ﬁctional
narratives is inherently underspeciﬁed.
The Schematic Nature of Make-Believe
We hold make-believe to be strongly schematic in operation. Schemata are cognitive
structures that hold representations of objects and the relations among them,
whether simple or complex, individual or social, the contemporary concept of

32
S. Turner et al.
a schema originating in the pioneering work of Bartlett (1932) on memory and
stories. Bartlett proposes that memory is a dynamic, situated, reconstructive process,
memories being both stored in, and shaped by, culturally determined schema.
Similarly, Piaget holds that a schema is “a cohesive, repeatable action sequence
possessing component actions that are tightly interconnected and governed by a core
meaning” (Piaget 1952, p. 7). In short, schema are held to organise our knowledge
of the world and scaffold encounters with new situations and information. They
are not, of course, static but evolve in the light of experience to assimilate and
accommodate new knowledge – although the process is not universal nor always
immediate.
While remaining a constant element in the development of the psychology of
memory, as we discuss towards the end of this chapter, schema theory became
more practically applied in the 1970s and 1980s by researchers working in the
then emerging ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence, as a means of representing human
information processing in a form which could be manipulated by machines. Here
the most prominent work is that of Minsky (1975) on frames: ﬁxed relational
knowledge structures that have a number of slots which can be ﬁlled from a limited
set of values. So a car frame has slots for wheels, paintwork, engine size and so
forth, which might be ﬁlled by, for example, alloy, 1.4 l, pearlescent black; while
the slots for a historic English city might include castle, cathedral, main square
and market place. Importantly for our argument, slots that are un-instantiated in a
current context are ﬁlled by default values. Finally, the dynamics of everyday life
are captured through scripts, or schemata for action (Schank and Abelson 1977).
Thus Schank and Abelson’s most familiar example, the restaurant script, prescribes
how to behave in a variety of restaurants by simply changing the contents of the
“slots” from, say, Chinese to Italian. (Note that while schemata, scripts, frames and
so forth have provided useful tools for describing and reasoning about the cognitive
representation of knowledge, including in this chapter, how far they actually exist
as cognitive structures remains contested.)
The basis for attributing a major role for schemata in make-believe, as we
have discussed elsewhere at greater length (Turner et al. 2015) draws on the
literature in child development (almost all psychological studies of make-believe
and pretending concern childhood behaviours and cognition) the philosophy of the
arts and narrative theory among other domains. Thus, Nichols and Stitch (2005,
p. 34) argue that schematic “clusters or packets of representations whose contents
constitute “scripts” or paradigms detailing the way in which certain situations
typically unfold” govern episodes of childhood pretend play, while Walton (1990)
and Gatzia and Sotnak (2014), among others, suggest that readers rely on back-
ground assumptions or propositions to populate the landscape of ﬁctional narrative.
Wolf (2014)) contributes a further elaboration, proposing that the act of make-
believe that constitutes the ﬁctional world is underpinned by schemata embodying
both real-world knowledge and familiar fantastic genres. Alber (2013) makes a
similar argument, but adds that real-world and fantastic genres are frequently
blended, and that the unnatural in ﬁction may also be attributed by the reader in a
schematic manner to dreams, fantasies or hallucinations. Rather interestingly for any

3
Make-Believing Virtual Realities
33
consideration of VR environments which seek to inﬂuence perceptions or behaviour,
Alber argues that such cognitive strategies in processing of ﬁctional narrative in turn
permit a fresh view of the real world.
Schemata, Presence and VR
Just as in other ﬁctional worlds, we propose that schemata underpin the make-
believe spaces and places of virtual reality and that this may explain the relative
success of comparatively simple VR environments. (We distinguish this aspect of
research into schemata and presence from the exploration of body schema – the
unconscious, adaptive model of the performance and morphology of the body –
in virtual environments and tele-operation. Stevenson Won et al. (2014) provide
a recent review of this area.) Our argument here builds on a number of earlier
proposals which may be summarised thus: schemata play a role in the enjoyment
of hypertext and interactive narrative; the sense of presence may be inhibited by
the lack of relevant schemata, and primed by content-relevant schemata; and during
the experience an interplay exists between cognitive phenomena such as schemata
and stimuli from the VR environment (Douglas and Hargadon 2000; Heeter 2003;
Nunez and Blake 2003; Ladeira et al. 2005; Pinchbeck and Stevens 2005; Turner
et al. 2005b; Jones 2007 respectively). A further group of studies explore lower
level psychological processes, broadly concluding that the degree of real-world
schema consistency inﬂuences memory for, and recognition of, objects in VEs (e.g.
Mourkoussis et al. 2010; Mania et al. 2010). Finally Chertoff et al. (2008, 2010)
suggest a role for schemata in enhancing “experiential design” for presence but do
not develop this work further beyond a survey instrument designed to capture the
effects of cognitive inputs from schemata and other structures.
Our argument expands the theoretical context of existing work by placing
schemata in the broader context of make-believe on the part of users. As Nunez
and Blake (2003) state that “presence does not simply occur as a consequence of
sensory input only, but that it is a constructive process in which the VE user creates
an experience using both sensory and psychological inputs.” We suggest that this
constructive, creative process is make-believe.
We conclude this introductory section with an instance of the very powerful prim-
ing effect of schemata in sustaining make-believe when interacting with a virtual
environment. This particular VE employed (then) state-of-the-art techniques to pro-
duce 360ı photo-realistic visual representations of places which were supplemented
by an appropriate soundﬁeld and augmented by computer-generated objects. The
aim was to convey not only an impression of the physical space, but also a sense of
the place itself (Turner and Turner 2006). In the later stages of the project, user trials
evaluated how far this had been achieved. One such trial presented a re-creation of
a distinctive stairway and landing in a historic university building, augmented by
a computer-generated desk. Participants donned a head-mounted display and sat
at a real desk placed to correspond with the position of the computer-generated

34
S. Turner et al.
desk in the re-creation, the environment maintaining veridicality as participants
stood up or looked around. No other people, real or simulated, were present in the
artiﬁcial environment. We also introduced a contextualizing schema. Before the VE
experience, participants were asked to imagine – or make-believe – that they were a
security guard and to report any incidents to control room staff (played by the project
team). The sound of breaking glass was introduced part way through the 10 min VE
session to enhance the scenario, but otherwise the audio environment was designed
to be silent. However, it emerged after the trial sessions that several participants
were able to hear unintended, extraneous sounds of conversation and people moving
around in the (real) trial location. These were duly reported as suspicious events and
one participant even mentioned a ‘shadowy ﬁgure’: the make-believe world had
evoked the sight of an intruder where none existed in the depopulated virtual scene.
The VR application just described was a relatively rich environment. However,
the operation of schema-based make-believe becomes even more compelling where
the environments themselves are much more impoverished. We now turn to two
more extensive case studies, ﬁrstly where a low ﬁdelity VR experience of arriving
in a new city is underpinned by everyday schemata of travel and city life; secondly
where the concept of the schematic ‘tourist gaze’ is used to engage participants in
a deliberately heightened VR cityscape. As we shall see, both these rather different
types of constrained, mediated experience require participants to make belief and
both engender a sense of being present in the places represented.
3.4
Application 1: A Taste of Edinburgh
The scenario below portrays the initial experience of an international student in a
new country. More speciﬁcally, it encapsulates the challenges in coping with an
unfamiliar geographical location, relating to its culture and praxis and interacting
with its inhabitants.
Shu-hui is a 27 year old Taiwanese student undertaking a masters degree in Edinburgh. It is
her ﬁrst time in the UK. Before departure, she was unconcerned about adjusting to her new
life, because she was an experienced traveller. She had, however learned that the weather
is the most frequently discussed subject in everyday British conversation!
However, none of this prepared her for the penetrating cold and damp on her arrival, nor
for her ﬁrst challenge while buying something to eat. British coins are hard to distinguish
for newcomers, and she felt embarrassed because it took too much time to ﬁnd the right
coins and she did not know how to respond politely to the cashier. (It is expected in Taiwan
to show friendliness and politeness to others, especially to strangers and acquaintances.)
Later, Shu-hui tried to locate her student accommodation. This was difﬁcult since she found
the addresses in Edinburgh differed from the format in Taiwan. Eventually, arriving at the
main building and expecting a reception desk, she rang the bell, only to be told that the
place was not a hotel and she was not allowed to move in yet. She wondered if she had
misunderstood something but at least she learned where the building was. Finally, she then
took the bus towards the university campus but got on it from the wrong direction, because
she did not realise that in the UK vehicles drive on the left.

3
Make-Believing Virtual Realities
35
The interactive application A Taste of Edinburgh was designed and developed by
the second author with the intention of better preparing students for the transition
encapsulated in this scenario.
Design and Implementation
To support this, the application aimed to evoke a feeling of being in the city, and to
afford a limited degree of simulated social interaction – a sense of both the spatial (or
tele-) and social aspects of presence – for those ‘arriving’ for the ﬁrst time. We were
interested to see how far this could be achieved with an intentionally constrained
environment, constructed and experienced through simple technologies.
The application was designed around the scenario presented above. Images,
text, video and audio material were incorporated in a desktop VR application
simulating arrival in Edinburgh. At the start of the experience, a textual narrative
introduction described what the participants were expected to achieve during their
mediated experience of Edinburgh. This comprised taking the bus from the airport
to the city, visiting an art gallery, ﬁnding the ﬂat where the participant would
be living and buying food from a sandwich bar. It was phrased in a manner
intended to arouse curiosity and interest and miminise uncertainty as to what the
participants were required to do in ‘Edinburgh’ and how this would be achieved.
More detailed textual instructions were provided at the start of each segment of the
application.
Once the application proper had been started, images, video and audio clips
conveyed an impression of the bus ride (Fig. 3.1) and arrival at the various desti-
nations, while virtual characters afforded a limited degree of interaction with the
participants. These were created, captured, edited and presented using simple web
and digital media technologies. Audio output was presented through headphones
and interaction mediated by conventional mouse and keyboard.
The images and videos were captured from the individual’s viewpoint, including
walking along streets, looking for an address, and the view from the front seat on the
top deck of the bus. Spatialised sounds corresponding to the photorealistic scenes
were presented during the entire set of sequences. The sounds were recorded at the
locations used. In order to allow the virtual agents to ‘speak’ to the participants,
the conversations between them were pre-scripted and audio clips captured from
volunteers with Scottish accents. Thus, interaction with virtual agents was primarily
achieved through images, pre-scripted text with limited opportunities for user input,
and audio clips. In the sandwich bar, for example, it was possible to choose food
and tender the right Scottish money to complete the transaction. Figure 3.2 shows
one of these steps.
As will be evident from the above description and the screenshots we have
included, the application as implemented did not appear conducive to a high degree
of immersion. While both audio and video material were available in the application,

36
S. Turner et al.
Fig. 3.1 A step in the sequence of buying a bus ticket
Fig. 3.2 Dialogue in the sandwich bar – adding a bacon roll to the order
as was a degree of interaction, media were presented at quite low ﬁdelity and
interaction minimal and pre-scripted. Moreover the ‘ﬂow’ of experience in the
application was punctuated by introductions at the start of each new sequence. To
reiterate: the low degree of media richness and ﬁdelity of interaction was intentional,
in order to investigate the effect of such relatively simple virtual experiences.

3
Make-Believing Virtual Realities
37
Evaluation
A ﬁrst prototype was trialled with 20 participants who were Asian students studying
in the UK. The results served to reﬁne the evaluation procedure, principally by
counter-balancing order of post-experience questionnaires, as well as to ﬁne-tune
the prototype itself. A second prototype was the subject of the main evaluation
which is reported here.
Participants were 26 Taiwanese and Chinese students who were considering, or
had already undertaken, study abroad. Their ages varied from 20 to 42, with most
being in their late twenties or early thirties. To avoid any uncontrolled effects from
being in the real location depicted in the virtual environment, we used participants
who were located outside the UK at the time of the evaluation. All gave their
informed consent to the trial procedure and possible publication of their data.
Two questionnaires were administered post-experience, the ITC-Sense of Pres-
ence Inventory (ITC-SOPI), Lessiter et al. (2001) to capture data on spatial
presence – the sense of being there – and engagement with the environment,
complemented by the Networked Minds instrument (Biocca et al. 2001) for
assessing the degree of social presence experienced in the ‘company’ of the virtual
bus driver and shopkeeper. Both instruments are well-established in the presence
research community.
The trial was conducted remotely over the internet, using audio communication
between experimenter and individual participants, who ran the application on their
own desktop computers. They were informed that the experience would take around
10 min to complete and asked to read the introductory text, then to carry out two
simple tasks, buying a bus ticket and ordering food. They then completed the post-
experience questionnaires. In order to preclude potential order effects we used a
counterbalancing approach, asking half the participants to complete the ITC-SOPI
ﬁrst, followed by Networked Minds and the reverse order for the other group.
Several items in both instruments were adapted in very minor ways from their
original paper-based form to facilitate administration online.
Results and Discussion
We ﬁrst report the results from the two questionnaire instruments, then discuss this
data in the context of schema-based make-believe.
Spatial Presence and Engagement: ITC-SOPI
The SOPI instrument has four scales: spatial presence (the sense of being in the
environment), engagement (with the environment), ecological validity/naturalness
(of the environment) and negative effects (such as dizziness); results for the ﬁrst two
of these are reported here. Nineteen items deﬁnes the ﬁrst factor ‘Spatial Presence’,

38
S. Turner et al.
Table 3.1 Selected SOPI
results, a taste of Edinburgh
N D 26
Spatial presence
Engagement
Mean rating
3.32
3.52
Max
4.21
4.31
Min
2.37
2.46
Standard deviation
0.41
0.45
Table 3.2 Comparing SOPI ratings from a taste of Edinburgh to results from other applications
Spatial presence
Engagement
A taste of Edinburgh
3.32
3.52
Tang et al. (2004) (VE discussion about phones
mediated by avatars and head-mounted displays)
2.60
2.83
Bruce and Regenbrecht (2009) (Exposure therapy
for claustrophobia; interactive VE and
head-mounted display)
3.23
3.21
Villani et al. (2012) (simulated job interview in
immersive CAVE-based VE)
2.93
Data not reported
such as “I felt I was visiting the places in the displayed environment” and “I had
a sense of being in the scenes displayed”. Thirteen items relating to psychological
involvement and pleasure are classiﬁed as ‘Engagement’, including the questions,
“I would have liked the experience to continue” and “I responded emotionally”.
All scales have 5 points, 5 being the most positive rating and 3 the ‘neither agree
nor disagree’ option. The main SOPI results aggregated across participants may be
found in Table 3.1 above.
The sense of ‘being there’ reﬂected in these apparently modestly positive scores
is best appreciated in the context of results reported by other scholars. Reported
data for individual SOPI scales is surprising rare in published material, but we have
identiﬁed the following instances. It should be noted that these were obtained from
trials of much heavier weight VR environments using head-mounted displays or a
CAVE. As can be seen from Table 3.2, A Taste of Edinburgh is, relatively, very
successful in this respect.
Social Presence: Networked Minds
The Networked Minds instrument developed by Biocca et al. (2001) enables
researchers to measure the subjective degree co-presence, psychological involve-
ment, and behavioural engagement, which in their model form the fundamental
dimensions of social presence. Eight sub-dimensions underlie these dimensions:
isolation/aloneness, mutual awareness, attentional allocation, empathy, mutual
understanding, behavioural interdependence, mutual assistance, and dependent
action. The 16 co-presence items include, for example, “I hardly noticed another
individual(s)” and “Others were often aware of me in the room”. Items such as “The
other individual(s) was inﬂuenced by my moods”, and “My thoughts were clear to
my partner”, contribute to the 12-item dimension of ‘Psychological Involvement’.

3
Make-Believing Virtual Realities
39
Table 3.3 Selected networked minds results, a taste of Edinburgh
N D 26
Co-presence
Psychological involvement
Behavioural engagement
Mean rating
3.04
3.42
3.12
Max
3.56
4.17
4.17
Min
2.31
2.92
2.45
Standard deviation
0.37
0.38
0.45
The last dimension, ‘Behavioural Engagement’ also consists of 12 items, including
“My actions were dependent on the other’s actions and “I worked with the other
individual(s) to complete the task”. As for the ITC-SOPI, all scales have 5 points,
5 being the most positive. The results for each dimension, aggregated across
participants, are shown in Table 3.3 above.
Despite a thorough review it has proved impossible to identify comparison data
from other VR applications but here again a positive sense of social presence, of
being with the bus driver and the shopkeeper, as well as being there in Edinburgh is
evident.
While A Taste of Edinburgh was crafted with a great deal of care, it remained a
limited virtual environment which was non-immersive (in the technological sense
of the term), minimally interactive and afforded only limited, pre-scripted ‘com-
munication’ with its inhabitants. Yet, from the questionnaire results, participants
experienced a reasonable degree of presence and social presence. For the former,
this compares favourably with much more sophisticated environments. We suggest
that these effects are facilitated by make-believe, bringing to bear existing schemata
of travel, transport and commercial transactions to ‘ﬁll in the gaps’ in the sparse
landscape provided by the technology. This conclusion is supported by a vignette
from the evaluation of the ﬁrst prototype (not reported further here): when buying
food in the shop, the dialogue box implied ordering a drink ﬁrst. We noticed that
some participants hesitated for a few seconds before continuing. It seemed they did
not expect to order the drink ﬁrst: schema driven expectations had been confounded.
Schema theory would predict here that, in time, this and other schemata should
assimilate such new patterns of everyday interaction, but further trials would be
necessary to establish how far this had been achieved in this context, and also to
establish how far the effects just discussed generalise beyond the particular case of
this group of participants.
3.5
Application 2: Digital Visitor
Digital Visitor (Burrows et al. 2010; Turner et al. 2013) also sought to convey an
experience of Edinburgh, but for a rather different purpose and with a very different
style. Here, we were interested to explore whether adopting a particular schema,
the ‘tourist gaze’, in the design of a limited VE would support participants in the
make-believe that they were there in the city.

40
S. Turner et al.
The Tourist Gaze
Urry (2002) argues that the “tourist gaze” is “directed to features of the landscape,
which separate them off from everyday experience. Such aspects are viewed because
they are taken to be in some sense out of the ordinary.” The gaze is often static
and managed, from a vantage point such as a balcony or promoted viewpoint, and
insulated from the real world, as in the case of a tourist ofﬁce’s sign-posted walk.
In other words (ours, not Urry’s), the tropes of tourism form a genre of make-
believe. The gaze is directed inter alia by anticipation, by the promotional narratives
of the tourism industry, by the ﬁlm, broadcast and internet media, by cultural
stereotypes and expectations (Turner et al. 2005a). In short, though Urry himself
does not use the term, it is itself a schema, informed by a set of other schemata.
English visitors to provincial France, for example, will expect a small town to have
its market place hosting a twice-weekly market, a clutch of specialist food shops
which close at lunchtime, a dark and rather forbidding bar, a couple of reasonable
restaurants and very likely a historic church. Aspects that do not ﬁt the schema
(the ubiquitous budget supermarket where most shopping is actually done : : : )
ﬁgure much less prominently in anticipation, in images captured by visitors or
incorporated in promotional literature. Finally, the attractions made available to be
gazed upon are frequently carefully manicured and their salient features, sometimes
quite literally, as in the case of ﬂoodlit monuments, highlighted. This is the aspect of
tourism which is characterised in Lengkeek’s thoughtful, sociological discussion as
the ‘mode of amusement, where the “stories and metaphors that suspend reality are
so well known and trusted that they do not create any tension with everyday reality.”
(Lengkeek 2001, our italics.) Thus, a tourist experience makes an ideal subject for
mediation through the medium of VR: much of the irregularity and unpredictability
of everyday reality is already designed out while the participant is primed to expect
the expected.
Design and Implementation
Digital Visitor was a small-scale desktop application designed and developed
by the third author to embody the ‘tourist gaze’ metaphor through the simple
means of an Edinburgh conveyed by ‘walking through’ a selection of well-known
photographed viewpoints. Images were supplemented by narrative descriptions
similar to that found on the information panels that abound at real-world sites
and appropriate sounds sourced from the position of image acquisition. Visitors
were guided on a tour of ﬁve well-known locations in and around the city. They
could explore each location by changing their point of view, much as a tourist
admiring a landscape or landmark might, and to a limited extent, move ‘through’
the location. Two forms of visual effects were implemented. Firstly, the images
comprised multiple layers creating a ‘2.5 D’ effect and secondly, the appearance of
the sky was exaggerated for each location by strikingly colourful colourful visual

3
Make-Believing Virtual Realities
41
Fig. 3.3 Calton Hill, Edinburgh (From Digital Visitor)
enhancements. The aim here was to reinforce the sense of a make-believe world and
to counter the effect encountered in photo-realistic virtual reality applications, that
the very ﬁdelity of the images paradoxically draws attention to any ﬂaws and thus
removes the observer from the scene. Figure 3.3 shows a typical image from the
application.
Evaluation
The evaluation of Digital Visitor was conducted with 25 participants, a mix of
undergraduate and postgraduate students and a range of professionals. Their ages
ranged from 19 to 45, comprising 14 males and 11 females: all were computer-
literate and familiar with the city. All gave their informed consent to the trial
procedure and possible publication of their data.
The intention was to emulate the representative use of a desktop application and
was conducted in a two settings: a typical home location and a busy university
computer lab. Each participant was briefed about the nature of the trial and the use
of the application, and then allowed to engage with the application independently,
at their own pace, observed by the third author. Time spent by the participants
ranged between 2 min 23 s and 7 min 44 s, the mean being a little over 5 min.
Post-use, participants completed a set of 11-point rating scales designed to elicit
structured responses to aspects of the experience of particular interest to its designer:

42
S. Turner et al.
navigation, sound, text, interaction, locations, images, aesthetics and engagement,1
of which the last is of most relevance here. Finally, a semi-structured interview was
conducted, probing more general reactions to the application, and concluding with
one additional scale item adapted from the Slater-Usoh-Steed presence instrument,
as reported in Usoh et al. (2000). This last item asked the question “When you think
back about the experience, do you think of Digital Visitor more as images that you
saw, or more as somewhere that you visited? This required a response on a scale
from 1 (images) to 5 (somewhere visited).
Results and Discussion
In this section we brieﬂy review the qualitative data from the interviews, then
consider the quantitative results from the ‘images or place’ and ‘engagement’ scale
items. We then return to the role of schemata in the experience of this version of
virtual Edinburgh.
Discussion around the Digital Visitor experience during the interviews was
very much focussed in the main on the design of the application, rather than the
experience itself. However, several participants volunteered remarks that suggested
that they had, in some sense, visited the locations presented. A representative
examples is quoted verbatim below.
: : : the background noise, it obviously made me feel like I was in sort of like, in the city : : :
driving in the city, nice! : : : and it felt like, you know, you were actually exploring the city,
even though you were just looking at motion graphics, you’re able to get a feel for the place.
(Participant C, T-shirt printer)
: : : it felt like you were going on a journey through it, rather than it just being a sort of
static : : : it felt like you were kind of moving through it, rather than it just being pictures.
(Participant N, landscape architect)
: : : I just felt like I was coming to town from this place : : : the home screen. (Participant W,
postgraduate psychology student)
This sense of a visit was reﬂected in the ratings obtained on the ‘images seen –
somewhere visited’ scale item. Here the mean rating was 3.6 on a 5 point scale, but
with the modal rating of 4 being awarded by 17 of the 26 participants. Consideration
of results from this item to those reported in evaluations of fully immersive VEs
(Usoh et al. 2000; Juan et al. 2006) suggests that that Digital Visitor performed well
by comparison. Finally engagement with the Digital Visitor experience was rated
highly positively on the scale item concerned, achieving a mean rating of C3.40 on
a scale from 5 to C5. No negative ratings were obtained, while the modal rating
was 4.
1Please note that this is not the operationalization of engagement captured in the engagement scale
in the ITC-SOPI instrument.
www.allitebooks.com

3
Make-Believing Virtual Realities
43
Overall, it appears that the design of this very technologically simple and non-
immersive application, constructed around the schema of the tourist gaze, had been
successful in evoking make-believe in a ‘visit’ to Edinburgh. This is supported to
some extent by what was not said in the interview discussions. Participants all knew
the city well, and there were several ideas volunteered for other tourist venues and
vistas that might have been included. Yet none suggested including the sights of the
mundane, workaday, and often less than picture-perfect city.
3.6
Overall Discussion: Lightweight VR and Make Believe
The above accounts demonstrate that simple, lightweight non-immersive VEs are
capable of generating a solid sense of presence and social presence (in the case of
A Taste of Edinburgh) and a sense of somewhere visited (Digital Visitor). How far
the conclusions from these empirical explorations can be generalised is naturally
limited: evaluation in both cases was conducted with relatively small numbers of
participants, the results may be subject to the kind of demand characteristics which
beset any evaluation where subjective responses are elicited and more systematic
comparisons with higher-ﬁdelity environments would be interesting and desirable.
Nonetheless, there is a strong case that the experiences evoked are attributable
to the ability of participants to make-believe, drawing upon existing schemata:
in the ﬁrst instance of travel, wayﬁnding and social interaction in an unfamiliar
city; in the second of the experience of a touristic honeypot – the ‘tourist gaze’.
In turn, successful real-world applications need to be designed to support schema
accommodation to new data. However, schemata may not be the whole story.
Does the Story End with Schemata?
As we have seen, schemata and closely associated constructs have been applied
by AI researchers and are also intrinsic to the theorisation of story, narrative and
ﬁction.2 But what of the wider role for schemata in the psychology of memory?
A review of this vast, complex, specialist, ﬁeld in psychology and neuroscience
is beyond the scope of this chapter, so what follows highlights just a few selected
studies of particular relevance. To set the scene, very many studies suggest that
schemata not only hold generalised semantic knowledge, but also play a role both
in episodic (or event) memory – for personally experienced, speciﬁc events – and
2And indeed there is also a large body of research, in AI-based storytelling.

44
S. Turner et al.
therefore in autobiographical memory: the knowledge of the self, of the entire
collection of remembered life events, and pertinent semantic knowledge, often
considered to be a constructed narrative; our life story, in more popular parlance.
(The exact deﬁnition, relationship and scope of these concepts and terms is both
contested and varies considerably among memory researchers; for a recent review
of the state-of-the art readers are referred to Rubin and Umanath 2015).
Further, and signiﬁcantly for this chapter, intriguing neurological data points to
links between autobiographical memory, theory of mind – the ability to infer other
people’s cognitive and affective states – and more generally to a capacity to mentally
inhabit ‘the other’. Rabin et al. (2010), for instance, describe the growing body of
evidence that “the processes responsible for the retrieval of past personal episodes
also serve non-mnemonic purposes”. This is supported by data from fMRI scans
showing close correspondence between the brain regions involved in imagining
alternative locations or future events. Intriguingly, there is also some evidence that
people with impaired autobiographical memory have difﬁculty in comprehending
familiar narrative structures such as fairy tales.
Rabin and her colleagues suggest several differing, but related, underlying
explanations for the phenomenon. Firstly, evidence from Buckner and colleagues
(2007, 2008) may indicate a “capacity for self-projection” which supports a mental
shift to “alternate times, places, and perspectives”. Schacter and colleagues (2007,
2008), however, regard personal memories as constructed from past event details,
rather than as ﬁxed representations, and thus events yet to be experienced may be
mentally constructed in a similar, ﬂexible manner. Finally, there is also an argument
for a spatial (re)construction of scenes within which schemata-informed details can
be imagined (O’Keefe and Nadel 1978; Hassabis et al. 2007; Hassabis and Maguire
2007; Rubin and Umanath 2015). Returning to the VR context, the observation in
Cummings and Bailenson’s meta-review (2015) that “presence is achieved through
a two-step formative process, in which the user ﬁrst constructs a spatialized mental
model of the mediated environment : : : and then comes to accept this mediated
environment over grounded reality as his or her primary frame of self-reference : : : ”
has clear resonances with this work.
Whichever account holds sway, however, there are now clear, evidence-based
indications that underlying our ability to decouple from reality and to project or
transport ourselves to ﬁctional worlds (including minimal, non-immersive virtual
environments) lies in the perception and interpretation of those alternative worlds
in terms of our own life histories and personal knowledge. The make-believe
which supports the sense of presence in a VR experience may be no different
from that which allows us to remember the past, dream about the future or take
another’s perspective: we construct stories (about VR content and in make-believe
more generally) drawing on our story- and schema-based autobiographical memory.
Perhaps the best source of content in designing a VR application which aims
to convey realistic events and real places might be to have people tell us their
memories.

3
Make-Believing Virtual Realities
45
References
Alber J (2013) Unnatural narratology: the systematic study of anti-mimeticism. Lit Compass
10(5):449–60
Alsina-Jurnet I, Gutièrrez-Maldonado J (2010) Inﬂuence of personality and individual abilities on
the sense of presence experienced in anxiety triggering virtual environments. IJHCS 68:788–
801
Bartlett FC (1932) Remembering: a study in experimental and social psychology. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Biocca F, Harms C, Gregg J (2001) The networked minds measure of social presence: pilot test of
the factor structure and concurrent validity. Media Interface and Network Design (M.I.N.D.)
Lab, E. Lansing
Biocca F, Harms C, Burgoon JK (2003) Toward a more robust theory and measure of social
presence: review and suggested criteria. Presence: Teleoper Virtual Environ 12(5):456–480
Bruce M, Regenbrecht H (2009, March) A virtual reality claustrophobia therapy system-
implementation and test. In: virtual reality conference, 2009 VR 2009, IEEE (pp 179–182)
IEEE
Buckner RL, Carroll DC (2007) Self-projection and the brain. Trends Cogn Sci 11:49–57
Buckner RL, Andrews-Hanna JR, Schacter DL (2008) The brain’s default network: anatomy,
function and relevance to disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1124:1–38
Burrows L, Turner S, Turner P (2010) Re-creating Edinburgh: adopting the tourist gaze. In:
Proceedings of the 28th Annual European Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics, ACM Press,
New York, pp 183–186
Chertoff DB, Schatz SL, McDaniel R, Bowers C (2008) Improving presence theory through
experiential design. Presence: Teleoper Virtual Environ 17(4):405–413
Chertoff D B, Goldiez B, LaViola JJ Jr (2010) Virtual experience test: a virtual environment
evaluation questionnaire. In: Virtual Reality conference (VR), 2010, IEEE, pp 103–110
Cohen D, Sevdalis N, Taylor D, Kerr K, Heys M, Willett K, Batrick N, Darzi A (2013) Emergency
preparedness in the 21st century: training and preparation modules in virtual environments.
Resuscitation 84(1):78–84
Cummings JJ, Bailenson JN (2015) How immersive is enough? A meta-analysis of the
effect of immersive technology on user presence. Media psychology (ahead-of-print), pp
1–38 www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/15213269.2015.1015740, VbDDBniA5UQ; Last
accessed 23 July 2015
Douglas Y, Hargadon A (2000) The pleasure principle: immersion, engagement, ﬂow. In:
Proceedings of the eleventh ACM on Hypertext and hypermedia. ACM press, New York,
pp 153–160
Gatzia DE, Sotnak E (2014) Fictional truth and make-believe. Philosophia 42(2):349–361
Gerrig RJ (1993) Experiencing narrative worlds: on the psychological activities of reading. Yale
University Press, Yale
Goulding J, Nadim W, Petridis P, Alshawi M (2012) Construction industry offsite production: a
virtual reality interactive training environment prototype. Adv Eng Inform 26(1):103–116
Guerra JP, Pinto MM, Beato C (2015) Virtual reality-shows a new vision for tourism and heritage.
Eur Sci J 11(9):49–54, www.eujournal.org/index.php/esj/article/view/5375. Last accessed
21.08.15
Guttentag DA (2010) Virtual reality: applications and implications for tourism. Tour Manag
31(5):637–651
Hassabis D, Maguire EA (2007) Deconstructing episodic memory with construction. Trends Cogn
Sci 11:299–306
Hassabis D, Kumaran D, Maguire EA (2007) Using imagination to understand the neural basis of
episodic memory. J Neurosci 27:14365–14374
Heeter C (1992) Being there: the subjective experience of presence. Presence: Teleoper Virtual
Environ 1:262–271

46
S. Turner et al.
Heeter C (2003) Reﬂections on real presence by a virtual person. Presence: Teleoper Virtual
Environ 12(4):335–345
Jones M T (2007) Presence as external versus internal experience: how form, user, style, and con-
tent factors produce presence from the inside. In: Proceedings of 10th international workshop
on presence, pp 115–126, astro.temple.edu/~lombard/ISPR/Proceedings/2007/Jones.pdf. Last
accessed 23 July 2015
Juan MC, Banos R, Botella C, Perez D, Alcaniz M, Monserrat C (2006) An augmented reality
system for the treatment of acrophobia: the sense of presence using immersive photography.
Presence Teleoper Virtual Environ 15(4):393–402
Ladeira I, Nunez D, Blake E (2005) The role of content preference on thematic priming in virtual
presence. Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop on Presence, London, pp 227–230.
astro.temple.edu/~lombard/ISPR/Proceedings/2005/presence2005.pdf. Last accessed 23.07.15
Lengkeek J (2001) Leisure experience and imagination rethinking Cohen’s modes of tourist
experience. Int Sociol 16(2):173–184
Lessiter J, Freeman J, Keogh E, Davidoff J (2001) A cross-media presence questionnaire: the ITC-
sense of presence inventory. Presence: Teleoper Virtual Environ 10:282–297
Lombard M, Ditton T (1997) At the heart of it all: The concept of presence. J Com-
put Mediated Commun 3(2). Accessed from onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1083-
6101.1997.tb00072.x/full. Last accessed 23 July 2015
Mania K, Badariah S, Coxon M, Watten P (2010) Cognitive transfer of spatial awareness states
from immersive virtual environments to reality. ACM Trans Appl Percept (TAP) 7(2):9
Minsky M (1975) A framework for representing knowledge. In: Winston P (ed) The psychology
of computer vision. McGraw-Hill, New York
Mourkoussis N, Rivera FM, Troscianko T, Dixon T, Hawkes R, Mania K (2010) Quantifying
ﬁdelity for virtual environment simulations employing memory schema assumptions. ACM
Trans Appl Percept (TAP) 8(1):2
Nichols S, Stich S (2005) Mindreading: a cognitive theory of pretense. Oxford University Press,
Oxford
Nunez D, Blake E (2003) Conceptual priming as a determinant of presence in virtual environments.
In: Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on computer graphics, virtual reality,
visualisation and interaction in Africa. ACM Press, New York, pp 101–108
O’Keefe J, Nadel L (1978) The hippocampus as a cognitive map. Clarendon, Oxford
Piaget J (1952) The origins of intelligence in children. International Universities Press, New York
Pinchbeck D M, Stevens B (2005) Presence, narrative and schemata. Proceedings of the 8th
International Workshop on Presence, London, pp 221–226. astro.temple.edu/~lombard/ISPR/
Proceedings/2005/presence2005.pdf. Last accessed 23 July 2015
Poissant L (2015) Performance arts and the effects of presence. Leonardo 48(3):216–216
Rabin JS, Gilboa A, Stuss DT, Mar RA, Rosenbaum RS (2010) Common and unique neural
correlates of autobiographical memory and theory of mind. J Cogn Neurosci 22(6):1095–1111
Riva G, Mantovani F (2014) 1 Extending the self through the tools and the others: a general
framework for presence and social presence in mediated interactions. In: G Riva, J Waterworth,
D Murray (eds) Interacting with presence: HCI and the sense of presence in computer-mediated
environments, Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co KG, pp 9–31
Riva G, Waterworth JA, Waterworth EL, Mantovani F (2011) From intention to action: the role of
presence. New Ideas Psychol 29(1):24–37
Rizzo A, Hartholt A, Grimani M, Leeds A, Liewer M (2014) Virtual reality exposure therapy for
combat-related posttraumatic stress disorder. Computer 47(7):31–37
Rubin DC, Umanath S (2015) Event memory: a theory of memory for laboratory, autobiographical,
and ﬁctional events. Psychol Rev 122(1):1–23
Ryan ML (2008) Fictional worlds in the digital age. In: Schreibman S, Siemens R (eds) A
companion to digital literary studies. Blackwell, Oxford, pp 250–266
Schacter DL, Addis DR (2007) The cognitive neuroscience of constructive memory: remembering
the past and imagining the future. Philos Trans R Soc Lond Ser B Biol Sci 362:773–786
Schacter DL, Addis DR, Buckner RL (2008) Episodic simulation of future events: concepts, data
and applications. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1124:39–60

3
Make-Believing Virtual Realities
47
Schank R, Abelson R (1977) Scripts, plans, goals, and understanding. Erlbaum, Hillsdale
Slater M (2009) Place illusion and plausibility can lead to realistic behaviour in immersive virtual
environments. Philos Trans Royal Soc B: Biol Sci 364:3549–3557
Slater M, Wilbur S (1997) A framework for immersive virtual environments (FIVE): specula-
tions on the role of presence in virtual environments. Presence: Teleoper Virtual Environ
6:603–616
Spagnolli A, Bracken CC, Orso V (2014) The role played by the concept of presence in validating
the efﬁcacy of a cybertherapy treatment: a literature review. Virtual Reality 18(1):13–36
Stanovich KE (1999) Who is rational?: studies of individual differences in reasoning. Psychology
Press, London
Stanovich KE, West RF, Toplak ME (2010) 17 Individual differences and rationality. In: Mank-
telow K et al (eds) The science of reason: a festschrift for Jonathan St BT Evans. Psychology
Press, London, pp 355–396
Steuer J (1992) Deﬁning virtual reality: dimensions determining telepresence. J Commun
42(4):73–93
Stevenson Won A, Haans A, Bailenson JN, IJsselsteijn WA (2014) A framework for interactivity
and presence in novel bodies. In: Riva G, Waterworth J, Murray D (eds) Interacting with
presence: HCI and the sense of presence in computer-mediated environments. De Gruyter
Open, Berlin, pp 57–69
Sylaiou S, Mania K, Karoulis A, White A (2010) Exploring the relationship between presence and
enjoyment in a virtual museum. Int J Hum-Comput Stud 68(5):243–253
Tang A, Biocca F, Lim L (2004) Comparing differences in presence during social interaction in
augmented reality versus virtual reality environments: An exploratory study. Proceedings of
the 7th International Workshop on Presence, Valencia, 2005, pp 204–208. astro.temple.edu/
~lombard/ISPR/Proceedings/2004/Tang,%20Biocca,%20Lim.pdf. Last accessed 23 July 2015
Turner P (2015) Presence: is it just pretending? AI & Society, 1–10
Turner P, Turner S (2002) Embedding context of use in CVE design. Presence: Teleoper Virtual
Environ 11(6):665–676
Turner P, Turner S (2006) Place, sense of place, and presence. Presence: Teleoper Virtual Environ
15(2):204–217
Turner P, Turner S, Carroll F (2005a) The tourist gaze: towards contextualised virtual environ-
ments. In: Spaces, spatiality and technology (pp 281–297). Springer, Dordrecht
Turner P, Turner S, Tzovaras D (2005b) Reliving VE day with schemata activation. In: Proceedings
of the 8th International Workshop on Presence, London, pp 33–38. astro.temple.edu/~lombard/
ISPR/Proceedings/2005/presence2005.pdf. Last accessed 23 July 2015
Turner P, Turner S, Burrows L (2013) Creating a sense of place with a deliberately constrained
virtual environment. Int J Cogn Perform Support 1(1):54–68
Turner P, Hetherington R, Turner S, Kosek M (2015) The limits of pretending. Digit Creat
26(3–4):304–17
Ungerleider G (2014) Virtual reality for vets with PTSD recreates the smells, sounds, and
feelings of an IED. www.fastcoexist.com/3031510/virutal-reality-for-vets-with-ptsd-recreates-
the-smells-sounds-and-feelings-of-an-ied#1. Last accessed 23 July 2015
Urry J (2002) The tourist gaze. Sage, London
Usoh M, Catena E, Arman S, Slater M (2000) Using presence questionnaires in reality. Presence,
Teleoper, Virtual Environ 9(5):497–503
Villani D, Repetto C, Cipresso P, Riva G (2012) May I experience more presence in doing the
same thing in virtual reality than in reality? An answer from a simulated job interview. Interact
Comput 24(4):265–272
Walton KL (1990) Mimesis as make-believe: on the foundations of the representational arts.
Harvard University Press, Harvard
Witmer BG, Singer MJ (1998) Measuring presence in virtual environments: a presence question-
naire. Presence: Teleoper Virtual Environ 7:225–240
Wolf W (2014) Illusion (aesthetic). In: Hühn P (ed) The living handbook of narratology. Hamburg
University, Hamburg

Chapter 4
Fiction for Design: Appropriating Hollywood
Techniques for Design Fictions
Tom Flint
4.1
Introduction
This chapter offers approaches and ideas from outside the HCI arena and considers
how they may be of use when producing ﬁctions. What is offered is a set of tools
for consideration when producing design ﬁctions. The importance of ﬁction to the
ﬁeld of HCI is not a new consideration evidenced in the established practice of
using scenarios; a practical tool for the production of interactive systems. Design
Fictions are considered as a method for communicating speculative futures and a
tool for engaging with those outside the laboratory. With a current demand for public
engagement from universities (Vines et al. 2013) it is increasingly important that
researchers become adept at communicating their visions and speculations. What
is offered here are some effective tools for use in the production of ﬁctions. This
chapter concentrates on the effective production and structure of video for creating
communications.
Considering how storytelling can be a tool for persuasion, this document takes a
brief segue to consider the power of storytelling and make-believe in the creation of
brands within the denim industry. The purpose of this aside is to demonstrates a tool
from Freeman (2004) for developing characters. Branding and marketing argues for
the treatment of companies as personalities and this is an important consideration
if we are to present diegetic prototypes (Kirby 2009) in our ﬁctions. The text then
discusses the use of a company as an antagonist in the Alien movie franchise. What
we learn from these sections is that diegetic prototypes are not produced outside of
context and are products of a story world. The character of the producing company
determines the shape and manifestation of the product.
T. Flint ()
School of Computing/Make-Believe Lab, Edinburgh Napier University, Edinburgh, UK
e-mail: t.ﬂint@napier.ac.uk
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
P. Turner, J.T. Harviainen (eds.), Digital Make-Believe,
Human–Computer Interaction Series, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-29553-4_4
49

50
T. Flint
The role of ﬁction has an important role in communication with the wider public.
If we are trying to convince others of assertions, we must consider what it is to
be convincing. Walton (1990) tells us that ﬁctions serve as props in acts of make-
believe. By creating believable ﬁctions, it is more likely that our audience will
indulge us by cooperating in acts of make-believe. This chapter presents some
evidence for the role of structure in both memory and positive neurochemical
response. This is followed by a presentation of Syd Field’s paradigm and its
effective use in Hollywood storytelling.
The ﬁnal section in this chapter again looks beyond the laboratory at the
phenomenon of crowd funding videos. Crowd funding videos are vital for their
producers in that they are ﬁctional accounts of products that have the aim of raising
enough money to make these products a reality. They bridge ﬁction and non-ﬁction
using storytelling as acts of realisation. A successful video is broken down in terms
of the paradigm and demonstrates how structure enables the ﬁction it portrays.
This chapter does not aim to offer techniques that are to replace established
methods. The tools discussed here have been shown to be effective in the act of
storytelling. If it is our desire to tell stories that are aimed at the public and the
wider world, we do well to consider them.
4.2
Fiction for Fiction
Stories are a way of mediating experience, watching a documentary on Everest can
give a person a sense of the experience of being a Nepalese Sherpa. Similarly,
watching The Terminator (Cameron 1984) mediates a sense of what it might be
like to be hunted down by a ruthless cyborg. One of these stories is fantastical
but we engage with it none the less, “because we would rather enjoy ourselves
and accommodate the vagaries of a good story’s speculations than dismiss it and
step outside of the drama” (Bleecker 2010). Walton (1980) dismisses the idea of a
“suspension of disbelief” or a “decrease of distance” instead arguing that audiences
extend their presence into the ﬁctional world. Extending presence, he argues is
managed through pretending, an activity learnt in childhood.
For example, Benford and Giannachi (2011) demonstrate audiences who are keen
to collaborate in the creation of ﬁctions. This is similar to “This is Not a Game,”
a popular device in Alternate Reality Games (Örnebring 2007). Alternate Reality
Games (ARGs) are games played across multiple media such as email, online
videos, phone applications and live events; these games rely on mass participation
and the creation of an alternate story world that plays across the real world. Those
that participate in an ARG are expected to accept that they are participating in a
game whilst simultaneously making-believe that they are not. Any interactions with
characters or other players within the story world will not acknowledge the game as
anything other than reality.
Audiences are willing to collaborate in ﬁctions through the act of pretending. The
popularity of ARGs and the success of Benford and Giannachi’s work demonstrate

4
Fiction for Design: Appropriating Hollywood Techniques for Design Fictions
51
that people will pretend in order to allow a narrative experience to continue. By
locating their senses of presence into the ﬁctional world, audience members have
the tools to consider what the world might be like if a particular product exists.
Audiences are sophisticated and are able to read media texts such as video at several
levels. Taking a postmodern approach to understanding media (Barthes 1972; Berger
1972; Mulvey 1975) demands that we understand both imagery and relationship to
other texts, something termed as the Under-Language (Moulthorp 2009). Although
this method of reading texts is traditionally focused on cinema, ﬁne art and literature,
understanding this type of representation is essential when examining New Media
such as Internet based videos (Lister et al. 2009).
A term for this type of representation is borrowed from rhetoric and is named
a ‘trope’. Tropes are described as “the order of things as a grid-like system of
representative order” (Kellner 1981). Tropes are a method of “crafting meaning” to
convey ideas that are “not literal but symbolic” (DiSalvo 2012). We can consider a
relationship between tropes and archetypes allowing narratives to create emotional
links with audiences (Huang-Ming et al. 2015). A contemporary cultural view of
tropes borrows from literature, postmodernist theory and semiotics (Hall 2012;
Howells
2003) and henceforth trope is the term used in this document for
representational understanding.
4.3
Fiction in Design
Use of a computer system is never free from context, the challenge is to consider real
world use and to this end, storytelling is an established tool within HCI. Personas
and scenarios are tools that employ ﬁction. A persona is a description of a ﬁctitious
person, used to highlight speciﬁc motivations or needs when using a product or
system. By considering how Julie, a professional lawyer of 50 with a busy home life
might interact with a product it can be designed around the needs and motivations
of real people. “The special aspect of a persona description is that you do not look
at the entire person, but use the area of focus or domain you are working within as
a lens to highlight the relevant attitudes and the speciﬁc context associated with the
area of work” Nielsen (2014).
Scenarios are descriptive passages demonstrating established personas’ attempts
at navigating a system or product. By understanding the persona, it is possible to
create a narrative vignette of the experience of a product. Ultimately, a scenario is
a story of a persona interacting with a system. Personas can be argued as analogous
to the creation of characters and scenarios as the creation of stories. According to
Carroll (2000) the strength of scenarios is that they are simultaneously concrete and
ﬂexible. They are concrete in that they set out speciﬁc motivations and use cases
and ﬂexible in that they can be easily adapted and changed according to what is
discovered in the design process. Scenarios encourage reﬂection and discussion in
systems design allowing consideration of how different people might experience a
system.

52
T. Flint
The same scenario can be used to explore different personas’ approach to a
similar interaction. The use of scenarios allows discourse with many stakeholders
in the design process (Bodker 2000). Describing use in the form of a scenario or
story allows non-experts to contribute to the design process, this is ultimately about
future use with proposed systems. Scenarios have a beginning, middle and end,
involve characters (personas) and are about these characters’ progression through a
series of events. Scenarios are driven by action and the motivations of characters to
perform these actions.
Scenario based design focuses speciﬁcally on the user when interacting with
systems, providing a useful and powerful tool for discussing the design of a
system (Carroll 2000). Scenarios are text based descriptive narratives that are shared
across organisations. How scenarios are used and how they are interpreted by
different members of a team can cause tensions (Benyon and Macaulay 2002). What
scenarios demonstrate is an established and relevant use of ﬁction for the design of
a system.
4.4
Design Fiction
Design Fiction has been of interest in HCI for at least 10 years (Lindley and Coulton
2015). Design Fiction can be argued to hail from approaches of Research Through
Design (Gaver 2012) and Speculative Design (Dunne and Raby 2013). Design
Fiction lacks clear speciﬁc deﬁnitions or approaches (Lindley 2015), however it can
be described as the use of story telling to encourage discussion of possible design.
Typically Design Fictions look to an imaginary future and possible products that
may be invented imminently.
There is no speciﬁc format for a Design Fiction though a common approach is to
use video. The Near Future Laboratory is a design agency who employ design ﬁction
in their work. They list a number of outputs for design ﬁctions “case studies, events,
workshops, fast-prototyped apps, innovative algorithms, curious objects, mock-ups,
videos, ﬁctional magazines, newspapers, product catalogs” (Near Future Laboratory
date unknown). The intended audience is wide, meaning that Design Fictions tend to
have high production values aiming to communicate a possible future reality. Design
Fictions are presented as though they were documents of prototypes in action.
Design Fictions involve a diegetic prototype (Kirby 2009), these prototypes are
often functionless mock ups but their manifestation enables the ﬁction producer to
demonstrate what life would be like were this prototype in the world. These proto-
types are props for acts of make-believe (Walton 1990). Unlike Scenarios, Design
Fictions are not necessarily for the purpose of creating solutions, instead they “open
up a space for discussion” (Dunne and Raby 2013 p. 51). Blythe (2014) promotes
caution as Design Fictions can cause confusion, in danger of being interpreted as
fact. Bleecker (2010) states that the strength of a design ﬁction is the placing of a
prototype within mundane settings as though it were already a commonplace arte-
fact within the world “The extraordinary becomes ordinary and, therefore, possible.”

4
Fiction for Design: Appropriating Hollywood Techniques for Design Fictions
53
Design ﬁctions have been used in high proﬁle public communications, notably Is
this your future? (Dunne and Raby 2004) “a collection of hypothetical products to
explore the ethical, cultural and social impact of different energy futures” produced
for the Science Museum London and exhibited in their energy gallery. Microsoft
often release design ﬁction videos such as their Ofﬁce Labs Vision 2019 (Microsoft
2009), these videos have no narration, allowing the unfolding story to communicate
a vision of the future. The TBD Catalog from the Near Future Laboratory (2014) is a
catalogue of “implications without making predictions” (TBD date unknown). This
catalogue is reminiscent of the type of product catalogues that are sent with certain
credit cards. Design Fictions can be argued to be artistically informed, concentrating
on high quality output for a wide audience. Morrison et al. (2013) argue that design
ﬁctions “may too readily be inﬂuenced by notions and practices of designing to do
with arriving at solutions to problems.” It is important to delineate Design Fictions
away from function and problem solving, this is the role of Scenarios.
Walton (1990) discusses the tensions between a text such as Darwin’s Origin
of Species, historical novels, outright ﬁctions and requests to pass the salt amongst
others. “If we are to believe the theory of evolution, it is because that theory is true,
or because there is good evidence for it, not because it is expressed in The Origin
of Species” (ibid p. 70). He tells us that a major difference between ﬁction and
non-ﬁction is that the latter makes assertions, warning that there are also malleable
delineations between the two. The pertinent fact in both is that something that is in
one person’s imagination is transferred to another’s imagination. “To be ﬁctional
is to serve as a prop in games of make-believe” (ibid p. 102). Design ﬁctions then
are props in themselves as well as media that contain props in the form of diegetic
prototypes.
Design ﬁctions often inhabit a world between ﬁction and non-ﬁction and it can
be argued that public communication of research thinking and speculation has a
motive of persuasion. This can be simply as a form of marketing for the university
or research group involved or as a method for encouraging funding investment.
There is established use of story telling for persuasion in the ﬁeld of marketing
and the use of stories can be extremely powerful. This text will now examine
how story telling was used to create and promote a new market of luxury denim
transforming the view of denim from functional work wear to a high fashion item.
This example is speciﬁcally used to demonstrate how the provenance of a product
can be manufactured through character development tools and the use of tropes.
4.5
True Fiction
Denim is considered by some to be a specialist product and those that have this point
of view seek particular types of denim in speciﬁc cuts and ﬁnishes with Japanese
denim being considered the best quality. This market can trace its origin to a decision
by Levi’s to change the production methods of their signature 501 jeans. Levi’s
changed the type of loom on which the denim for their jeans was produced. The

54
T. Flint
original shuttle loom process was notable for the fact that it produced a seam known
as a selvedge. The selvedge marks the edge of the denim and runs up the outer inside
of the leg of the trouser. Simultaneously Levi’s changed the red badge on the back
of the trouser, the E in Levi’s was changed from an uppercase ‘E’ to a lower case
‘e.’
In the early to mid 1980s a fashion ensued for buying second hand “big E”
Levi’s. Those who had a pair could easily signify this by turning up the bottom of
their trouser legs to reveal the selvedge. The fashion became prevalent, particularly
in Japan and due to their scarcity the price of second hand Levi’s increased
dramatically. Levi’s have a particular brand story that is arguably one of the best-
known in the world. This is the true story of a trader, Levi Strauss who ran a general
trading shop in San Francisco during the gold mining era. Strauss came up with the
idea of using rivets to strengthen his work trousers. The trousers were stocked on
shelf number 501 and the denim jean, as we understand it today was conceived.
In 1998 Hidehiko Yamane began producing denim under the brand name Evis.
These jeans were produced on shuttle looms meaning they had a selvedge. The jeans
studiously recreated the cut of 1950s era Levi’s 501 jeans and had similar details.
The jeans were ﬁnished with a painted ‘seagull’ on the back pockets, the shape
of these seagulls being very similar to the stitched shape on the back of a pair of
Levi jeans known as the arcuate. There are unsubstantiated rumours that Yamane
purchased Levi’s old looms making him the only source of ‘original’ Levi’s. These
rumours were considered to be a ﬁctional fabrication to aid his marketing (Sean
2012). Following legal action from Levi’s, Yamane changed the brand name to
Evisu and the company has since managed to create and dominate an international
luxury denim market. Levi’s have responded with their Levi’s Vintage range, which
produces replica items from the extensive Levi’s archive.
Both Evisu and Levi’s use the story of their founder to promote their product.
Evisu and other Japanese denim manufacturers can be argued to have appropriated
authenticity from Levi’s (Keet 2011). Both companies’ product catalogues are
dominated by the story of their products, for example Levi’s website (Levi’s
2015) uses the following text for their 1933 replica jeans. “The Great Depression
was causing tough times for Americans when these 501 jeans were released in
the 1930s.” The text continues, describing certain features of the jeans and their
provenance.
This text now turns to Welsh company Hiut established in 2012. Hiut sell
a premium denim range manufactured in Cardigan, South Wales. Factories in
Cardigan used to manufacture denim jeans for Marks and Spencer, a popular UK
high street retail store, until 2002 when production was moved to Morocco. Hiut
employ storytelling to promote their trouser, the third link on their site, after ‘Shop’
and ‘Fit Guide’ is ‘Our Story.’ This is where they tell us:
Cardigan is a small town of 4,000 good people. 400 of them used to make jeans. They made
35,000 pairs a week. For three decades.
Then one day the factory closed. It left town. But all that skill and knowhow remained.
Without any way of showing the world what they could do.

4
Fiction for Design: Appropriating Hollywood Techniques for Design Fictions
55
That’s why we have started The Hiut Denim Company. To bring manufacturing back home.
To use all that skill on our doorstep. And to breathe new life into our town.
(Hiut 2012).
Hiut have told a story of a large manufacturing facility closing and being revived
through community practice. Using this particular story, they are able to charge a
premium price for their product. The irony is that the original jeans manufactured
for Marks and Spencer would have been produced and sold as a value product. Hiut
employ a familiar trope of saving small town industry by community effort and this
narrative is evocative. Without the luxury market created through storytelling by
Evisu and other Japanese denim manufacturers, this story would be ineffective.
We argue above that the creation of personas is the act of creating characters and
we now discuss brand personality as an established concept in marketing (Seimene
and Kamarauskaite 2014). As an example Aaker (1997) deﬁning brand personality
as “the set of human characteristics associated with a brand” gives us personality
traits associated with Coca Cola namely: cool, all-american and real as opposed to
those of Pepsi: young, exciting and hip and Dr. Pepper: non-conforming, unique and
fun.
Freeman (2004) has established a set of techniques he terms ‘Emotioneering’ for
the establishment of effective characters. A speciﬁc tool Freeman has established
is that of the character diamond. This is a set of traits allowing writers to consider
how a speciﬁc character might act in the course of a ﬁction. The character diamond
is termed a diamond because it is usually employed for human characters giving
four dimensions. Freeman gives us the example of Star Wars character Han Solo’s
character diamond (Fig. 4.1). Freeman also describes a three pointed, triangular
shape for non-player characters (NPCs), similar to Aaker’s personality traits for soft
drinks and a ﬁve pointed shape for more complicated characters. We could consider
personality traits for the three denim companies discussed above (Fig. 4.2).
These brand personalities affect all aspects of a companies’ interactions with the
outside world. In this way, if we are to create a product from a ﬁctional company, the
product will communicate the brand personality in its structure. This reﬂects modern
product design following principles of Total Design (Pugh 1991) where the design
and manufacturing process are synthesised into an iterative process. In this way
Fig. 4.1 Character diamond
for Han Solo

56
T. Flint
Fig. 4.2 Brand personalities of the denim companies discussed above
we can consider that a Samsung telephone will communicate the brand personality
of Samsung through its shape, interface and marketing. Using Freeman’s character
diamonds enables us to consider what a family of products from the same company
might be like.
4.6
Convincing Fiction
For Dunne and Raby (2013) it is important that speculative design is not something
that could necessarily exist in reality, it is the discussions designs provoke that
are more important. They also highlight a difference between speculative design
and design ﬁction claiming that they are different disciplines with differing remits.
Lindley and Coulton (2015) tell us “So a design ﬁction is (1) something that creates
a story world, (2) has something being prototyped within that story world, (3) does
so in order to create a discursive space.” If, as argued above, we are asking our
audience to cooperate through make believe in co-creating a story world we must
take care that it is believable. Loveridge (2010) argues that Design Fictions occupy
a space between the fantastic and the uncanny, for him it is imperative that we
employ techniques from ﬁlm, particularly science ﬁction in the creation of stories
our audience will believe.
Design Fictions include prototype products and we must consider that these
products do not appear fully realised from nowhere, they are the realisation of
human effort and particularly entrepreneurial practice. We must consider where
these products come from, are they the product of years of research realised in a
‘to market’ product? Are they the pursuit of a lone auteur and businessperson? Are
they one output from a large conglomerate? These nuances will have bearing on the
product and will be manifest in its construction. This is demonstrated throughout
the Alien ﬁlm franchise with the company Wayland Utani.
In the ﬁrst Alien ﬁlm, Alien (Scott 1979), this company has a dominant presence
with its branding on almost every surface. Wayland Yutani’s range of products
stretches from large spacecraft to beer drunk by the crew. In this ﬁlm series, it is
the motivations of “The Company” that is the driving force of the narrative. This

4
Fiction for Design: Appropriating Hollywood Techniques for Design Fictions
57
motivation is manifest by manipulating the crew to land on a planet in the hope that
an alien specimen will be returned to Earth for study. Ash, a synthetic human and a
product of Wayland Yutani, is the one character that is aware of the desire to capture
an alien and that the human crew are considered expendable. This ﬁlm establishes
Wayland Utani as the major antagonist for the whole franchise. The alien though
terrifying is simply acting to its nature; it is The Company that is the true monster.
In the ﬁrst sequel, Aliens (Cameron 1986), Wayland Yutani have an outward
public relations identity of attempting to help the human race settle extra terres-
trially with a highly visible slogan of “Building Better Worlds.” In this ﬁlm, the
company’s interest in capturing a specimen is born out by the character Carter
Burke, a corporate executive who conducts the protagonist Ripley’s debrief and
rehabilitation. Burke represents a familiar trope of an uncaring executive whose
motivation is promotion and reward for fulﬁlling The Company’s wishes. Through
Burke, Wayland Utani is able to attempt to manipulate the capture of an alien. In
Alien 3 (Fincher 1992), Ripley lands on a remote prison outpost and as soon as
the warden reveals her identity to The Company, it becomes evident that she is of
speciﬁc interest. In the ﬁnal ﬁlm of the original series, Alien Resurrection (Jeunet
1992), Ripley has been genetically resurrected by a secret arm of the military in
order to breed aliens as a weapon. Throughout the franchise, it is the desire of
external bodies to capture and study the alien that have been the underlying cause
of the disasters that have befallen our heroine.
When Scott returned to the franchise in the prequel Prometheus (Scott 2012) he
told the origin story of the discovery of the alien and the ancient ship that contained
it. In this story we are introduced to Peter Wayland, founder and owner of the
Wayland Corporation. During the ﬁlm’s narrative it becomes clear that Wayland’s
main motivation is to attempt to procure the secret to longevity. Although there is
not a great deal of exposition of the character in the ﬁlm, Scott turns to transmedia
efforts (Von Stackleburg 2014) to expand on the character of Peter Wayland. On a
corporate website for Wayland Industries (Fox date unknown), we are able to watch
his revolutionary TED™talk from the year 2023. We are also introduced to David,
the ﬁrst synthetic human developed by the corporation. In the feature ﬁlm, David
demonstrates a familiar disregard for the safety of crewmates when he deliberately
infects a character with a substance discovered on the alien ship.
The tropes employed in the original franchise are of the overbearing corporation
with little regard for people over proﬁt. Combined with the trope of an uncaring,
uncanny doppelganger (Freud 2003) or synthetic human, this makes for a powerful
and believable element of the overall fabula. Scott uses this established trope
to introduce the Peter Wayland character employing yet another trope of the
driven megalomaniac inventor with a total disregard for anyone who may consider
disrupting his machinations. Being made aware of this as an audience is credible
because it makes sense of some of the situations in the ﬁrst four ﬁlms. In this way
we can argue that any product that comes from the company should in some way
be born of this narrative. In fact, David’s ﬁngerprints incorporate a large W, the
Wayland Industries logo. When creating design ﬁctions, we must be aware of the
provenance of our products and implicitly design this narrative into their make up.

58
T. Flint
Our analysis reveals the careful construction of a story world in which various
writers and directors have told entertaining stories. The Company itself acts as
an antagonist throughout the series, operating malevolently in the background. If
not for the motivations of this character, there would be no story to tell. There
is a tension in the creation of narratives that are convincing and based on reality.
Markusen and Knutz (2013) posit “if ﬁction is to be measured according to its
resemblance to reality, then there will be no room for ﬁctional worlds that do not
resemble what we consider as real.”
4.7
Vital Fiction
This chapter has so far discussed the use of storytelling in product design and
demonstrated both its use in Hollywood and its power in creating brands. Our
discussion now turns to the importance of structure. Individuals have greater recall
of stories related to them that conform to speciﬁc structures (Mandler and Johnson
1977), implying stories and memory are linked. It is argued (Schank and Abelson
1977; Hassenzahl 2010) that phenomenological experience itself is made sense of
and stored in memory as stories.
Paul Zak (2015) has found that oxytocin is secreted when a person is trusted and
that this neurochemical promotes reciprocation. Oxytocin encourages a person to
be more generous when donating money and it will make them more likely to give
money to strangers. Zak’s work has produced empirical evidence that engaging,
structured narratives are effective in promoting the release of oxytocin, creating
empathy and triggering charitable acts. This is important when we consider our next
focus, crowdfunding videos on sites such as Kickstarter, Rockethub and IndieGoGo.
There can be no greater need for creating a convincing ﬁction than when seeking
funding. A typical crowdfunding campaign proposes a product or service and asks
members of the public to invest small amounts of money to support its development
and production. A particularly successful crowd funded company is Flint & Tinder
known for producing garments made in America. Starting with an idea to produce
underwear they rapidly expanded into other products. Their durable 10-year hoodie
was the ﬁrst fashion product to receive over a million dollars in pledges (Kickstarter
2015). The language Flint and Tinder use in their promotional videos is based
around domestic manufacturing and protection of US industry, echoing the story
behind Hiut denim.
The majority of crowdfunding campaigns use video as the main promotion tool
for their proposed product or service. Much of the motivation for investing in
crowdfunding is feeling part of a community (Gerber and Hui 2013) so it is crucial
that these ﬁctions be convincing, promoting empathy and charity as well as creating
feelings of community belonging. These campaigns are the act of telling the story of
a ﬁctional product in order to receive money to make it into being. It is possible to
make videos engaging and involving using structure and many modern ﬁlm writers
use a tool termed “The Paradigm” (Fig. 4.3). Syd Field ﬁrst introduced this structural

4
Fiction for Design: Appropriating Hollywood Techniques for Design Fictions
59
Fig. 4.3 A representation of Field’s Paradigm drawn by the author
tool in 1979 (Yardley 2013) and it has become increasingly inﬂuential. Field (1984)
describes the paradigm as a structure that acts as an open system allowing a writer
freedom to create a compelling narrative. Drawing from Aristotle’s Poetics, the
paradigm breaks a narrative into a three-act structure commencing with a set up,
moving to confrontation and ﬁnally resolution, these acts are navigated through
“plot points.”
The Paradigm has been used to deconstruct a number of ﬁlms including
The Shawshank Redemption (Darabont 1994). Plot points can be considered to
be revealing points in the narrative where new facts are gained changing the
protagonist’s and thereby the audience’s perspective of the story world. In Fig. 4.3
the arrow is used to represent the linear progression of narrative. Narratives are split
strictly according to time, for example, if a ﬁlm runs for 180 min, the ﬁrst act will
end 45 min into the narrative, with the second act ﬁnishing at 135 min.
We can deconstruct the ﬁlm The Terminator (Cameron 1984) in terms of the
Paradigm. In this ﬁlm A Cyborg Assassin, a Terminator is sent back through time
from a future where sentient machines are at war with humans. The Terminator’s
mission is to travel back to 1984 and murder a woman named Sarah Connor. In
the future, Connor’s unborn son John is the leader of the human army and will
lead mankind to victory. If the Terminator succeeds in its mission, the whole of
mankind is doomed. Sarah’s only hope is a soldier from the future who has chased
the Terminator back through time to protect her.
During Act 1, The Setup, we are introduced to the main characters. Both men
arrive naked, steal clothes and begin looking for a woman named Sarah Connor.
Sarah discovers that people with her name are being murdered and is scared to go
home choosing to hide in a nightclub. Plot point 1 occurs in the nightclub where
all three characters converge. This is where it is revealed to the audience that one
man is there to kill Sarah and the other to protect her. It is also evident that the
murderer is extremely resilient to gunshot wounds. Plot point 1 serves as a method
of transforming our point of view from ‘there are two suspicious men looking for a
woman’ to ‘one is there to kill her, one to save her.’

60
T. Flint
During the ﬁrst half of Act 2, The Confrontation, Sarah is in the company of her
rescuer, Reese but unsure of whether she can trust him. This is where the main plot
is exposed amongst a great deal of car chase action. The police arrest Reese and
take Sarah into protective custody. At this point the police assure Sarah that Reese
is delusional.
The Midpoint starts when the Terminator arrives at the police station and
proceeds to murder everyone inside. Sarah makes the decision to run towards Reese,
realising he is probably the only person who can protect her. The Midpoint of a ﬁlm
is a major turning point in the plot where the protagonist’s internal world is radically
changed. In The Terminator, this is the scene in the police station. In The Shawshank
Redemption it is the scene where the character Andy plays opera over the prison’s
PA system and he begins to accept his situation.
During the second part of Act 2 Sarah and Reese escape together and begin to
prepare to ﬁght the cyborg. Plot point 2 and the beginning of Act 3, The Resolution,
sees Reese declaring his love for Sarah and they have sex. This changes the mission
into a personal act of protection for Reese. He is no longer simply protecting his
leader’s mother, he is caring for his partner. The ﬁlm continues with a large amount
of confrontation resolving with Sarah’s successful destruction of the Terminator,
Reese’s death and the revelation that Reese is John’s father.
Using the Paradigm enables ﬁlmmakers to pace their ﬁlms successfully and
The Terminator uses structure to great effect. We can consider how structure
can help in the production of convincing crowdfunding videos and this is where
this text now turns. There can be no greater need to convince with a design
ﬁction than when trying to get people to part with money. To wit we examine a
successful crowdfunding project whose video employs structure successfully. The
crowdfunded product that will be focused on is Skylock™, a connected bicycle lock
that communicates with smartphones. We examine this video (Skylock 2014) as an
example of employing structure to impart a design concept.
To apply the paradigm to this video involves dividing it in time. The complete
running time of the video is 2 min and 4 s. Strictly conforming to the Paradigm, we
can expect that plot point 1 would be at 31 s, the midpoint at 1 min and 2 s and plot
point 2 at 1 min 33 s. This is represented graphically in Fig. 4.4. All images are used
with permission (Fig. 4.5).
Act 1 “The Setup”
Skylock employ the ﬁrst act to introduce the video we are watching. The ﬁrst 15 s of
the video are concerned with various establishing shots and images of the product
and the smartphone application. At exactly 15 s the shot focuses on the narrator,
standing behind his bike, which is locked to a typical piece of street furniture outside
a coffee shop. The initial 15 s are used to establish the fact that we are looking at
a video about a bike lock, the subsequent 15 s are used by the narrator to conﬁrm
that this is a video about a bike lock, which he assures us is as strong as any lock on
the market. Between 29 and 31 s, the narrator speaks the words “Skylock is keyless
entry for your bike,” this is the ﬁrst plot point, it is asserted that we are not looking
at an ordinary bike lock but keyless entry.

4
Fiction for Design: Appropriating Hollywood Techniques for Design Fictions
61
Fig. 4.4 A representation of the Paradigm with the Skylock video timeline super imposed
Fig. 4.5 Plotpoint 1 at 31 s
Act 2 “Confrontation”
The next 15 s establish the technology used and that the lock can be turned on
and off with a telephone application. The narrator also points out that the lock
has a solar panel “making sure its battery never runs out.” We can argue that the
video is employing a method of revealing functions over time, in this manner using
a classic selling technique (Moncrief and Marshall 2005) known as ‘overcoming
objections.’ Communication through video is mono directional so rather than wait
for a consumer to voice their objections, the video uses pacing and slow reveal to
create and then negate objections from the viewer. The ﬁrst part of act 2 is employed
here to make sure that the audience are clear that the lock is technically proﬁcient.

62
T. Flint
Fig. 4.6 Midpoint at 1 min 2 s
Midpoint
At 45 s the narrator is sat inside the coffee shop where he tells us “ordinarily I
wouldn’t leave my bike unattended for even an hour,” he then goes onto explain that
if he logs into the local Wi-Fi, the lock will alert him if anyone disturbs the bike. At
50 s, we see a hand shaking the bike, followed by an alert on the phone that prompts
the narrator to leave the coffee shop. A young man has his hand on the bike and the
narrator and the young man exchange glances. The midpoint is used here to present
an antagonist, the youth, and the exchange of glances is used to present the theft
alert capabilities of the lock (Fig. 4.6).
The narrator explains to camera that Skylock has an inbuilt accelerometer,
ﬁnishing the midpoint. We are then told that the accelerometer can be adjusted
for sensitivity and that the lock can be set to automatically open in response to
proximity. The narrator then declares “let’s talk safety (Fig. 4.7).”
Act3 “Resolution”
Plotpoint 2 is the narrator riding his bike into a post box. He uses this opportunity
to explain the feature of the lock where it is able to contact emergency services in
the event of an accident.
The video then cuts to an indoors shot where the narrator appears to be at home
and a new female character is in the background. It is at this point that we are
introduced to the bike sharing function of the application. The female character
says goodbye to the narrator and we then see shots of her unlocking and taking his
bike.
This video is divided into three acts and employs plotpoints to progress the
narrative. Act 1 or the setup, explains the technology and that the video is discussing

4
Fiction for Design: Appropriating Hollywood Techniques for Design Fictions
63
Fig. 4.7 Plotpoint 2 at 1 min 33 s
a new type of bike lock, plot point 1 is where keyless entry is established. Act 2
or the confrontation is used to demonstrate the anti-theft attributes of the product.
Plotpoint 2 is where our protagonist, the narrator crashes and is used to demonstrate
the lock’s ability to alert emergency services. The video is resolved with the
protagonist safe at home, sharing his bike with his partner through the app.
This case study of Skylock is an example of structure helping to drive a narrative.
By breaking down the essential information to impart, the video producers are able
to employ structure to reveal important features of the product. The video is aided
by its humour and deft use of cinematographic techniques such as composition.
Another example of a successful crowdfunding campaign is that of Tens
sunglasses. Their campaign video (Tens 2014) elicited a great deal more funding
than expected, allowing the company to expand and establish itself in the market
place (Hurst 2014). In an interview discussing the making of their video, company
director Tom Welsh stated “I was very aware of creating tension and pacing at
particular points in our video. I made sure we edited it in a way that would reﬂect
this.”
4.8
Pulp Fiction
This chapter is about story telling and make-believe and offers some tools for
public communication. It has established that stories are collaborative acts between
communicator and audience. Treating audiences as sophisticated participants able
to comprehend meaning on a number of levels allows us to tell engaging stories. The
use of tropes is effective and relevant for a modern audience. The use of ﬁction in

64
T. Flint
the area of HCI is not a new phenomenon and to this end the text has brieﬂy focused
on the use of scenarios. We have then discussed the relatively modern phenomenon
of Design Fictions and introduced the concept of speculation rather than function.
The text digresses into the world of denim retail to make the point of brands as
characters. If we treat brands as characters in our ﬁctions, then we are able to create
more convincing story worlds. This is evidenced with the example of Wayland Utani
from Alien. By creating and establishing a believable company, Ridley Scott and
others are able to use the story world as a constraint to embellish the story whilst
maintaining continuity. The lesson here is that we should ensure that when we create
diegetic prototypes that we consider where they come from.
Structure is introduced as a tool employed in Hollywood for establishing and
maintaining tension through a narrative. Again we ﬁnd ourselves having to move
outside the laboratory to ﬁnd effective examples of the use of structure. The acts
of make-believe that are crowd funding videos ask us to pretend a product exists to
such an extent that we are prepared to part with money to embody it.
The reader is asked to consider these tools when employing narrative in
communication. Tropes allow a shorthand communication of familiar concepts
to audiences. Character diamonds afford the creation of believable companies.
Employing structure effectively makes video believable and memorable promoting
action.
Acknowledgements The author would like to thank Velo Labs for allowing the use of their
images. Thanks also go to Dr. Charles Kriel for the original deconstruction of The Terminator
in terms of the Paradigm.
References
Aaker J (1997) Dimensions of brand personality. J Mark Res 34(3):347–356
Barthes R (1972) Mythologies. Vintage, London
Benford S, Giannachi G (2011) Performing mixed reality. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Benyon D, Macaulay C (2002) Scenarios and the HCI-SE design problem. Interact Comp
14(4):397–405
Berger J (1972) Ways of seeing. Penguin, London
Bleecker J (2010) Design ﬁction: from props to prototypes swiss design network conference
2010. Available from: http://www.swissdesignnetwork.org/daten_swissdesignnetwork/docs/
Conference%20Book%20Swiss%20Design%20Network%20Conference%202010.pdf.
Last
accessed 8 Aug 2015
Blythe M (2014) Research through design ﬁction: narrative in real and imaginary abstracts CHI
2014. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems,
Toronto
Bodker (2000) Scenarios in user-centred design – setting the stage for reﬂection and action. Interact
Comput 13(1):61–75
Cameron J (1984) The Terminator. 20th Century Fox, Los Angeles, USA
Cameron J (1986) Aliens. 20th Century Fox. Los Angeles, USA
Carroll J (2000) Five reasons for scenario-based design. Interact Comput 13(1):43–60
Darabont F (1994) The Shawshank Redemption. Castle Rock, Los Angeles, USA

4
Fiction for Design: Appropriating Hollywood Techniques for Design Fictions
65
DiSalvo (2012) Spectacles and tropes: speculative design and contemporary food cultures. Fibrecul
J Issues 20:109–122
Dunne A, Raby F (2004) Is this your future? Exhibition, science museum catalogue. Available
from http://www.dunneandraby.co.uk/content/projects/68/0 Last accessed 24 July 2015
Dunne A, Raby F (2013) Speculative everything: design, ﬁction, and social dreaming. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA
Field S (1984) The screenwriter’s workbook. Bantam Dell, New York
Fincher D (1992) Alien 3. 20th Century Fox, Los Angeles, USA
Fox (date unknown) Weyland industries. Available from http://www.weylandindustries.com. Last
accessed 29 June 2015
Freeman D (2004) Creating emotion in games: the art and craft of emotioneering. New Riders, San
Francisco
Freud S (2003) The uncanny. Penguin Books, London
Gaver W (2012) What should we expect from research through design? In: CHI 2012, Austin,
Texas, USA
Gerber E, Hui J (2013) Crowdfunding: motivations and deterrents for participation. ACM Trans
Comput-Hum Interact 20(6), Article 34:32
Hall (2012) This means this this means that a user’s guide to semiotics, 2nd edn. Laurence King
Publishing, London
Hassenzahl M (2010) Experience design, technology for all the right reasons. Morgan & Claypool,
San Rafael
Hiut (2012) Our-town-is-going-to-make-jeans-again. Available from: http://hiutdenim.co.uk/
blogs/story/5156362-our-town-is-going-to-make-jeans-again. Last accessed 26 June 2015
Howells R (2003) Visual culture. Polity. Cambridge
Huang-Ming C, Ivonin L, Diaz M, Catala A, Chen W, Rauterberg M (2015) Enacting archetypes in
movies: grounding the unconscious mind in emotion-driven media. Digit Creat 26(2):154–173.
doi:10.1080/14626268.2014.939985
Hurst S (2014) Indiegogo-success tens announces Singapore expansion. Available from http://
www.crowdfundinsider.com/2014/10/52315-indiegogo-success-tens-announces-singapore-
expansion/. Last accessed 15 Aug 2015
Jeunet J-P (1992) Alien Resurrection. 20th Century Fox, Los Angeles, USA
Keet P (2011) Making new vintage jeans in Japan: relocating authenticity. Text J Cloth Cult
9(1):44–61
Kellner H (1981) The inﬂatable trope as narrative theory: structure or allegory? Diacritics
11(1):14–28
Kickstarter
(2015)
The
10-year
Hoodie:
built
for
life,
backed
for
a
decade!
Avail-
able from https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/jakehimself/the-10-year-hoodie-built-for-life-
backed-for-a-decade. Last accessed 26 July 2015
Kirby D (2009) The future is now: diegetic prototypes and the role of popular ﬁlms in generating
real-world technological development. Soc Stud Sci XX(X):1–30
Levi’s (2015) Levi’s vintage clothing. Available from: http://levisvintageclothing.levi.com/GB/en_
GB/#/1933-501-jean/showcase/ﬁt. Last accessed 26 June 2015
Lindley J (2015) Researching design ﬁction with design ﬁction creativity and cognition 2015. In:
Proceedings of creativity & cognition, Glasgow
Lindley J, Coulton P (2015) Back to the future: 10 years of design ﬁction. In: Proceedings of
British HCI 2014, Lincoln
Lister M, Dovey J, Giddings S, Grant I, Kelly K (2009) New media a critical introduction, 2nd
edn. Routledge, London
Loveridge R (2010) Fantastic form swiss design network conference 2010. Available from:
http://www.swissdesignnetwork.org/daten_swissdesignnetwork/docs/Conference%20Book
%20Swiss%20Design%20Network%20Conference%202010.pdf. Last accessed 8th Aug 2015
Mandler J, Johnson N (1977) Remembrance of things parsed: story and structure and recall. Cogn
Psychol 1(9):111–151

66
T. Flint
Markusen T, Knutz E (2013) The poetics of design ﬁction DPPI 2013. Proceedings of designing
pleasurable products and interfaces, 3–5 September 2013, Newcastle upon Tyne
Microsoft (2009) Microsoft ofﬁce labs vision 2019 video. Available from https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=8Ff7SzP4gfg. Last accessed 7 Aug 2015
Moncrief W, Marshall G (2005) The evolution of the seven steps of selling. Ind Mark Manag
34(1):13–22
Morrison A, Tronstad R, Martinussen E (2013) Design notes on a lonely drone. Digit Creat
24(1):46–59
Moulthorp (2009) See the strings: watchmen and the under-language of media. In: Harrigan
P, Wardrip-Fruin (eds) Third person authoring and exploring vast narratives. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA
Mulvey (1975) Visual pleasure and narrative cinema. Screen 16(3):6–18
Near Future Laboratory (2014) TBD catalog. Self published, USA
Near Future Laboratory (date unknown). http://nearfuturelaboratory.com. Last accessed 24 July
2015
Nielsen L (2014) Personas. In: Soegaard M, Dam RF (eds) The encyclopedia of human-computer
interaction, 2nd edn. Aarhus: The Interaction Design Foundation. Available online at https://
www.interaction-design.org/encyclopedia/personas.html
Örnebring H (2007) Alternate reality gaming and convergence culture. Int J Cult Stud 10(4):445–
462
Pugh S (1991) Total design: integrated methods for successful product engineering. Addison
Wesley, Boston, USA
Schank R, Abelson R (1977) Scripts plans goals and understanding. Psychology Press, London
Scott R (1979) Alien 20th Century Fox. Los Angeles, USA
Scott R (2012) Prometheus. 20th Century Fox. Los Angeles, USA
Sean (2012) Raw denim myths the truth about selvedge denim. http://www.rawrdenim.com/2012/
08/raw-denim-myths-the-truth-about-selvedge-denim/. Last accessed 12 Oct 2015
Seimene E, Kamarauskaite E (2014) Effect of brand elements on brand personality perception. In:
Proceedings of the 19th international scientiﬁc conference: economics and management, Riga,
Latvia
Skylock (2014) Skylock – your bicycle. Connected. YouTube video. Available from: https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=6gyLPjDakAc. Last accessed 10 June 2015
TBD (Date Unknown) TBD catalog available from: http://tbdcatalog.com. Last accessed 4 Aug
2015
Tens (2014) Tens: #TheRealLifePhotoFilter. Available from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
Q9N7hwJ29gQ. Last accessed 14 Aug 2015
Vines J, Thieme A, Comber R, Blythe M, Wright P, Olivier P (2013) HCI in the press: online
public reactions to mass media portrayals of HCI research CHI 13. In: Proceedings of the
SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems, Paris, France
Von Stackleburg P (2014) Tales of our tomorrows: transmedia storytelling and communicating
about the future. J Futur Stud 18(3):57–76
Walton K (1980) Appreciating ﬁction: suspending disbelief or pretending belief? Dispositio
V(13–14):1–18
Walton K (1990) Mimesis as make-believe. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA
Yardley W (2013) Syd ﬁeld, who wrote the book on writing screenplays dies at 77. New
York Times. Available from: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/19/arts/syd-ﬁeld-author-of-
the-deﬁnitive-work-on-writing-screenplays-is-dead-at-77.html?_r=0. Last accessed 10 June
2015
Zak P (2015) Why inspiring stories make us react: the neuroscience of narrative cerebrum. Dana
Foundation, New York

Chapter 5
Designing for Service Experiences
Satu Luojus and J. Tuomas Harviainen
5.1
Introduction
In this chapter, we discuss the way service design processes are conducted through
make-believe, and the contributions that service design and its modes of thinking
can offer for HCI. Focusing on the experientiality of service, we through a review
of design processes, business logics and sample techniques illustrate the presence
of make-believe at all stages of fruitful design.
Modern technology is interactive and intelligent, and thus may appear complex
or difﬁcult to use from the user’s point of view. Aspects of interaction between
human and interactive technologies have traditionally been addressed by research
and practice in areas such as Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) and Computer-
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW). The researchers and practitioners in HCI
have recognized a need for understanding the relationship between people and
technology in a more comprehensive manner. They have been trying to solve design
problems by, for example, concentrating on designing for user experiences.
The rapid technologic evolution has raised new challenges for the various ﬁelds
of design. Mager and Sung (2011) recognize two essential changes going on: (1)
the role of design is shifting from being seen as styling through design as a process,
towards design as a strategy, and (2) a continuous shift from the design of the
tangible world to the world of interactions, moving frominteraction to experience
S. Luojus ()
Laurea University of Applied Sciences, Espoo, Finland
e-mail: Satu.Luojus@laurea.ﬁ
J.T. Harviainen
Management and Organization, Hanken School of Economics, Helsinki, Finland
e-mail: tuomas.harviainen@hanken.ﬁ
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
P. Turner, J.T. Harviainen (eds.), Digital Make-Believe,
Human–Computer Interaction Series, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-29553-4_5
67

68
S. Luojus and J.T. Harviainen
and then from experience to services. They go even further, for their design is “about
strategies and structures, processes and interactions – altogether about services”
(Mager and Sung 2011).
The digital revolution has raised new challenges for designing services as well.
At the same time, while services have become the most important economic power
in the world (e.g. Ostrom et al. 2010) the nature of services and the pace of
change have shifted dramatically. Services have evolved into multichannel services
where digital technology plays a signiﬁcant role (Miettinen et al. 2014). According
to Patricio et al. (2011) service ﬁelds agree that further research is needed to
address these challenges in e.g. marketing, operations management, innovation
management, interaction design, design, and service science. They emphasize that
some areas need particular attention, such as the growing complexity of service
systems, the emergence of multichannel services, and customer co-creation of
service experiences (Patricio et al. 2011). Thus, traditional interaction design should
be viewed in a more holistic way – through a service design lens.
Together these trends have resulted in the need for novel interdisciplinary
approaches to respond to the increasing complexity of modern technology and
modern business. New concepts, methods, and tools are needed to invent, identify
and evaluate multidimensional services – and to make them intuitive and simple
to use from the user’s perspective. At the same time, designers have to understand
the way in which people engage with new interfaces based on their existing mental
models that come from previous engagements with products and services. Users
intuitively make believe that the new actions they perform are similar enough with
their existing patterns of behaviour. Comprehending this requires an understanding
of the possible ways of interaction with interfaces and the role imagination plays
in it. To acquire that, methods of make-believe are required, for both envisioning
new services and for making sure that those services ﬁt customers’ needs and
intuitive logics. Human experience (e.g. user experience, customer experience,
service experience, tourist experience) research has received increasing importance
in academic discussion in the design ﬁelds. Service design is a useful approach when
trying to understand and design for human experiences.
The intent of this chapter is to outline how to engage interaction design and
service design in fruitful dialogue, and how they connect to imagination and
make-believe. It presents a short history of the different stages of current HCI
research, from cognitive information processing psychology and studies of the user
as rational data processor to user experience design and understanding technology
as an experience, in many cases through the use of make-believe. Secondly, it
brieﬂy discusses the simultaneously paradigm shift and how the new business
logics have dramatically changed the understanding of business thinking and value
creation in the ﬁeld of service marketing and managing. Finally, it presents service
design approaches and processes. As an outcome, it introduces three innovative and
creative service design methods that can be useful in the ﬁeld of HCI.

5
Designing for Service Experiences
69
5.2
Shifting Focus from Products to Experiences
A Short History of Current HCI
The roots of HCI extend at least to WWII, but in its current form, it started at the turn
of the 1970s and 1980s when the use of computers became more common and the
general public became aware of problems in understanding the interaction between
humans and computers. When personal computers became more common, this ﬁeld
of research suddenly gained both social and ﬁnancial signiﬁcance, and HCI research
quickly expanded both in companies and in universities. The model of human
cognition was adopted as the information-processing paradigm of computer science
in the early 1980s (Kaptelinin and Nardi 2006). Challenges for the dominance of
the cognitive paradigm and observations about the limitations of the traditional
information-processing paradigm began to appear as early as in the mid-1980s
(e.g. Winograd and Flores 1986; Suchman 1987). The limitations of cognitivist
thinking and the need for a broader focus in HCI research and development were
acknowledged by the mainstream HCI community (e.g. Grudin 1990; Bannon 1991;
Kuutti 1995) by the early 1990s.
When information technology or communication technology devices became
more common and expanded into consumer products in the 1990s, new challenges
for interaction design emerged. “Post-cognitivist” approaches were created in HCI
research to understand the problems of living with technology. The term post-
cognitivist refers to an approach based on the idea that it is difﬁcult or impossible to
address these issues by utilising cognitivist information-processing psychology, and
thus researchers have strived to introduce new elements into the original theoretical
basis of HCI. Theories have been developed in order to study (1) the human element
when using computers from viewpoints other than cognition and (2) the human-
computer use case in a broader sense than the immediate interaction (Kuutti 2009).
After the turn of the millennium, HCI researchers started to search a solution
for design problems by focusing on designing user experience (cf. ACM series of
Designing User Experience (DUX) conferences). This approach focuses on the role
and activities of users not only as rational but also emotional beings and consumers
seeking pleasure and status (cf. Pine and Gilmore 1998). User experience (UX)
in itself is a new important concept that aims at describing the comprehensive
relationship between a user and a product, as well as the service provided by
the product (Jääskö et al. 2003). During the last dozen years UX has become a
focus of attention in HCI research. The HCI community has recently recognized
a need for a complementary conceptual-theoretical discussion about UX. Not only
theoretical study of the phenomenon is needed but also analytical tools to more
comprehensively analyse and understand UX (Luojus 2010).
The design of digital services increasingly utilizes these concepts. User expe-
rience design requires an understanding of customer needs, and service design
excels in acquiring such data. Make-believe allows researchers and designers to
then extrapolate from that data, creating an understanding of many customers’ needs

70
S. Luojus and J.T. Harviainen
through insight into the needs of a few of them. This understanding is combined with
a customer-oriented business approach, in order to create contexts where the HCI
design’s results are seen as means and tools for providing services and solutions to
customers, not as products. Because this drastic shift in perspective is based on a
different view of the market, we next examine the logics that underlie at the base of
such an approach.
Shifting Focus from Products to Customers in Service
Marketing and Managing
During the past decade, the academic discussion in service marketing and manage-
ment has shifted from a manufacturing way of thinking, i.e. goods-dominant logic
(GDL), towards service-dominant logic (SDL), service logic, and further, towards
customer-dominant logic (CDL). Business logic refers to a strategic mindset of a
company and its business activities that guide conscious decisions made in that
company (Heinonen et al. 2010; Ojasalo and Ojasalo 2015). Focus of contemporary
academic discussion on business logics is on the identiﬁcation and creation of
customer value (e.g. Vargo and Lusch 2008; Heinonen et al. 2010; Grönroos and
Ravald 2011; Ojasalo and Ojasalo 2015).
According to goods-dominant logic every company has a position in a value
chain, adding value to inputs and then passing them to the customers, who are
the actors in the end of the value chain. In goods-dominant logic value creation
takes place inside a company through its own activities (Ojasalo and Ojasalo 2015).
Customers are seen as an external part and through segments, which the companies
tried to capture and act on (Prahalad and Ramaswamy 2004; Lüftenegger 2014).
Goods-dominant logic suggests that value is added in the units of output, and the
outputs present the essential units of exchange (Vargo and Lusch 2008; Ojasalo and
Ojasalo 2015).
New business logics, service-dominant logic (Vargo and Lusch 2004, 2008),
service logic (Grönroos 2006, 2008), and customer-dominant logic (Heinonen et
al. 2010; Voima et al. 2010) highlight customers’ active role in value creation.
The fundamental principle of the service-dominant logic is that the value emerges
when the offering is used and experienced by the customer (Vargo and Lusch 2004,
2008). SDL emphasizes the co-creation of value, value-in-use and value-in-context,
which are proposed as an alternative approach to the traditional notion of value-in-
exchange (Ojasalo and Ojasalo 2015). The company offers value propositions and
value is always co-created together between the service provider and the customer
(Vargo et al. 2008). Lüftenegger (2014) proposes that SDL is focused on value co-
creation as a collaborative process and the integration between the producer, the
consumer, and other supply and value network partners (Lüftenegger 2014). While
the ideas may come from marketing, for HCI this is an important shift in design
perspectives: as we move to understanding the systems and interfaces we create as
tools for delivering service, instead of as products, we are better able to imagine how

5
Designing for Service Experiences
71
the users will relate to that which we have produced. That insight, in turn, will enable
better design, with a focus on delivering solutions for customer needs and wants.
Grönroos (2006, 2008) has further developed the idea of SDL and provides an
alternative approach, service logic. Service logic proposes that customers are value
creators during value-generating processes and in value-supporting interactions,
while companies are the facilitators and co-creators that engage themselves in the
customers’ value creation processes. Thus, the customers not only deﬁne the value,
but also control the value creation in their own processes (Heinonen et al. 2010;
Voima et al. 2010; Grönroos and Ravald 2011). This means that companies search
for possibilities to understand and support the customers’ value creation processes
(e.g. Grönroos and Ravald 2011; Grönroos and Voima 2013) and create resources
and means to facilitate customers to create value for themselves (Grönroos 2006).
In the beginning of 2010s the service-dominant logic and service logic were
argued to be still production and interaction focused (e.g. Heinonen et al. 2010;
Strandvik et al. 2012). Although the customer was seen as a partner in co-creation,
service was viewed from the perspective of a service provider. The customer-
dominant logic (CDL) (e.g. Heinonen et al. 2010; Grönroos and Voima 2013)
takes the SDL thinking further emphasizing a deeper understanding and knowledge
of the customer’s daily life and the service experience as a long-term, in a
context related process. It is essential for companies to understand how the value
emerges in the customer’s mental and emotional experiences; to understand the
customer experiences before and after the actual service interaction, and to know
how the customer experiences the value in her/his own context, i.e., what is the
customer doing in order to accomplish their goals (Ojasalo and Ojasalo 2015).
CDL emphasizes that the value is emerged, when the service becomes embedded
in the customer’s own context, processes, activities and experiences. Service design
therefore takes into account not only the customer, but optimally as many key actors
and stakeholders in the service’s ecosystem as possible. We next discuss how this is
typically accomplished.
5.3
Service Design Approach
Design is an integrative discipline. Buchanan (1996) writes about ‘wicked prob-
lems’ of ‘design thinking’ common to all designers despite of professions and
academic disciplines. He argues that different areas of design point towards certain
kinds of objectivity in human experience, and the work of designers in each of
these areas has to create a framework for human experience in contemporary culture
(Buchanan 1996).
Stickdorn and Schneider (2011) discuss the ﬁve core principles of service design
thinking: (1) user-centered; (2) co-creative (3) sequencing; and (4) evidencing, and
(5) holistic.
(1) User-centered design approach is based on the principles that can be found
in “Human-centered design for interactive systems” (ISO 9241-210) and that can

72
S. Luojus and J.T. Harviainen
Fig. 5.1 Human-centered design for interactive systems (ISO)
be summarized in the following manner (Fig. 5.1): (A) the design is based upon
an explicit understanding of users, tasks and environments; (B) users are involved
throughout the design and development process; (C) the design is driven and reﬁned
by user-centered evaluation; (D) the process is iterative by nature; (E) the design
addresses the whole user experience and (F) the design team has multidisciplinary
skills and perspectives (ISO 9241-210).
(2) Co-creative. Mattelmäki and Sleeswijk Visser (2011) clarify the relationship
of co-design and co-creation in the context of design research as follows: “Co-design
is a process and the planning, adjusting tools and facilitation is built on a mind-set
based on collaboration. Co-creation can take place within the co-design processes
but focuses much more on the collective creativity of involved users and stakehold-
ers.” The notion of co-creation has adopted also in business literature. As noted
before, there has been an apparent shift away from goods-dominant logic (GDL)
that sees value embedded in products and services (value-in-exchange) to customer-
dominant logic (CDL) where value is embedded in personalized experiences (value-
in-use) (Prahalad and Ramaswamy 2004). In the value co-creation, the service
company and its customer are together creating value for the customer, as well as
for the service company (e.g. Gupta and Lehman 2005; Ramaswamy and Gouillart
2010). In the modern business thinking a company’s co-creation approach is viewed
from three angles: (A) Strategic thinking and the business model, (B) Customer
interactions and relationships, and (C) Service design processes (Ojasalo 2010).
(3) Sequencing. Services are created through the interaction between the service
provider and the customer in a dynamic process taking place over a certain period of

5
Designing for Service Experiences
73
time. Each service process follows a three stage continuum from pre-service period
to the actual service period and ﬁnally to the subsequent post service period. The
service processes can be divided into single touch-points, when interaction between
the service provider and the customer takes place. Thinking these touch points
can happen through different interfaces, such as human to human and human to
technology. According to service design these service moments should be visualized
and well organized as a sequence of interrelated actions, enabling a pleasant rhythm
and progress of the customer’s mood by communicating the story inherently to the
service through each touch point. This is a key area where make-believe comes in:
using tools of imagination, extrapolations of deep customer insight data, desktop
walkthroughs, and other similar means, service designers model the interaction and
seek to optimize it (Stickdorn and Schneider 2011).
(4) Evidencing. Due to the intangible nature of service, physical evidence
or artefacts, such as souvenirs, brochures, or signs, can enhance the customer
experience by triggering positive associations and memories about the service
moments. Physical or tangible service evidence can therefore prolong the service
experiences from the actual service period far into the post-service period, poten-
tially increasing customer loyalty and engagement. They allow users to return to the
service experiences, reliving them through make-believe anchored by the physical
reminders. It is crucial however that the service evidence is designed as an integral
and natural part to the service and the sequence of touch-points (Stickdorn and
Schneider 2011).
(5) Holistic. When designing services, the wider context of the environment, in
which the service process takes place, should be considered. The service designers
should understand and be consciously aware of what the customers may subcon-
sciously perceive through their senses from the entire service environment. These
subconscious perceptions can have a profound impact on the service experience.
In addition, when designing a detailed touch-point, it is necessary to understand the
whole customer journey and to know where this particular touch point lies in relation
to the entire customer experience. Furthermore, the holistic approach needs to be
incorporated to the entire organization of the service provider. The organizational
culture, values, norms along with its structure and processes are important elements
for the success of service design. Thus, there cannot be any inconsistencies between
the corporate identity and objectives with the corporate image perceived by the
customer (Stickdorn and Schneider 2011).
The service design approach is both a set of methods for service designers as
well as an emerging academic ﬁeld of design research (Ojasalo and Ojasalo 2015;
Miettinen and Valtonen 2012; Miettinen et al. 2014) with a focus on complex
and interactive experiences and processes. The multidisciplinary service design
approach has been widely disseminated and rapidly adapted among designers,
because the service design methods have proven to be very powerful in bringing
customers and the service experience into the focus of service development process
(Ojasalo et al. 2015; Ojasalo and Ojasalo 2015). Many of the tools rely on make-
believe for their effect. For example, personas are imaginary target customers
created by extrapolating from existing customer data and then used as a basis for

74
S. Luojus and J.T. Harviainen
designing for the segments which they represent. Academic research on service
design is increasing (Ojasalo and Ojasalo 2015) and the basic concepts and
paradigm are still developing (Miettinen et al. 2014).
Due to their inherent nature of being intangible, and being simultaneously
produced and consumed (Vargo and Lusch 2004), services cannot be stored in
an inventory like traditional products. Service is created through the interaction
between the service provider and the customer (Zeithaml et al. 2013). According
to Mager and Sung (2011) service design aims at “designing services that are
useful, usable and desirable from the user perspective, and efﬁcient, effective
and different from the provider perspective. It is strategic approach that helps
providers to develop clear strategic positioning for their service offerings. Services
are systems that involve many different inﬂuential factors, so service design takes
holistic approach in order to get an understanding of the system and the different
actors within the system.” (Mager and Sung 2011).
5.4
Service Design Process Models
There are several service design processes model or frameworks available usually
consisting of three or even up to seven stages, but fundamentally all service
design processes share the same logic and mindset (Stickdorn and Schneider 2011;
Tschimmel 2012). Each service design process model is complementary to existing
design methodologies and provides a service design thinking perspective that can
be integrated into different design and development processes in a way that is
appropriate to the particular context. In other words, various tools and methods can
be used in each stage, depending on the desired outcome.
Stickdorn and Schneider (2011) emphasize that the service design processes are
usually presented as having a clear and chronological structure, but in reality the
service design processes are nonlinear and iterative by nature (see ISO 9241-210).
The iterative approach is fundamental for service design processes, enabling the
designers to learn from the mistakes and to take the process in the right direction
based on these learnings. The idea is to notice the mistakes as early as possible in
the design process and before actually implementing the new concept. The cost of
iteration is marginal compared to changing the service concept that has already been
launched full scale (Liedtka and Ogilvie 2011; Stickdorn and Schneider 2011). In
the following section, a selection of perhaps the most well-known and used service
design processes are introduced.
(I) The Double Diamond Model (or 4D Model) by the British Design Council
has been divided into four distinct phases, Discover, Deﬁne, Develop and
Deliver. (1) In the Discovery phase the designer identiﬁes the problem,
opportunities and need to be addressed through design, deﬁne the solution
space and build a rich knowledge resource with inspiration and insights. (2)
The Deﬁne stage acts as a ﬁlter in which the outputs of the previous phase
are reviewed are analysed and the ﬁndings are synthesized into a reduced

5
Designing for Service Experiences
75
number of opportunities. Furthermore, the designer deﬁnes a clear brief for
sign off by all stakeholders. The main activities in (3) the Deﬁnition phase are
to develop the initial brief into a product or service for implementation, design
service components in detail and as part of the holistic experience, and ﬁnally
to iteratively test concepts with end users. In the last phase, (4) the Deliver
stage, the ﬁnal solution concepts are taken through ﬁnal testing, signed-off,
produced and launched (British Design Council).
(II) The 3 I model (Inspiration, Ideation, and Implementation) was developed
by IDEO in 2001 in the context of social innovation. (1) The Inspiration
stages includes the following stages: the identiﬁcation of the service design
problem motivating the search for solutions; the elaboration of the design brief
providing the service design team a framework; and the observation of the
customers for gathering deep insights about the behaviour and needs of the
users in their own environment. (2) In the Ideation stage is the process of
generating, developing and testing ideas. In this phase, the interdisciplinary
service design team aims to synthesize the observations and learnings they
have gathered in the Inspiration phase into insights reﬂecting opportunities
and ideas for new solutions, i.e. the ideas for solving the initial problem or
opportunity are brainstormed and visual representations of the new service
concepts are made. The selected concepts are tested, iterated and improved
through prototyping. (3) The Implementation phase takes the project from
concepts to the market, i.e. once the ﬁnal product or service has been created
based on the feedback gathered from the users. The three overlapping spaces of
innovation described above provide the necessary boundaries, without which
the design simply cannot happen. Brown (2009) takes this thinking further
by stating that the acceptance of these boundaries is the foundation of design
thinking. He states that these constraints can be visualized as three overlapping
criteria for successful concepts: feasibility (what is functionally possible),
viability (is it possible to create a sustainable business model), desirability
(what makes sense for people, do they want to use the solution and does it
satisfy their needs) (Brown 2009).
(III) Moritz (2005) presents a service design (SD) process as a set of tasks that
have been grouped into six categories: SD Understanding, SD Thinking, SD
Generating, SD Filtering, SD Explaining and SD Realizing. The categories
enable an easy application of the list of tasks and also tools to be utilized in a
service design project. All categories have their objectives and each task acts as
an intermediary step helping to reach these objectives. (1) SD Understanding
is about researching the customers’ both conscious and unconscious or latent
needs. It is about ﬁnding out about the context, the constraints and resources
as well as exploring different possibilities. In this stage, insights identifying
areas the company should aim for are generated. This phase takes the project
beyond things that the participants are already familiar with through exploring
the customer’s wants, needs, motivations and contexts as well as investigating
the business and technical requirements and constraints, i.e. what do the
customers’ desire, what is feasible and viable. (2) SD Thinking identiﬁes

76
S. Luojus and J.T. Harviainen
the purpose and objectives for the project, provides strategic direction for
the service design project by setting the parameters for the other categories,
making sure that all other categories work in line with the strategy. (3) SD
Generating includes the development of relevant, intelligent and innovative
ideas, the creation of role-, design- and concept alternatives as well as crafting
details and consistency. In practice, this stage is about doing, creating and
coming up with ideas and strong solution concepts, through the use of make-
believe as a tool for imagining the potential end results. In addition, the service
experience is developed, including all the details, spaces and elements required
for providing superior experiences matching the customer needs. (4) In the
SD Filtering stage, the most relevant and promising ideas are selected and
evaluated against speciﬁc criteria, requirements and measures (e.g. subjective,
heuristic, economic, technical and legal). The performance and quality and
the service components of these selected solutions are tested and measured.
Here, too, make-believe plays a signiﬁcant role, as testing methods rely on
tools that function through representation rather than model the eventual result
perfectly. For example, websites are often feasibility tested by using simpliﬁed
wireframes, servicescapes with methods such as LEGO® walkthroughs, and
physical items rapidly prototyped with things like cardboard mock-ups. These
anchors enable the testers to envision what using the service would roughly
feel like (5) Comprehensive understanding of the main ﬁndings and insights,
ideas and processes is vital for ensuring a successful of SD Explaining phase.
This phase is a necessary step for creating shared understanding within the
multidisciplinary team and stakeholders by visualizing the ideas and concepts;
as well as testing the service experiences by prototyping. The same make-
believe tools that help ﬁltering play an even more important role on this
stage, as the anchors make possible not just imagining, but also a shared
imagining that results in common insight and understanding. (6) SD Realizing
is about making it happen; developing and implementing prototypes, solutions
and processes, writing business plans, instructions and guidelines as well as
conducting training and brieﬁngs for ensuring consistent touch-points, i.e.
everything that is needed to plan, specify and rollout a service. SD Realizing
too can be done either by testing an experience prototype or the actual service,
ensuring the best possible service performance. However, as service systems
are complex and the environment likely to change, it will always be necessary
to continue improving the service. Thus, this phase should be considered a
new beginning instead of the end of the service design process (Moritz 2005).
(IV) The service design process deﬁned by Liedtka and Ogilvie (2011) is based
on four basic questions, representing the four stages of the process: What is?
What if? What wows? and What works? (1) The What is? phase explores
the prevailing reality, aiming to deﬁne the job the customer is trying to get
done and what are their current problems or dislikes. This means the framing
of the design challenge based on the as-is situation. (2) The What if? phase
is about synthesizing the information and emerging patterns gathered in the
What is stage, developing hypothesis about the possibilities and the desirable

5
Designing for Service Experiences
77
futures as well as generating ideas and developing concepts based on these
identiﬁed possibilities and future visions. Obviously, this stage is largely the
realm of fruitful make-believe, yet it is important to note that it is still guided
by the fact-base created during What is?. In the What wows? phase, the
most promising concepts, meeting the customer needs and providing attractive
proﬁt potential, are prioritized and tested in the market via rapid prototyping in
order to collect real-time data about the concept performance. The ﬁnal stage,
i.e. What works?, is about determining what works by inviting customers
into an active and hands-on co-creation conversation and taking the service
concepts into the market via careful launch planning and trials, ensuring that
the concept will persuade the customers and get the awareness required for
success (Liedtka and Ogilvie 2011).
(V) Stickdorn and Schneider (2011) present a service design process that has been
divided into four stages: exploration, creation, reﬂection and implementation.
In (1) the exploration phase, the service designer’s task is to identify the
problem to start working on. The objective and focus in the exploration phase
is to deﬁne the problem and gain a clear understanding of the situation from
existing and new customers’ points of views. During (2) the creation phase,
the objective is to create possible solutions based on the problems identiﬁed
and insights generated in the previous phase, through make-believe. (3) The
reﬂection stage means testing the ideas, and as discussed earlier, relies on
tools that function as make-believing anchors. Thus, prototyping and gathering
feedback from customers should take place. Stickdorn and Schneider (2011)
remind that testing intangible services, the prototyping may be more complex.
They suggest the utilization of e.g. comic strips, storyboards, videos or image
sequences, and role-plays to guide the imagination. (4) The implementation
should be based on the consistent service concept developed and tested in
the previous stages of the service design process. There needs to be clear
communication including the emotional aspects of the service, i.e. the desired
customer experience the service provider aims to offer for its customers via
the new or improved service. Employee engagement is one of the key success
factors for the implementation. Including the employees in the interdisci-
plinary team throughout the service design process for developing and testing
the service concept usually creates the required engagement (Stickdorn and
Schneider 2011).
Due to the nature of service design thinking, it is impossible to provide a simple and
easy to follow process model that would ensure the success of every service design
project (Brown 2009). However, as noted before in this section, all these service
design processes share the same service design thinking approach. The authors may
have emphasis on different phases of the process. Characteristics of the service
design processes are that them (1) aim at understanding human experience; (2) invite
and involve users and other stakeholders to the design process to inspire design and
to evaluate design solutions; (3) consist interlinking and overlapping phases in the
iterative design process; and (4) rely on a combination of gathered data and guided,
result-seeking make-believe. Some of the models, such as The Double Diamond

78
S. Luojus and J.T. Harviainen
Model (or 4D Model) by the British Design Council, The 3 I model by IDEO and
The service design process model by Stickdorn and Schneider describe roughly
the design process as a continuum of few overlapping phases, not as a sequence
of distinct and strictly deﬁned steps happening in an orderly manner (cf. Brown
2009). Moritz’s (2005) service design process model is more detailed, because the
phases have two functions: to create a simple and generic framework helping to
understand service design and to establish what various mindsets are needed in
service design. He wants to emphasize that each phase can require a different set of
skills, mindset, attitude, focus and environment (Moritz 2005). The service design
process deﬁned by Liedtka and Ogilvie (2011) and by Stickdorn and Schneider
(2011) emphasizes that the successful implementation of a new service concept
usually requires elements from change management and has to be planned properly,
as well as reviewed after the actual implementation has taken place (Liedtka and
Ogilvie 2011; Stickdorn and Schneider 2011). The 3 I model (Inspiration, Ideation,
and Implementation), on its behalf, is developed for the context of social innovation.
In the next segment, we further discuss some of the key tools of service design and
their connections to make-believe.
5.5
Service Design Methods
Service design has adopted methods and working traditions from several ﬁelds
(Miettinen et al. 2014). Service design methods come from several knowledge ﬁelds,
such as arts, engineering, marketing, anthropology, and psychology. Sleeswijk
Visser et al. (2005) divide methods into three categories according to the focus of the
method: say/think, do/use and know/feel/dream. “Say/think” relates to interviews
and to explicit knowledge, whereas “do/use” relates to observing the situation
of usage. “Know/feel/dream” refers to physical or visual aids to allow people to
visualize and describe their expectations and dreams, or tacit knowledge (Fig. 5.2)
(Sleeswijk Visser et al. 2005). The focus of service design has shifted towards more
creative approaches which seek to understand people’s subjective values, attitudes
and desires.
Users’ creative input is an important source of design ideas. Thus, designers’
creativity is not targeted only towards creating new design solutions, but increas-
ingly towards creating opportunities for creative collaboration among users and
developing tools that enhance their creativity (Brandt 2006; Vaajakallio 2012).
There is a quantity of design methods recently established that represent credible
ways of collecting user data through creative means. Creative and innovative
methods are usually identiﬁed by their participatory nature, creative engagement
and outcome, and their relatively speciﬁc application to design research (Hanington
2003). These methods are meant to support both the designers and the users in their
creativity and interpretations during the design process. The service design approach
favours creative research methods because research data gathered by these methods

5
Designing for Service Experiences
79
Fig. 5.2 Division of user research methods by Sleeswijk Visser et al. (2005)
provide stimuli that allow ideas and insights to be created and enable opportunities
to share them (Mattelmäki 2006).
In the following paragraphs three innovative, make-believe related service design
methods are introduced: design probes, design games and Lego serious play. All of
the methods are speciﬁcally designed for the users in speciﬁc design context to
enhance their creativity and encourage them to express themselves. Since design
probes is based on self-documentation, speciﬁcally designed material packages are
given to the users to document their private lives, contexts and experiences. Design
games and Lego serious play are based on playful approach. Polaine (2010) argues
that play is such a fundamental building block of culture, society, technology and
cognition that it is a central vehicle through which to understand the interactive
experience. Play is versatile enough to cross boundaries and fundamental enough to
be understood intuitively. Taking play as a central feature in design enables us to
understand interactivity in more comprehensive manner (Polaine 2010).
Design Probes
Probes are an approach for understanding human experience and exploring design
opportunities (e.g. Gaver et al. 1999; Gaver 2001). Probes are based on self-
documentation. Mattelmäki (2006) identiﬁes the three features describing the
probes: (1) Users have an active role in gathering research data. The users gather and

80
S. Luojus and J.T. Harviainen
document the material, working as active participants in the service design process.
Design probes are a set of assignments through which or inspired by which the
users can document their experiences and express their thoughts. (2) Design probes
emphasize the user’s personal perceptions, needs, feelings, values and attitudes, and
their everyday life context including social, aesthetic and cultural environment. (3)
Design probes explore new design opportunities (Mattelmäki 2006).
The most common forms of probes are diaries and camera studies, but probes
can also appear as interactive devices or systems. Design probes examine the
daily factors of human lives. Probes give a more credible and reliable data than
observation in a single situation, minimize the observer’s possible inﬂuence by
changing the user’s behaviour, and the context-related experiences are captured in
a more genuine form trough self-documentation. The design probes in user studies
are conducted by means of probe kits (Fig. 5.3).
The kits can be envelopes, folders or bags holding artefacts such as diaries,
notebooks, illustrated cards or stickers speciﬁcally designed for the purpose. The
aim of the design probes is to encourage creativity. Thus, activities such as taking
photographs, writing diaries, drawing maps and making a collage of pictures are
frequently used. Articles and assignments vary from project to project both in
content and aesthetic appearance (Mattelmäki 2006).
Mattelmäki identiﬁes ﬁve different phases in the use of design probes. The ﬁrst
phase “tuning in” consists of the deﬁnition of the uses, purpose, and subject of the
Fig. 5.3 A probe kit from a project called Kinos (2006, unpublished)

5
Designing for Service Experiences
81
probes. The second phase is “reaching out to the target group” helps deﬁning the
principles of selecting the user group. The third phase “designing the probes” is
actual probing with instructions for practical work. The fourth phase “a follow-up
on the probe material in an interview” is the methods to be applied with probes,
interviews in particular. The last phase “interpretation and results” is to draw
interpretations and results out of the material (Mattelmäki 2006).
Design probes represent the data-gathering aspect of service design. While not
themselves connected to make-believe, they exemplarily create precisely the kind
of information which can then be used by the designers for imagining possible
solutions to existing problems and new services that ﬁll needs of which the probe
providers themselves may not even be aware. Probes function as a condensation of
human experiences, for the purpose of others then expanding again, through make-
believe and empathy, from that summarization.
Design Games
There is no generally accepted deﬁnition for the concept of design game. Instead,
there are several different descriptions of the characteristics of design games. Most
descriptions agree that design games are about staging participation, that there is
seldom competition over who wins the game and that there are rules and tangible
game pieces that guide the design moves (Brandt 2006; Vaajakallio 2012). Design
games are not games in a traditional sense, because the application area of early
concept search and co-design, deﬁne them. Vaajakallio (2012) argues that there are
some characteristics of play, games and performance that could describe design
games as well: they are bounded with regard to time and space, they proceed
according to explicit rules, are typically intensive and they utilize the magic circle
of play, fostering make-believe (Vaajakallio 2012).
Design games can be approached from different perspectives and seen for
example (1) as a tool for addressing the three needs of co-design: organising
dialogue, supporting empathic understanding and gaining several contributions in
order to identify, frame and solve design problems. (2) For the players, design games
appear as a mind-set that creates an experience of being in a special game world,
which is a physical and ideal playground with a special ordering of time, roles
and rules that are not bound by the laws of ordinary life and where fruitful make-
believe is therefore much easier – and more easily shared between stakeholders. (3)
From a game designer’s point of view, design games are a structure with tangible
game materials, explicit rules or ﬁxed elements, and performance roles that can be
manipulated depending on contextual needs (Vaajakallio 2012).
Vaajakallio (2012) identiﬁed two basic components of design games, context and
play-qualities, which deﬁne them. Instead of being a well-deﬁned method, a design
game is an expression that emphasizes the exploratory, imaginative, dialogical
and empathic aspects of co-design. The objectives of applying design games are
rooted in the design context. Design games are tools for co-design that purposefully

82
S. Luojus and J.T. Harviainen
highlight play-qualities such as playful mind-set and structure, which are supported
by tangible game materials (e.g. game board, playing cards, and pieces) and rules
(Vaajakallio 2012). The objectives of the design games are to inspire design and to
help facilitate a participatory design process. By being context-speciﬁc, yet playful,
they allow participants to engage in make-believe within the topic, while the rules of
the game provide both direction and facilitation (Vaajakallio and Mattelmäki 2014).
Framing collaborative design activities in a game format improves idea generation
and communication between stakeholders. By shifting focus to the game, power
relations and other factors that might complicate idea generation, are downplayed
(Brandt 2006). According to Vaajakallio (2012) “the means for reaching these
objectives are drawn up in addition to the design (e.g. tangible mock-ups and
user representations) from the world of games (e.g. role-playing, turntaking, make-
believe) to deliberately trigger participants’ imagination as a source of design
ideas” (Vaajakallio 2012) (Figs. 5.4 and 5.5).
LEGO Serious Play
LEGO® SERIOUS PLAY® (LSP) is a make-believe based team collaboration
method developed by LEGO and IMD, a business school based in Lausanne,
Switzerland. The basic principle of LSP is that LEGO bricks are simple to use
and provide ready-made, powerful and multi-purpose symbolic pieces, known to
most people and across different cultures (Cantoni et al. 2009). LEGO bricks (1) are
simple to use and do not require particular motor abilities in order to be able to build
models, (2) provide ready-made powerful symbolic pieces, such as little men and
women representing e.g. many professions and cultures, as well as animals, plants,
vehicles, furniture, and tools, (3) are known to most people as a toy and as a joyful
part of their own childhood, and (4) are present in many different cultures. LSP
offers a reﬁned means for a team to share ideas, assumptions and understandings, as
well as to engage team members in rich dialogue, by anchoring the imagination with
tangible, playful representations. LSP’s statement is that everyone can contribute
to the discussion and help creatively generate solutions (Cantoni et al. 2009). In
addition, the creative, reﬂective process of making something stimuluses and can
open new perspectives. (LEGO® SERIOUS PLAY®).
LSP is based on four theoretical approaches (1) constructivism (e.g. Piaget), (2)
constructionism (e.g. Papert), (3) play and (4) imagination (Moeller and Tollestrup
2013). In practice, LSP follows a structured process, where the participants use
the bricks to create models that express their thoughts, reﬂections and ideas. The
three elementary phases of the process: (1) the challenge, (2) building, and (3)
sharing. (1) Considering the objectives of the workshop in advance, the facilitator
formulates building challenges in a way that enhance dialogue and reﬂection. Each
building challenge is posed to the participant one at a time. The building time is
made clear and the facilitator asks participants to build a model with the bricks
that expresses their thoughts and simultaneously response to the building challenge.

5
Designing for Service Experiences
83
Figs. 5.4 and 5.5 A design game from a project entitled WeLive (2015) (Photo: Janne Lahti)
The challenge for the facilitator is to formulate the building task so that it best
serves the purpose of the workshop while following the basic principles of the
method. (2) The participants construct their response to the building challenge with
LEGO bricks. During construction, the individual participant under goes a reﬂective
www.allitebooks.com

84
S. Luojus and J.T. Harviainen
process through which they gain more deep insight into their own thoughts by
assigning meaning to their models by means of metaphors, ﬁgures of speech, and
narratives. Using their hands to build concrete, three-dimensional models of their
thoughts and reﬂections, gives the participants easier access to their experiences
and catalyses new trains of thought. (3) When all participants have a constructed
a model in front of them, each of the participants has an opportunity to set their
own issues on the table (literally and metaphorically), and they all have an equal
standing. Next, one at a time, each participant shares the meaning and story that
they have assigned to their own model. It is necessary that each participant gets
the chance to share the story about their model, because the sharing is a reﬂection
process. Those listening also have an opportunity to explore in more detail what the
narrator expresses through the model. The facilitator asks facilitating questions with
the aim of get participants to share more about their thoughts and ideas with each
other. One of the purposes of the LSP process is that each person’s voice is heard and
everybody is listened to. This is on the one hand to create a shared understanding
of the team’s way of handling the situation, and on the other hand to create the best
starting point for people to feel ownership for the reﬂections and ideas expressed.
(LEGO® SERIOUS PLAY®) (Fig. 5.6).
5.6
Discussion
Ojasalo and Ojasalo (2015) argue that service design approach would bring new
kinds of means for implementing service logic in marketing and management,
because the principles of service design support “the service logic since the process
and outcomes of service design are not based on what an offering can do, but on
what customers want to achieve and what they do with the service (e.g. Wetter-
Edman 2011)”. Service design methods provide a practical set of tools to explore
their customers’ world, to develop service experience and to facilitate customer
value creation (Ojasalo and Ojasalo 2015). It seems that service design approach
has awakened some interest within the HCI research community as well. First steps
towards identifying common ground and towards creating supportive structures
between interaction design and service design have been taken (e.g. Holmlid 2007;
Polaine et al. 2012).
The innovative methods are intended to understand people’s feelings, pleasure,
values and dreams, often through data-based make-believe. Sometimes the objec-
tives are thoughts never really thought, or expressed in words (Mattelmäki 2006).
One of the major challenges in design is to make tacit and latent knowledge visible.
These types of studies require methods for examining phenomena that cannot be
grasped by means of direct observation and understanding. Tacit knowledge turns
visible through appropriate research methods and tools (Luojus 2010). There are two
ways how innovative methods can enhance in making tacit knowledge visible: (1)
the innovative and creative methods are based on the process of making something,
utilising the ‘hand-mind connection’ (e.g. design probes, design games and LSP).

5
Designing for Service Experiences
85
Fig. 5.6 A LEGO® SERIOUS PLAY® from a project entitled COM’ON (2012) (Photo: Jukka
Malkamäki)
The process of building and collaborating often produces insights which simply
would not have appeared in regular discussions (e.g. Gauntlett 2007, 2011). (2) The
innovative and projective methods (e.g. design probes and LSP) help the users to
express themselves through make-believe, metaphors and associations, sometimes
revealing very delicate and irrational motives. Creative and projective methods
offer these ways. Projections reveal things that people do not wish to see, or are
incapable of seeing. The principle of psychoanalytic interpretation is that the factors
affecting the emotional reactions evoked by images are subconscious, not conscious.
Projective methods are used for collecting qualitative data about the users and
their values, dreams and needs for understanding and inspiration, and for further
development of design (Mattelmäki 2006).
Human experience research has received increasing importance in academic
discussion in the various ﬁelds of design. Human experience as an object of design
provides a way to perceive more comprehensive understanding of the various
elements of the design challenge. An experience is always personal and therefore

86
S. Luojus and J.T. Harviainen
designers always work through make-believe, when they try and create experiences
for others. The components of each single experience are dependent not only on
the subject and object of the experience but also on the comprehensive interaction
between these two. This requires UX research that approaches the phenomenon
in a more comprehensive manner and analytical tools to analyse and understand
UX. Multidisciplinary service design approach seems to be a useful framework
when trying to understand and design for human experience in more comprehensive
manner. By using and understanding data-based make-believe, designers are able to
better tailor the experiential value that they propose to users through the services
that they design.
References
Bannon LJ (1991) From human factors to human actors. The role of psychology and human-
computer interaction studies in system design. In: Greenbaum J, Kyng M (eds) Design at work:
cooperative design of computer systems. Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, pp 25–44
Brandt E (2006) Designing exploratory design games: a framework for participation in participa-
tory design? In: Proceedings of the 9th conference of participatory design (PDC 2006), ACM
Press, New York, pp 57–66
British Design Council. http://www.designcouncil.org.uk
Brown T (2009) Change by design: how design thinking transforms organizations and inspires
innovation. HarperCollins, New York
Buchanan R (1996) Wicked problems in design thinking. In: Margolin V, Buchanan R (eds) The
idea of design. A design issues reader. The MIT Press, Cambridge
Cantoni L, Marchiori E, Faré M Botturi L, Bolchini D (2009) A systematic methodology to use
LEGO bricks in web communication design. In: Proceedings of the SIGDOC’09, ACM Press,
New York
Gauntlett D (2007) Creative explorations: new approaches to identities and audiences. Routledge,
London
Gauntlett D (2011) Making is connecting: the social meaning of creativity, from DIY and knitting
to YouTube and Web 2.0. Polity Press, Cambridge
Gaver W (2001) The presence project. RCA CRD Research Publications, London
Gaver W, Dunne T, Pacenti E (1999) Cultural probes. Interactions 6(1):21–29
Grönroos C (2006) Adopting a service logic for marketing. Mark Theory 6(3):317–333
Grönroos C (2008) Service logic revisited: who creates value? And who co-creates? Eur Bus Rev
20(4):298–314
Grönroos C, Ravald A (2011) Service as business logic: implications for value creation and
marketing. J Serv Manag 22(1):5–22
Grönroos C, Voima P (2013) Critical service logic: making sense of value creations and co-
creation. J Acad Mark Sci 41:133–150
Grudin J (1990) The computer reaches out: the historical continuity of interface design. In:
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems: empowering
people. ACM Press, New York, pp 261–268
Gupta S, Lehman DR (2005) Managing customers as investments. Wharton School Publishing,
Philadelphia
Hanington B (2003) Methods in the making: a perspective on the state of human research in design.
Des Issues 19(4):9–18
Heinonen K, Strandvik T, Mickelsson K-J, Edvardsson B, Sundström E, Andersson P (2010) A
customer dominant logic of service. J Serv Manag 21(4):531–548

5
Designing for Service Experiences
87
Holmlid S (2007) Interaction design and service design: expanding a comparison of design
disciplines. Nordes 2007 (No. 2). University of Arts, Crafts and Design, Stockholm, Sweden
ISO 9241-210 (2011) Human-centered design processes for interactive systems. International
Organization for Standardization, Geneve
Jääskö V, Mattelmäki T, Ylirisku S (2003) The scene of experience. In: Haddon L, Mante-Meijer
E, Sapio B, Kommonen KH, Fortunati L, Kant A (eds) God, bad, and the irrelevant. University
of Art and Design Helsinki, Helsinki, pp 341–346
Kaptelinin V, Nardi BA (2006) Acting with technology: activity theory and interaction design. MIT
Press, Cambridge
Kuutti K (1995) Activity theory as a potential framework for human-computer interaction research.
In: Nardi B (ed) Context and consciousness: activity theory and human computer interaction.
MIT Press, Cambridge, pp 17–44
Kuutti K (2009) HCI and design – uncomfortable bedfellows? In: Binder T, Löwgren J, Malmborg
L (eds) (Re)searching the digital Bauhaus. Springer, London
LEGO® SERIOUS PLAY®. http://www.lego.com/ﬁ-ﬁ/seriousplay/
Liedtka J, Ogilvie C (2011) Designing for growth: a design thinking tool kit for managers.
Columbia University Press, New York
Lüftenegger ER (2014) Service-dominant business design. Doctoral dissertation. Proefschifts-
maken, Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands
Luojus S (2010) From a momentary experience to a lasting one. The concept of and research on
expanded user experience of mobile devices. Doctoral dissertation. University of Oulu, Oulu
Mager B, Sung TJ (2011) Special issue editorial: designing for services. Int J Des 5(2):1–3
Mattelmäki T (2006) Design probes. Doctoral dissertation. University of Art and Design, Helsinki
Mattelmäki T, Sleeswijk Visser F (2011) Lost in co-X: interpretations of co-design and co-creation.
In: Proceedings of the 4th world conference on design research (IASDR 2011), Delft, The
Netherlands
Miettinen S, Valtonen A (eds) (2012) Service design with theory: discussion on value, societal
change and methods. Lapland University Press, Rovaniemi
Miettinen S, Valtonen A, Markuksela V (2014) Service design methods in event design. In:
Richards G, Marques L, Mein K (eds) Event design. Routledge, New York
Moeller L, Tollestrup C (2013) Creating shared understanding in product development teams. How
to ‘Build the Beginning’. Springer, London
Moritz S (2005) Service design – practical access to an evolving ﬁeld. Koln International School
of Design, University of Applied Sciences Cologne, London, pp 187–239
Ojasalo K (2010) The shift from co-production in services to value co-creation. Bus Rev 16:
171–177
Ojasalo K, Koskelo M, Nousiainen AK (2015) Foresight and service design boosting dynamic
capabilities in service innovation. In: Selen W, Roos G, Green R, Agarwal R (eds) The
handbook of service innovation. Springer, London
Ojasalo K, Ojasalo J (2015) Adapting business model thinking to service logic: an empirical study
on developing a service design tool. In: Gummerus J, von Koskull C (eds) The Nordic school –
alternative perspectives on marketing and service management. Hanken School of Economics,
Helsinki
Ostrom AL, Bitner MJ, Brown SW, Burkhard KA, Goul M, Smith-Daniels V, Demirkan H,
Rabinowich E (2010) Moving forward and making a difference: research priorities for the
science of service. J Serv Res 13(1):1–33
Patricio L, Fisk RP, Cunha JF, Constantine L (2011) Multilevel service design: from customer
value constellation to service experience blueprinting. J Serv Res 14(2):180–200
Pine BJ, Gilmore JH (1998) The experience economy. Welcome to the experience economy. Harv
Bus Rev 76:97–105
Polaine A (2010) Developing a language of interactivity through the theory of play. PhD thesis,
Faculty of Arts & Social Sciences, University of Technology, Sydney
Polaine A, Løvlie L, Reason B (2012) Service design from insight to implementation. Rosenfeld
Media, New York

88
S. Luojus and J.T. Harviainen
Prahalad CK, Ramaswamy V (2004) The future of competition – co-creating unique value with
customers. Harvard Business Press, Boston
Ramaswamy V, Gouillart F (2010) Building the co-creative entreprise. Harv Bus Rev, October
Sleeswijk Visser F, Stappers PJ, Van Der Lugt R, Sanders EB-N (2005) Contextmapping:
experiences from practice. CoDes J 1(No. 2):119–149
Stickdorn M, Schneider J (eds) (2011) This is service design thinking: basics – tools – cases. BIS
Publishers, Amsterdam
Strandvik T, Holmlund M, Edvardsson B (2012) Customer needing: a challenge for the seller
offering. J Bus Ind Mark 27(2):132–141
Suchman L (1987) Plans and situated actions: the problem of human-machine communication.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Tschimmel K (2012) Design thinking as an effective toolkit for innovation. In: Proceedings of the
XXIII ISPIM conference: action for innovation: innovating from experience, Barcelona, Spain
Vaajakallio K (2012) Design games as a tool, a mindset and a structure. Doctoral dissertation,
Aalto University
Vaajakallio K, Mattelmäki T (2014) Design games in codesign: as a tool, a mindset and a structure.
CoDesign 10(1):63–77
Vargo SL, Lusch RF (2004) Evolving to a new dominant logic of marketing. J Mark 68:1–17
Vargo SL, Lusch RF (2008) Service-dominant logic: continuing the evolution. J Acad Mark Sci
36:1–10
Vargo SL, Maglio PP, Akaka MA (2008) On value and value co-creation: a service systems and
service logic perspective. Eur Manag J 26(3):145–152
Voima P, Heinonen K, Strandvik T (2010) Exploring customer value formation: a customer
dominant logic perspective. Working papers. Hanken School of Economics, Helsinki
Wetter-Edman K (2011) Service design – a conceptualization of an emerging practice. Licentiate
thesis, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden
Winograd T, Flores F (1986) Understanding computers and cognition: a new foundation for design.
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company Inc, Menlo Park
Zeithaml VA, Bitner MJ, Gremler DD (2013) Services marketing – integrating customer focus
across the ﬁrm. McGraw-Hill, New York

Chapter 6
Gameworld Interfaces as Make-Believe
Kristine Jørgensen
Make-believe is an important part of our engagement with many aspects of our
lives and is often seen as central to our engagement with representational media.
When playing video games, players must make sense of a range of information, and
gameworlds include a selection of signs that either point to the game system, or
to the ﬁctional aspects of the game. The combination of health meters, experience
bars, and symbols ﬂoating around in the world, with a recognizable environment
featuring anthropomorphic inhabitants with intentions and motivations may appear
paradoxical, but players tend to accept this contradiction without any confusion.
With reference to Kendall Walton’s (1990) theory of make-believe where virtually
anything has the potential of being props in the imaginative process, the aim of
this chapter is to expand the understanding of make-believe by exploring how it is
employed when players interact with gameworlds.
Springing out of game studies, the chapter builds on the idea that gameworlds
are not simply game rules in ﬁctional worlds as Jesper Juul claims in Half-Real
(2005), but world environments designed for gameplay (Klevjer 2007; Jørgensen
2013). This environment is a complex world construct that draws on conventions
from ﬁctional media as well as interactive systems, often in combination, and
where players must employ different kinds of imaginative processes simultaneously.
Finding support in cognitive theory and play theory, the chapter challenges the
notion that the engagement with games can be reduced to pretence and “acting as if”,
and shows that other imaginative processes are also part of the playful processes that
take place when players engage with gameworlds. The chapter stresses imagination
over make-believe as a better concept for illuminating the imaginative processes,
K. Jørgensen ()
Department of Information Science and Media Studies, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
e-mail: kristine.jorgensen@uib.no
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
P. Turner, J.T. Harviainen (eds.), Digital Make-Believe,
Human–Computer Interaction Series, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-29553-4_6
89

90
K. Jørgensen
and presents thus an expansion of Walton’s sense of make-believe that takes a
game-speciﬁc approach to the imaginative process used when interacting with
gameworlds.
The chapter starts with two sections introducing the theory of gameworld as
interface, and the concepts of imagination and make-believe. Once established,
these concepts are brought together through Walton’s idea of props in an argument
stressing that gameworlds spawn different kinds of imaginative processes. In the
following sections this argument is developed and reinforced through a discussion of
how players experience gameworlds. The empirical data that supports the argument
was collected during a 2008–2010 research project focusing on how players engage
with information in a gameplay context in four different game genres. Players were
observed while playing, and subjected to a research interview immediately after the
play session. In addition, one focus group was conducted in which a group of ﬁve
players discussed game information on the basis of a number of screenshots from
selected games. Although the data has been discussed in closer detail in Jørgensen
(2011, 2013), the contribution of this chapter is to give greater attention to the role
of make-believe and imagination in connection with gameworlds.
6.1
The Gameworld Interface
Before we can go into the concept of make-believe and its role in the engagement
with gameworld interfaces, it is important to delimit and discuss what a gameworld
is. Gameworlds are world representations designed for the playing of games,
structured as arenas for participation and contest (Klevjer 2007, 58). Although
modern video games include powerful physics engines, gameworlds are primarily
governed by game mechanics; that is, standardized game interactions and operations
restrained by game rules (Rollings and Adams 2003, 9; Sicart 2008). Gameworlds
are also world systems, representing a habitable and self-contained world-like
environment (Bartle 2004: 1; Ryan 2001: 91). Communicating the game system
by way of a world metaphor, gameworlds are interfaces to the game system. In
human-computer interaction, an interface is traditionally understood as the part
of the computer system that allows communication between the user and the
system (Lauesen 2005, 4). As an environment that connects the player with the
game system, the gameworld invites a particular kind of gameplay interaction, and
provides relevant information to support this (Jørgensen 2013, 3–4).
As both interfaces and world environments, gameworlds are complex repre-
sentational systems: First, the gameworld is a metaphor that makes an abstract
game system more concrete; or in other words, the gameworld reiﬁes the game
system (Beaudouin-Lafon 2000, 449). Second, the gameworld is also, like other
representational media such as literature and ﬁlm, a representation of a ﬁctional
reality. As world representations, gameworlds contextualize and make the game
system understandable. This contextualization is based in recognizable tropes from
ﬁction and narratives, making the gameworld not only a stage for contest but also

6
Gameworld Interfaces as Make-Believe
91
a ﬁctional world of imaginary characters and powerful narratives. This duality in
terms of representation is made evident and strengthened through the fact that
gameworlds combine two kinds of semiotic systems. Gameworlds use some signs
that point to the ﬁctional reality of the game, presenting a world environment
with more or less recognizable topography, landscape, objects and inhabitants
(Ryan 2008, 251); and other signs that point directly to the game system hidden
beyond to hood, using features that we do not recognize from the interaction with
the natural ecology such as blinking arrows above character heads, health and
ammo bars, minimaps, and inventories. We may call game information ecological
when it is represented as integrated into the gameworld environment in a way
that resembles how information exists in our actual physical environment; and
emphatic when it adds new information about, comments on, or augments ecological
features (Jørgensen 2013, 79–80). Examples of ecological information span from
walking paths that indicate the safest road through the environment in The Elder
Scrolls 5: Skyrim (Bethesda Game Studios 2011), to the integration of the HUD
into the avatar’s helmet in a ﬁrst-person shooter such as Crysis (Crytek 2007).
In The Witcher 3: The Wild Hunt (CD Project Red 2015), we witness emphatic
information when using “witcher’s senses” to get a heightened perception of the
surroundings, illustrated through a ﬁlter that marks clues in the environment as
bright red. Ecological and emphatic information are both natural to the gameworld
interface because they support the player’s direct interaction with the game and have
a direct relationship with actions and events that takes place inside the game. Often
seen as part of the graphical user interface of the game, such features are integral
parts of the gameworld to the degree that it makes little sense to separate them from
it. For this reason the gameworld is not only an interface, but the interface is also
part of the gameworld (Jørgensen 2013, 57–58, 143–144). In the following I will
use gameworld and gameworld interface interchangeably, but they both refer to the
gameworld environment that players engage with when playing games, and the idea
that gameworlds are informational spaces and for this reason interfaces to the game
system at the same time as they are ﬁctional worlds.
6.2
Imagination and Make-Believe
Combining conventions from different media and interactive systems, gameworld
interfaces appeal to different forms of engagement and cognitive processes. The
two different information systems described above – ecological and emphatic
information – invite the players to activate different imaginative processes. This
subchapter will discuss make-believe with reference to imagination, and argue why
imagination may be a better term when discerning between the different kinds of
imaginative processes that are active when engaging gameworlds.
Make-believe presupposes an active cognitive process of creating belief, or to
make something believable. As such it is often used as synonymous to pretence,
fantasy and imagination. Crudely speaking, we can describe make-believe as a

92
K. Jørgensen
mental process in which one actively enters a mindset where one gives in to a
non-factual situation and pretends to believe that it is real in the context of the
particular situation. Make-believe can be understood as a cognitive process related
to imagination, but it may also be understood as an aspect of play. As play, make-
believe is often associated with children’s play (Piaget 1962; Walton 1990, 4).
As a cognitive process, make-believe is more commonly discussed as imag-
ination in the ﬁelds of psychology and the philosophy of mind. Imagination
is a cognitive process that includes the formation of a mental representation
of something (Gendler 2013). Imagination covers a range of related processes,
spanning from “the ability to think of something not presently perceived” to “the
ability to create works of art that express something deep about the meaning of
life” (Stevenson 2003, 238). Imagination appears to have a more general application
than make-believe in that it includes sophisticated processes of reasoning such as
hypothesis-making and the considering of possible and counterfactual situations, as
well as dreaming, fantasy and ﬁctional engagement (Byrne 2005; Gendler 2013;
Mithen 2007; Turner and Harviainen 2016).
Make-believe is an essential part of Caillois’ understanding of play. In connection
with the activity of play, make-believe opens up for a “special awareness of a second
reality” (Caillois 1958, 10). For Caillois, play can be governed by rules or make-
believe. This means that some games can be more heavily rule-bound, while other
games are based in make-believe. Make-believe and rules are closely related in
play; rules themselves may create ﬁction, and make-believe may substitute rules
as a guiding principle in the activity of play.
Most importantly for this chapter is the idea that make-believe has a central
role in connection with play activities, and that it works in conjunction with rules.
Since gameworld interfaces combine conventions from game and ﬁction, they are
governed by rules as well as make-believe. In connection with gameworld interfaces
we may for this reason see rules and make-believe as two parts of a continuum,
where one might be more heavily activated than the other at any given time during
play. With reference to reversal theory, psychologist Michael Apter identiﬁes two
mindsets connected to play: the telic and paratelic state. The telic is a goal-oriented
mindset in which the play activity is engaged in for a purpose. This mindset is
activated when a play activity is heavily rule-bound. The paratelic, on the other
hand, is at work when the activity is important in itself (Apter 1992, 56, 202n;
Stenros 2015, 66, 167). We can recognize this mindset in play activities that are
more heavily oriented towards make-believe. Central to the reversal theory is the
idea that those engaging in such activities may experience an oscillation between
the two mindsets (Apter 1992, 29–31).
Combining Caillois and Apters’ theories with a broader understanding of imagi-
nation from cognitive theory, we may distinguish between two kinds of imaginative
processes that are central for players engaging with gameworld interfaces. Make-
believe or ﬁctional imagination is connected to the paratelic state and allows players
to interpret what happens in the gameworld as part of a ﬁctional reality separate from
the physical world and where particular laws apply. Ludic imagination is telic in

6
Gameworld Interfaces as Make-Believe
93
nature and connected to the kind of hypothetical reasoning that allows us to imagine
alternative possible outcomes or moves that can be undertaken in the problem
solving process of gameplay. This mindset corresponds with what Bernard Suits
calls the lusory attitude (Suits 2006, 188–190); the rule-oriented mindset focused
on the game activity, stressing interaction with the game system and accepting the
rules of the game even when they are not in coherence with the ﬁctional world of the
game. Simply described, players who are most interested in the narrative experience
and the consistency of a ﬁctional world stress their ﬁctional imagination, while
players who are mostly engaged in the game mechanisms and the manipulation of
the system focus on ludic imagination.
The two mindsets are active when players engage with gameworld interfaces,
and while some players may stress one rather than the other, they may experience
an oscillation or rapid change between the two during the course of play. Also, they
may experience that apparent contradictory information, such as emphatic symbols
in an otherwise ecologically oriented gameworld representation, are not experienced
as a paradox, but as a convention to gameworld interfaces. This will be explored
more thoroughly below.
6.3
Props and Models in Gameworld Interfaces
How does the imaginative process work in the context of gameworld interfaces?
According to Kendall Walton, props are important cues in the imaginative process.
Props are “generators of ﬁctional truths, things which, by virtue of their existence,
make propositions ﬁctional” (Walton 1990, 37), and anything that is being used in
the imaginative process for the purpose of establishing and maintaining a ﬁctional
reality can be considered props. When something serves as a prop, it becomes
a ﬁctional representation in a game of make-believe. As world representations,
gameworlds have the potential for employing, and for themselves being, props.
Although Walton explicitly connects props to the activity of make-believe, props
may support any kinds of imaginative process. Understood as a cue that guides
our attention or supports our interpretative processes, they are helpful not only for
ﬁctional imagination, but also in processes of hypothetical reasoning and meaning-
making associated with ludic imagination.
We ﬁnd support in cognitive science for the idea that representations or objects
may assist us, not only in the make-believe process, but also in other cognitive
processes. Research in cognitive science has shown that we often use external
models or artefacts are helpful for human cognition process of sense-making (Kirsh
2010; Scaife and Rogers 1996). The idea that representations and models may help
us understand complex processes is fundamental both to the use of illustrations
for explanatory or pedagogical purposes, and for the idea of training simulations
and simulation-based learning. Scaife and Rogers argue that a particular way
of representing an underlying structure will affect comprehension and problem

94
K. Jørgensen
solving. Models that visualize or put into motion how things work may reduce the
cognitive effort required to understand what is being represented or solve a problem,
and such models can also cue a particular interpretation of an abstract structure
(1996, 188–189).
Using Walton’s terminology, the model or representation becomes in these cases
a prop that allows the player to envision how the system works and can be interacted
with, and thus it works to support the imaginative process. As the gameworld itself
models the underlying, abstract game system in terms of a more comprehensible
world environment, the gameworld is a prop that cues the player’s understanding of
how the game system works. By exploring the gameworld and testing its interactive
limits, the player uses the gameworld to envision possible scenarios and solve
problems. Players stressing a ludic over a ﬁctional mindset will approach the
gameworld as a model that helps them understand how to interact with and master
the game, and their imaginative process will stress problem solving rather than
immersing themselves into a ﬁctional reality.
When the player enters a gameworld that addresses them in a way that resembles
the physical world, for instance through a recognizable topography and inhabitants
that address them with tasks they can solve, he or she is given cues that strongly
invite them to imagine this world as if it were real. Corresponding with the idea of
a coherent ﬁctional world, ecological information may seem particularly enticing as
props, and as world representations, gameworlds have the potential for employing,
and for themselves being, props. However, props can also be of a less world-like
or more abstract nature. According to Jesper Juul, players are invited to imagine a
ﬁctional world in games through the combination of graphics, sound, haptics, rules
and player actions (2005, 133–134). As augmentations of ecological features in the
gameworld, emphatic information, such as blinking arrows above character heads,
health and ammo bars, minimaps, and inventories, is also powerful because they
highlight particular aspects of the gameworld, direct attention towards particular
features, and may thus prescribe speciﬁc imaginings (Toon 2010) in the player.
Although they may be unfamiliar to our physical environment, such informative
features are natural to the gameworld interface because they support the player’s
direct interaction with the game and have a direct relationship with actions and
events that takes place inside the game.
6.4
Players’ Imaginative Engagement with Gameworlds
In this sub-chapter I will use interview data to show how actual players describe
their imaginative involvement with in-game information when interacting with
gameworlds. I will discuss how players interpret game information with point of
departure in the imaginative process in which they are engaging.

6
Gameworld Interfaces as Make-Believe
95
Gameworlds and Fictional Imagination
Players who employ ﬁctional imagination seek to frame the game experience as a
ﬁctional experience.
Common for these players is the idea that the gameworld is primarily a
ﬁctional world, and that the ﬁctional world is the source system that all game
information available in the gameworld refers to. For this reason they will interpret
information from this perspective regardless of whether the information is presented
as ecological or emphatic. How players with a ﬁctional mindset choose to tackle
game information varies between players as well as between genres.
While most players tend to accept the mixture of emphatic and ecological
information as a convention to the video game medium as long as it provides
meaningful information in a given gameplay context (Jørgensen 2012, 2013), some
players ﬁnd that the mixture between ﬁction and game system to be potentially
disturbing for ﬁctional imagination. When discussing the ﬁrst-person shooter Crysis
(Crytek 2007), a player states that “if a score appeared above the heads of the
monsters when you shot them [ : : : ], immersion would disappear instantly” (Peter,
focus group, Nov 2008). When playing Crysis, Peter ﬁnds emphatic information to
be a sign of ﬁctional incoherence (Juul 2005, 123) that hinders him from imagining a
consistent ﬁctional world, and which thus activates imaginative resistance (Gendler
2013). Of course, as a ﬁrst-person shooter that focuses on ecological information
while downplaying emphatic to the degree that it explains the HUD as being part of
the avatar’s helmet, Crysis is aiming for the audio-visual style of immediacy, where
“the goal is to make the viewer forget the presence of the medium ( : : : ) and believe
that he is in the presence of the objects of representation” (Bolter and Grusin 1999,
272–273).
The ideal of immediacy aims for photorealism and is based in the idea that
the sense of involvement is enhanced when the game appears unmediated, and for
some players this stylistic coherence is an important prop in the process of ﬁctional
imagination. For many players, abstract information or game system information
inside the gameworld environment is imagined as referring to an event or object
relating to the ﬁctional reality in the game. For example, when employing ﬁctional
imagination, an exclamation mark above a character head in a role-playing game
such as Diablo 2 (Blizzard North 2000) is not system information, but representative
of a ﬁctional event. In Scott’s words, the avatar “would perhaps see it as a person
trying to make contact with her, not as an exclamation mark above the head” (Scott,
interview, Dec 2008). For Scott, the emphatic information becomes a prop that
inspires ﬁctional imagination, and with reference to Toon (2010) we may also argue
that its caricature style prescribes a particular interpretation: It draws attention to
itself and stresses the importance of the character in question.

96
K. Jørgensen
Gameworlds and Ludic Imagination
Players who stress ludic imagination may frame information completely different
from those who focus on ﬁctional imagination. Ludic imagination is activated when
players frame information as representative of the game system, regardless of mode
of presentation. For instance, when a player accepts that Mario has three lives by
referring to the game rules (Juul 2005, 130) they are engaging in ludic imagination.
For these players, the game system is the source system, and the ﬁctional world is a
metaphor that contextualizes and makes the abstract game rules more concrete and
easier to understand. Thus, emphatic information is for them a direct representation
of the game system, while ecological information is seen as a metaphor for the
abstract game rules.
Games that leans on emphatic information and does not attempt to mask it as
ﬁctional follow the style of hypermediacy, which aims to “remind the viewer of the
medium” and draw attention towards itself and the communicative process (Bolter
and Grusin 1999, 272). Games using this approach focus on the formal aspects of
the game and the fact that it is a system to be played. With reference to Diablo 2, one
player argues that such games “never ask you to relate to [the game] as a realistic
world. They only ask you to play it as a game” (Peter, focus group, Nov 2008).
When encountering emphatic information such as overhead exclamation marks
or ﬂoating, highlighted symbols in the gameworld, these players do not imagine
a ﬁctional explanation for these, but explain them as representative of certain
game mechanics. According to one player, symbols such as health meters are “an
abstraction, not of emotions, but of, well, avatar status” (Oliver, focus group, Nov
2008). Oliver’s interpretation shows that he is attentive to the instrumental function
of this information with respect to game state, and that emphatic information
becomes props in his process of ludic imagination. While it is possible to argue
that this explanation is caused by ﬁctional incoherence, for these players it seems
that considering the gameworld through ludic imagination is the most rational
interpretation. However, this interpretation is not limited to situations of ﬁctional
incoherence. Another player discusses the light that surrounds the avatar in caves in
Diablo 2: “Well, I don’t think they light a torch and then they draw the sword. That
light is part of the game mechanics, to give you better overview.” (Tom, interview,
Dec 2008). This shows that information that are more in tune with the ﬁctional
universe of the game can be used as a prop that fuels ludic imagination.
Gameworlds and the Importance of Mixed Imagination
Although gameworld interfaces invite players to stress either ﬁctional or ludic
imagination when they interact with gameworld interfaces, most players tend to
accept a combination of emphatic and ecological information in gameworlds as long
as it provides relevant information in the gameplay context (Jørgensen 2011). This
is demonstrated by the remark made by one of the respondents when playing Crysis:

6
Gameworld Interfaces as Make-Believe
97
“Regardless of how cinematic a game is ( : : : ), since you’re making the decisions
yourself, give orders and move things, you need something that provides some
kind of feedback on what is going on” (Eric, interview, Nov 2008). Even the most
immediate gameworld using largely ecological signs needs a system that provides
clear and relevant information in the right context to make the game playable.
Many of the respondents appear to accept the combination of emphatic and
ecological information not as a necessary evil, but as a stylistic convention of
modern video games. According to one respondent, “It’s like cartoons, right? [ : : : ]
We accept the speech bubbles because that’s the way cartoons work” (Oliver,
focus group, Nov 2008). Likewise in games, emphatic information “is something
we have become accustomed to, partly because we need some aids in order to
register what is happening” (Carl, interview, Nov 2008). The relativist position
shows that players have no problems combining the two kinds of imagination when
playing games. Although players may favour one of the imaginative processes
when interacting with gameworld interfaces, they may experience an oscillation
or rapid change between the two during the course of play. Players may also
engage in both processes simultaneously and appreciate that games are at one
and the same time ﬁctional experiences as well as ludic. They may experience
that apparent contradictory information, such as emphatic symbols in an otherwise
ecologically oriented gameworld representation, are not experienced as a paradox,
but as a convention to gameworld interfaces. However, it is important to stress that
conventions from the game medium and also from speciﬁc game genres may take the
role as props in the imaginative process as well. Whether a particular combination
of props inspires ﬁctional or ludic imagination, or a combination of the two, appears
to be an individual endeavour.
6.5
Conclusions
Combining cognitive theory and play theory, this chapter has discussed the role
of make-believe in the interaction with gameworlds. By arguing that props can
spawn different kinds of imagination, the chapter presents an expansion of Walton’s
theory of make-believe that includes the engagement with gameworlds. Because
gameworld interfaces are complex representative systems where the gameworld
environment may be understood as a ﬁctional reality, or as a metaphor for the
underlying game system, players may engage with them as ﬁction or as game. The
fact that gameworld interfaces draw on conventions from both ﬁctional media as
well as interactive systems, often in combination, players must employ different
kinds of imaginative processes at the same time. Further, it is important to stress
that although the use of ecological information is in correspondence with a coherent
representation of a ﬁctional world, and the use of emphatic information has an
abstraction level that is in conﬂict with a coherent ﬁctional world, we cannot
conclude that ecological information sparks ﬁctional imagination and emphatic
information sparks ludic imagination. As we have seen both informational types
can function as props in both processes.

98
K. Jørgensen
But are the imaginative processes in question make-believe? The answer to this
is yes and no.
Players leaning towards the ﬁctional mindset may interpret the gameworld
interface mainly as a ﬁctional world. They may either choose to interpret all features
in the game as representative of something ﬁctional, or they may choose to ignore it.
In this ﬁctionalization lies a high degree of make-belief, understood not as pretence,
but as acting or thinking as if they believed that the ﬁctional world and its events
were real. This also allows them to imagine the gameworld as a bigger ﬁctional
universe than is actually presented in the gameworld. The ﬁctional element is an
important part of modern video games, and also a major motivator for many players.
However, make-believe is not the only kind of imaginative process that takes place
when players engage with gameworld interfaces. Players leaning towards a ludic
approach towards games stress the gameplay experience of interacting with the
game mechanisms, the challenges and working towards the goal of the game.
The imagination that they employ is related to rational thinking and allows us to
consider alternative possibilities and scenarios. They choose to see the gameworld
as instrumental in the problem solving process of gameplay, and are thus using the
gameworld as an artefact that helps them reason. And this process is not what we
normally understand as make-believe, since players are not acting or thinking as if
they believe that their pursuit towards the game goal matters. Instead their actions do
matter, and their imaginative process is for this reason more closely associated with
problem solving and rational thinking. The player may not have killed a dragon,
which would be an act of make-believe; but they may in fact have defeated the main
boss and received an in-game reward for that. While this is the categorical answer,
the details about the relationship between these activities and how the combination
of imaginative processes affects our interpretation of what ﬁction is in the context
of games, and what games are in the context of ﬁction, may be clearer with more
research on the matter.
This chapter shows the strengths of using cognitive theory in combination with
play theory in exploring how players engage with imaginative processes when
making sense of games. Also, the chapter has demonstrated how individual inter-
pretations and preferences inﬂuence the imaginative process. Not least, the chapter
stresses that the idea of gameworlds as a particular kind of world construct with its
own rules and characteristics is a fruitful base for a game-speciﬁc understanding of
the imaginative process.
References
Apter MJ (1992) The dangerous edge. The psychology of excitement. The Free Press, New York
Bartle R (2004) Designing virtual worlds. New Riders, Indianapolis
Beaudouin-Lafon M (2000) Instrumental interaction: an interaction model for designing post-
WIMP user interfaces. In: CHI’00: Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors
in computing systems. ACM, New York, pp 446–453
Bethesda Game Studios (2011) The elder scrolls 5: skryim. Bethesda Softworks [Xbox 360]

6
Gameworld Interfaces as Make-Believe
99
Blizzard North (2000) Diablo 2. Blizzard entertainment [PC]
Bolter JD, Grusin R (1999) Remediation: understanding new media. MIT Press, Cambridge
Byrne RMJ (2005) The rational imagination: how people create alternatives to reality. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA
Caillois R (1958) Man, play and games. University of Illinois Press, Champaign
CD Project RED (2015) The witcher 3: the wild hunt. Namco Bandai Entertainment [Xbox One]
Crytek (2007) Crysis. EA games [PC]
Gendler T (2013) Imagination. In: Zalta EN, Nodelman U, Allen C, Perry J (eds) Stanford
encyclopedia of philosophy. Stanford University Press, Stanford
Jørgensen K (2011) The user interface continuum: a study of player preference. In: Gamasutra,
April 12. Available via Gamasutra.com. http://www.gamasutra.com/view/feature/134715/the_
user_interface_continuum_a_php. Accessed 1 Mar 2016
Jørgensen K (2012) Between the game system and the ﬁctional world. A study of computer game
interfaces. Game Cult 7(2):142–163
Jørgensen K (2013) Gameworld interfaces. MIT Press, Cambridge
Juul J (2005) Half-real. Videogames between real rules and ﬁctional worlds. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA
Kirsh D (2010) Thinking with external representation. AI Soc 25:441–454
Klevjer R (2007) What is the Avatar? Fiction and embodiment in avatar-based, single-player
games. PhD dissertation, University of Bergen
Lauesen S (2005) User interface design. A software engineering perspective. Addison-Wesley,
Harlow
Mithen S (2007) Seven steps in the evolution of human imagination. In: Roth I (ed) Imaginative
minds. Oxford University Press for The British Academy, Oxford, pp 3–29
Piaget J (1962) Play, dreams and imitation in childhood. Norton, New York
Rollings A, Adams E (2003) Andrew rollings and Ernest Adams on game design. New Riders,
Indianapolis
Ryan M-L (2001) Narrative as virtual reality: immersion and interactivity in literature and
electronic media. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore
Ryan M-L (2008) Fictional worlds in a digital age. In: Schreibman S, Siemens R (eds) A
companion to digital literary studies. Blackwell, Cambridge, pp 250–266
Scaife M, Rogers Y (1996) External cognition: how do graphical representations work? Int J Hum-
Comp Stud 45:185–213
Sicart M (2008) Deﬁning game mechanics. Game Stud 8:2
Stenros J (2015) Play, playfulness and games. A constructionist ludology approach. PhD disserta-
tion, University of Tampere
Stevenson L (2003) Twelve conceptions of imagination. Br J Aesthet 43(3):238–259
Suits B (2006) The grasshopper: games, life and utopia. Broadview Press, Peterborough
Toon A (2010) Models as make-believe. In: Frigg R, Hunter M (eds) Beyond mimesis and
convention, Boston studies in the philosophy of science. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 71–96
Turner P, Harviainen JT (2016) Introduction. In: Turner P, Harviainen JT (eds) Digital make-
believe. Springer, Cham
Walton K (1990) Mimesis as make-believe. On the foundations of the representational arts. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, MA

Chapter 7
Make-Believe in Gameful and Playful Design
Sebastian Deterding
7.1
Introduction
On an unassuming summer day in 2012, The Hague became witness to a monster.
The “Man-Eater”, as the press would later call it, was ﬁrst spotted around noon
by a passenger on tram number 6, between Stuyvesantplein and Centraal Station.
Roughly the size of a bulldog, with ﬁns and telescope eyes, it ﬂoated through the
air like a deep water dweller above the ocean ground, biting off the head of any
pedestrian it passed, swallowing them whole in one swift, clean gulp, shlupp: just
like that.
The Man-Eater is, of course, a creature of make-believe, summoned into The
Hague as a thesis project by designer Daniel Disselkoen (2015). It was little more
than two stickers: One thumb-sized, in the shape of a deep sea ﬁsh, attached on eye
level to the inside of a tram window, and a second, larger sticker with a set of rules
pasted on the back of the seat in front. The rules instructed the passenger to look
through the window with one eye closed, such that the sticker would appear as a big
ﬁsh ﬂoating in the panorama beyond. Moving her head up or down, the passenger
could make the ﬁsh appear to ﬂoat up or down in turn. The goal: between two tram
stops, eat as many pedestrians as possible by visually capturing their heads in the
Man-Eater’s mouth (Fig. 7.1).
Disselkoen’s Man-Eater is a great little example of a recent wave in interaction
design (IxD) and human-computer interaction (HCI) that has been variously called
gamiﬁcation, gameful design, or playful design. Although each term captures
slightly different phenomena, the underlying idea is the same: Play is the paragon
of enjoyable, intrinsically motivated activity, associated with a wide range of
S. Deterding ()
Digital Creativity Hub, University of York, York, UK
e-mail: Sebastian@codingconduct.cc
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
P. Turner, J.T. Harviainen (eds.), Digital Make-Believe,
Human–Computer Interaction Series, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-29553-4_7
101

102
S. Deterding
Fig. 7.1 Daniel Disselkoen’s man-eater
positive effects on experience, motivation, social interaction, learning, and well-
being. Games and toys are artefacts purpose-built to afford play and its positive
effects. Hence, game and toy design might hold design elements and guidelines for
affording enjoyment, motivation, and the like that can be applied to other activities
and systems (Deterding 2015a).
In our example, Man-Eater added rules and a goal to a daily tram commute to turn
it into an eye-street coordination challenge – a game (Juul 2005). And not just that:
It combined the game with a little ﬁction of head-chomping urban ﬁsh, anchored
in words (“Man-Eater”) and a ﬁsh-shaped sticker. It produced make-believe, a
fundamental form and aspect of human play and its appeal (Burghardt 2005; Lillard
2014; Pellegrini 2009). Man-Eater materializes for us adults to see what children
naturally discover on the backseat of a car ride: that something quotidian like a rain
drop running down a car window can be made engaging by wrapping its fate in a
bit of pretence. And we do not have to go back into childhood to see the engaging
power of pretence: any look into a movie theatre or library will ﬁnd ample adult
faces entranced in a piece of make-believe.
Now in some sense, games and make-believe are separable: To turn the tram ride
into a game, it would have sufﬁced to state the rules and paint an abstract targeting
reticule on the window. Likewise, the two stickers could have merely prompted
passengers to imagine the Man-Eater, without any rules. And yet make-believe and
games also share something fundamental. Both are instances of “counting-x-as-y”,
of layering alternative meanings and functions on top of existing ones. In make-
believe, a stick can suddenly count as a “magic wand”; by virtue of the shared
agreement between players, its holder can command others to “drop dead”. Games
formalize this loose shared agreement into explicit rules and numbers: this stretch
of the lawn now counts as “out”, and crossing it with this leather ball in your hand
counts as one “strike”, and whoever scores the most “strikes” in so-and-so many
minutes is the “winner.”

7
Make-Believe in Gameful and Playful Design
103
We can already see that play, games, and make-believe are entangled in many
interesting ways, both in and beyond gameful and playful design. This chapter
hopes to disentangle them at least somewhat, with two provisos. First, it focuses
on make-believe as part of the user experience. Many interaction design practices
involve make-believe in a playful or gameful manner, such as “gamestorming”
(Gray et al. 2010) or service theatre. These are covered elsewhere in this volume (see
Turner, this volume; Luojus and Harviainen this volume). Second, given the largely
non-existing existing research on make-believe in gameful and playful design,
the present chapter is quite theoretical, chieﬂy drawing on neighbouring ﬁelds to
suggest future research trajectories. To this end, it ﬁrst introduces the concepts of
games and play, gameful and playful design, and make-believe. A survey of existing
design literature and empirical research ﬁnds that make-believe has been largely
neglected in gamiﬁcation and gameful design, and is conceptually and empirically
best situated in playful design (Sect. 7.2). The majority of the chapter breaks out
ﬁve major design aspects of make-believe: theming; storiﬁcation; scripting, ruling,
and framing; role-playing; and their integration in uniﬁed experiences. Each aspect
is presented with potentially positive psychological and behavioural effects and
explanatory theories; main design elements and strategies used to evoke these
effects; empirical studies, if existing; and illustrative examples (Sect. 7.3). The
chapter closes in summarizing the potential positive effects as well as drawbacks of
make-believe; how and why playful make-believe designs differ from current
gamiﬁcation in form (often artistic one-offs) and technology (often audio); and what
limitations future research should try to overcome (Sect. 7.4).
7.2
Concepts
Gameful and Playful Design
Designs like the Man-Eater are but the most recent outgrowth of a long history of
applying games and play to ‘serious’ purposes, reaching back at least to Plato’s
Republic (Krentz 1998) and Chinese military leaders using Go to train in the art
of war during the sixth century BCE (Halter 2006). Important waymarks are the
emergence of the simulation and gaming movement starting in the 1960s, the rise
of edutainment software in the 1990s, and of digital serious games in the 2000s
(see Deterding 2015b for a fuller history). In HCI, Malone (1982), Carroll (1982),
and Carroll and Thomas (1988) early on suggested to derive heuristics and models
for “fun of use” from games, followed in the 2000s by researchers interested
in the “funology” (Blythe et al. 2004) of “pleasurable products” (Jordan 2002).
Designing for playfulness became a particular focus of this work (Korhonen et al.
2009; Fernaeus et al. 2012). But it was arguably start-ups, think tanks, and digital
agencies that in the 2010s brought large-scale attention and investment to applied
games and play. Under the catchword “gamiﬁcation,” they promised massive gains

104
S. Deterding
in customer and employee engagement through the use of game design (Deterding
2015b). Today, serious games, playful design, and gamiﬁcation are growing and
intertwined industries and research ﬁelds.
Naturally, several terms and deﬁnitions have been suggested to capture these
phenomena. As for “games” and “play”, despite or because of decades of research
across disciplines, scholars mostly agree on what they disagree about (see Sutton-
Smith 1997; Henricks 2015, for play, and Stenros forthcoming, for games). “Play”
is generally seen to refer to a kind of activity and/or psychological-behavioural
mode of engagement with the world, whereas “games” typically refer to objects
or systems designed for that activity (see Stenros forthcoming for exceptions).
For animal and childhood play, ethology and developmental psychology provide
convergent empirical descriptions of play features (Burghardt 2005; Pellegrini
2009): play is intrinsically motivated, autotelic; it transforms and recombines
other, functional behaviours – exaggerating, varying, repeating, representing them,
rendering them incomplete so they lack their ‘serious’ consequence and thus, their
obvious immediate instrumental or survival value; ﬁnally, play tends to occur
when no other immediate inner or outer pressures are felt. In game studies,
Salen and Zimmerman (2004) and Juul (2005) have provided inﬂuential recent
syntheses of game deﬁnitions. Juul’s oft-cited “classic game model” deﬁnes a
game as “a rule-based system with a variable and quantiﬁable outcome, where
different outcomes are assigned different values, the player exerts effort in order
to inﬂuence the outcome, the player feels emotionally attached to the outcome, and
the consequences of the activity are negotiable” (Juul 2005, p. 36).
Moving on to applied games and play, deﬁnitions are likewise still contested,
particularly with regard to gamiﬁcation (see Seaborn and Fels 2015 for a review).
There is consensus that gamiﬁcation refers to a design process, activity, or strategy,
not its end result. Beyond that, some deﬁnitions have framed gamiﬁcation through
particular means (game design elements like points, badges, leaderboards, cf.
Deterding et al. 2011), others through particular ends (gameful experiences like
competence, competition, etc., Huotari and Hamari 2012). Some include serious
games (Zichermann and Cunningham 2011), others exclude them (Deterding et al.
2011; Huotari and Hamari 2012). Some delimit gamiﬁcation to non-game contexts,
on the grounds that ‘adding game elements to a game’ is tautological (Deterding
et al. 2011); others don’t, holding that a game can be made ‘gamier’ (Huotari
and Hamari 2012); yet others view priming users to re-frame a non-game as a
game to be a sub-form of gamiﬁcation (Lieberoth 2015). This chapter adopts the
matrix suggested by Deterding and colleagues (2011) and Deterding (2015a), for
two reasons. First, it is well-established and widely adopted (cf. Seaborn and Fels
2015). Second, it explicitly maps the full space of applied games and play, which is
particularly relevant for make-believe (Fig. 7.2).
Their matrix uses two (plus one) dimensions with two poles each. The ﬁrst is
taken from Caillois (2001), who noted that all human play exists on a spectrum
between unruly, free, exploratory play or paidia (found prototypically in chil-
dren’s pretend and rough-and-tumble play), and the orderly, rule-based striving for

7
Make-Believe in Gameful and Playful Design
105
Serious game
design
Serious toy
design
Playful design
Gameful design
Toy design
Game design
ludus
paidia
Whole systems
Qualities
elements
Fig. 7.2 A conceptual map of applied games and play practices
challenging goals or ludus, as found in classic gaming and competitive sports.1
Second, Deterding and colleagues distinguish between wholes and qualities as the
object of design. Combining these dimensions, they arrive at the following four
quadrants:
•
Serious game design or creating “ludic wholes”: designing and/or deploying full-
ﬂedged games for ‘serious’ purposes;
•
Serious toy design or creating “paidic wholes”: designing and/or deploying full-
ﬂedged toys for ‘serious’ purposes;
•
Gameful design or affording “ludic qualities”: designing to afford the experiential
and behavioral qualities characteristic for gaming;
•
Playful design or affording “paidic qualities”: designing to afford the experiential
and behavioral qualities characteristic for playing.
1 Ludus and paidia do not map onto games vs. play understood as objects vs. activities/modes.
Rather, they characterize particular styles of play activity/engagement, which are afforded more
or less well by particular genres of games (see Barr 2007, also for empirical evidence regarding
Caillois’ conceptual distinction). They do roughly map on the psychological distinction of pretend
and role vs. rule play (Pellegrini 2009). This is reﬂected in the following by talking of playing (D
paidic play) and gaming (D ludic play).

106
S. Deterding
Deterding and colleagues (2011) deﬁne gamiﬁcation as the means of using game
design elements in non-game contexts, usually for the end of gameful design.
Analogously, one can distinguish the end of playful design from toyiﬁcation as the
means of using toy design elements – toy shapes, colours, materials, and behaviours.
Make-Believe
Like “gamiﬁcation”, “make-believe” swims in a sea of closely related concepts,
namely pretend, role, and rule play, ﬁction, and narrative.
Pretend play has been mainly studied as a phenomenon of child development
(Pellegrini 2009; Lillard 2014), capturing a stage and form of play where children
re-enact or invent strips of events assembled from their surrounding life and media
world. Thereby, they often also engage in role-play, pretend play entailing “social
content”, that is, enacting people and their roles. In the course, children lend the
actors, objects, actions and events they enrol in play alternative functions and
meanings: bringing their doll to bed in the role of their own mother or telephoning
with a banana. Many scholars from Huizinga on (1949) view pretend play as
the evolutionary and developmental origin of symbolic cognition, counterfactual
reasoning, the arts, and meaning-making more generally (see Lillard et al. 2011 for
a critical review): in pretend play, children practice how to coordinate joint attention
around objects and actions, and how to not reﬂexively react to them, but act based
on jointly constituted functions and meanings. The rule play of games presents a
later development of pretend play, where said alternative functions and meanings
are formalized in the shape more or less explicit, not spontaneously renegotiable
rules (Pellegrini 2009; Lillard 2014).
As such, pretend, role, and rule play double the foundational process in which
members of a society jointly constitute the functions and meanings of their social
world: this piece of paper counts as “20 Euros”, these two people now count as
“man and wife”, stepping onto this street before that light has switched to green
counts as “jaywalking” (Berger and Luckmann 1967; Warﬁeld Rawls 2009; Searle
1995). Our everyday world is ﬁlled with entities that may have been made little
more durable with the help of material objects (trafﬁc lights and wedding rings
and specially printed paper), but would ultimately not exist without us continually
acting as if (or more precisely, such that) they exist. What sets pretend and rule play
apart from canonical social functions and meanings is that the former are voluntary,
temporary, and “as if”: enacted to hold no lasting reality beyond the play episode.
Which brings us to ﬁction, mainly the subject of literary theory and philoso-
phy. Prototypically encountered in literature and other ﬁctional media, ﬁction is
commonly seen as a genre of discourse (Searle 1975) characterized by its “as if”
truth or reality status (Zipfel 2001). Authors have variously distinguished ﬁctionality
(Cohn 1990) – the syntactical, formal properties that allow us to tell apart a ﬁction
ﬁlm from a documentary; ﬁctiveness, the semiotic, logical, or ontological status of
propositions expressed in a work of ﬁction; and ﬁction as a pragmatic institutional

7
Make-Believe in Gameful and Playful Design
107
practice: the running agreement between ﬁction producers and receivers to co-
intentionally treat them “as if” (Lamarque and Olsen 1994). Works of ﬁction involve
a ﬁctional world – e.g., J.R.R. Tolkien’s Lord of the Rings renders the ﬁctional world
of Middle Earth, just like pretend play may generate a pretence world of pirates
(Zipfel 2001; Ryan 2014).
Although ﬁction has often been equated with narrative, they are analytically
separable (Ryan 2008). Put plainly, narrative is about telling a story. It relates to a
certain semantic type of statement (a temporal sequence of events); a formal quality
of communications (being organized and presented in a way we would recognize as
‘typical’ for stories: re-tellable, eventful, sequential, etc.); and a certain pragmatic
communicative situation, consisting of a narrator relating the narrative to a narratee
(Abbott 2014). To be sure, all narratives convey a story world (Ryan 2014), and this
story world is very often ﬁctional (see Middle-Earth). Vice versa, the overwhelming
majority of works of ﬁction is narrative. But as narrative journalism and maps
of ﬁctional countries demonstrate, there is non-ﬁction narrative and non-narrative
ﬁction.
To summarize, pretend play, role-play, rule play, and ﬁction strongly overlap in
the constitution of alternative, “as if” functions and meanings. They often involve
narrative: pretend and role play re-enact or invent narrative sequences of events,
rule play generates sequences of events that are often retold as a story afterwards,
and ﬁctional media usually take a narrative form. And this overlap has led multiple
scholars to reason that all four phenomena share an evolutionary and developmental
origin in play.
Prominently – turning to make-believe – Kendall Walton suggested in Mimesis
as Make-Believe (1990) that literature, movies, theatre plays, and paintings “are
best seen as continuous with children’s games of make-believe.” (p. 11) Make-
believe emerges from the interaction of “props” – toys, pictures, written or spoken
words that prompt, anchor, focus and coordinate individual and shared imagination
(ibid., pp. 19–21) – , and “principles of generation”: “rules about what is to be
imagined in what circumstances”, based on a given prop in a given game of make-
believe (ibid., p. 40). These principles are part of a larger shared “convention,
understanding, agreement in the game of make-believe” (ibid., p. 38) to treat those
generated imaginations “as if”. In contemporary humanities, make-believe is chieﬂy
understood with Walton as this constitution of ﬁctional, “as if” functions and
meanings found both in play and representational art (Bareis 2014). Because of its
wide adoption, including the conceptualization of make-believe in games (Bateman
2011), we here subscribe to the Waltonian deﬁnition of make-believe.
The main point of remaining scientiﬁc contention is how the constitution of
make-believe works. The traditional family of views holds that make-believe
involves some mental (meta-)representations: things symbolically “stand in for”
other, non-existing things, prompting mental images or propositions of those non-
things, be it through simple association or some rule-based calculus (Rucinska
2014; this volume). An alternative, emerging family of socio-material, ecological,
or enactive accounts views make-believe as a practical accomplishment emerging
from the embodied dispositions of actors and affordances of involved objects (ibid.).

108
S. Deterding
Here, functions and meanings are not cued or rule-generated mental representations
with propositional content, but learning-shaped organizations of one’s perception
and action systems how to perceive and engage with certain objects in certain
contexts that bottom out in the responses of the material environment and the
running agreement of the co-present social group.
Positioning Make-Believe
Following Caillois, make-believe (or “mimicry”, as he calls it [2001, p. 19]) is
squarely a matter of paidia: games are “ruled or make-believe” (ibid., p. 9, emphasis
in original), and make-believe lacks “the continuous submission to imperative
and precise rules” (ibid., p. 22) that characterizes ludic gaming. Developmental
psychology, as we have seen, likewise distinguishes pretend and role-play from rule
play. In our matrix of applied games and play, this would put make-believe in the
paidic half.
Game research since Caillois has unfortunately been more concerned with the
relation of games to narrative than make-believe, particularly in the so-called “ludol-
ogy/narratology” debate, which often conﬂated narrative and ﬁction (Frasca 2003).
To establish games as a subject matter in its own right, early game studies engaged
in what Bateman (2015) labelled “ﬁction denial”: It drew a sharp conceptual
distinction between “rules” and “ﬁction,” holding that only rules are essential to
games, conceding that digital games often comprise (analytically distinct) rules and
narrative/ﬁction in one piece of “half-real” or “ludo-narrative” software (Juul 2005;
Aarseth 2012).
From a Waltonian make-believe standpoint, this view is incorrect in that both
rules and ﬁction are forms of make-believe (Deterding 2009; Bateman 2011, 2015).
It is correct in that games and player communities can differently facilitate and
emphasize ludic, rules-and-goals-focused gaming, or paidic, pretense-and-roles-
focused playing (Barr 2007; Linderoth 2012). For instance, the genre of role-playing
games particularly formalizes and facilitates pretend and role-play (Deterding and
Zagal forthcoming).
A look into gamiﬁcation and gameful design lends further support to Cail-
lois’ view, suggesting if not a ﬁction denial, then a ﬁction neglect: In most
gamiﬁcation design literature, make-believe is simply absent (e.g. Zichermann and
Cunningham 2011; Kim 2011; Paharia 2013; Deterding 2015a). If it appears at all,
then as a single bullet point or paragraph listing avatars or story. For instance,
Werbach and Hunter (2012, pp. 78, 80) name “narrative (a consistent, on-going
storyline)” and “avatars (visual representations of a player’s character)” as game
dynamics and mechanics, to then never return to them. Reeves and Read (2009, pp.
64–66, 68–71) enumerate “self-representation with avatars” and “narrative context”
as two of the “ten ingredients of great games”. In contrast, both books spend whole
chapters on ludic design elements like points, badges, and leaderboards. And neither
avatars nor narratives are necessarily make-believe.

7
Make-Believe in Gameful and Playful Design
109
Gamiﬁcation research shows a similar picture. A systematic review by Hamari
et al. (2014) identiﬁed 24 empirical papers on gamiﬁcation, only 6 of which involved
“story/theme” (versus 10 with leaderboards, and nine each with points and badges).
In another review, Seaborn and Fels (2015) found 31 studies, of which only 3
featured avatars, 1 featured roles, and 1 a story (compared to 18 with points, 17
with badges/achievements, and 11 with leaderboards). Seaborn and Fels furthermore
identiﬁed seven theories currently in use in gamiﬁcation research – none of which
explicitly speak to the effects of make-believe.
While both practice and research are in their infancy, this comparatively curt,
superﬁcial, and conﬂating treatment is indicative of the inferior role of make-
believe – and paidic play more generally – in gamiﬁcation and gameful design.
Among current rhetorics and connected forms of applied games and play, only one
explicitly focuses make-believe: the rhetoric of performance (Deterding 2015b).
Notably, its proponents typically distance themselves from gamiﬁcation or gameful
design, preferring play forms and terms like alternate reality games, play in public,
or live-action role-play (ibid., pp. 42–43). Proponents of this rhetoric commonly
approach games and play as the collective performance of temporary reframings
of everyday life. They value the paidic opening such performance produces for
exploring and creating new, alternative behaviours, meanings, and experiences. As
such, they connect to older rhetorics of play as identity – a strong shared experience
that bonds a community – and play as imaginary: a realm of creative imagination
(Sutton-Smith 1997). Given how their work foregrounds open exploration and
backgrounds goals and rules, it is most easily classiﬁed as playful design.
7.3
Forms and Effects
Gameful and playful design, we noted, attempt to afford gaming- and playing-
characteristic experiences and behaviours with non-game/play activities and sys-
tems, typically for an ulterior goal like enjoyment, motivation, or learning. To
this end, they often employ design elements from games and toys. This raises the
question what desirable effects make-believe has on user experience and behaviour,
and what the ‘active ingredients’ of games and toys are that bring these effects about.
Put more formally, what are the affordances of games and toys regarding make-
believe: the functional compounds of design features and user dispositions that give
rise to particular desirable experiences and behaviours (Deterding 2011)?
As noted, although foundational to pretend, role-, and rule play, make-believe
has been chieﬂy employed as part of playful design interventions (and serious role-
playing games, see below, Sect. 7.3.4). Even here, practitioners and researchers have
been more focused on the design and effects of systems and make-believe as a whole
than teasing out individual affordances. As suggestions for future research, we here
highlight four design aspects: theming; storiﬁcation; scripting, ruling, and framing;
and role-playing.

110
S. Deterding
Theming
In games and other design spheres, theme commonly refers to a particular semiotic
domain (Gee 2003) or frame (Fillmore and Baker 2009) that a design evokes or
“is about”: a recognizable chunk of real or ﬁctive life world like “pirates”, “high
fantasy”, “Wall Street banking”, “Japan”, “hospital”, or the like. Theming describes
how a given design is “dressed up” in a domain (in contrast to simulation, where the
system is intended to model a domain).
Maybe the most prominent design domain of theming is not games, but themed
spaces (Grove and Fisk 1992; Gottdiener 2001; Ritzer 2009; Lukas 2013). As
part of the larger shift towards an experience economy (Pine and Gilmore 2011),
corporations are increasingly trying to transform interactions with customers into
memorable and entertaining experiences – either as their chief product, or as a
marketing tool to differentiate themselves from competitors and put customers into
a positive, consumption-fostering mood. Examples are theme parks like Disneyland,
theme restaurants like the Jekyll & Hyde Club in New York City, theme shops
like the Time Travel Mart in L.A., and theme events like a party set in a 1940s
WWII bunker by the Parisian event group WATO. There are even examples in
the workplace, like start-ups trying to create a more playful ofﬁce environment by
designing meeting rooms as a James Bond villain’s secret underground lair (Mäyrä
et al. 2013).
The main tools for theming are art direction and language (Lukas 2013): Spaces,
objects, actors, events and actions are audio-visually (and sometimes also in smell
and interaction) designed and verbally labelled to evoke elements from the target
domain: In a hypothetical hospital-themed restaurant, waiters might wear white
overcoats and stethoscopes and call themselves “nurses”, the drink menu may be
labelled “medicine”, the walls may be painted in hospital white and light green, etc.
Several desirable effects can be identiﬁed for theming: First, the novelty of a
themed system or space can evoke curiosity in users, driving exploration to discover
what else the designers might have themed how, as well as pleasurable surprise
at unexpected theming (Silvia 2006). Paradoxically, theming is also seen to relax
users through familiarity: themed spaces usually only evoke the most universally
well-known semiotic domains and use the most stereotyped, clichéd signiﬁers (the
doctor’s stethoscope) to both make the theming easily legible and create a safe,
calming space (Gottdiener 2001). In the case of franchises or ﬁctional worlds with
signiﬁcant lore and fan communities, recognizing allusions and ‘insider jokes’ that
are non-obvious for casual consumers may also generate positive experiences of
cultural competence and belonging (Jenkins 2006).
A further positive effect often highlighted is facilitating understanding and
learning through (metaphorical) external representations (Imaz and Benyon 2007).
Providing novice users with concrete representations from a well-familiar source
domain for a novel or abstract target domain allows them to use existing knowledge
to infer and learn about the target. A well-known example in interface design is the
desktop metaphor (ibid.).

7
Make-Believe in Gameful and Playful Design
111
In HCI, Malone (1982) ﬁrst observed that wrapping interaction in a “fantasy” is
one characteristic that makes video games more interesting and motivating. Carroll
and Thomas (1982) similarly suggested that boring computer jobs like monitoring
factory parameters on a screen could be made more motivating by representing
them as e.g., landing an airplane in rough weather. Particularly with regard to
learning, Malone (1982) distinguished “intrinsic” fantasies, where the theme maps
onto and supports the skill to be learned, from “extrinsic” ones, where the theme is
an arbitrary, exchangeable add-on. This distinction has since been articulated and
tested as intrinsic integration (Habgood and Ainsworth 2011): Evidence supports
that a learning game where the skill to be learned is both the central game challenge
and ﬁtting the ﬁctional domain representing the challenge is more conducive
to engagement and learning than a not-ﬁtting one (e.g., calculating angles is
intrinsically integrated with a game where the challenge and ﬁction is to load, aim,
and shoot a catapult to destroy an enemy’s castle, whereas translating words to ﬁre
the catapult would not be). The explanation is that intrinsically integrated ﬁctions
provide metaphorical mappings (see above), and that clashing ﬁction and game
mechanics disrupt enjoyable immersion in the task – a phenomenon also called
“ludonarrative dissonance” (Hocking 2007).
In playful and gameful design, few if any research has focused on theming. Birk
and colleagues (2015) studied the effect of theming on four standard psychological
tasks. For instance, a go/no-go task where users are to respond on one stimuli
(circles) but not another (squares) was redressed as shooting zombies, not civilians.
Birk and colleagues found that theming actually decreased performance and user
experience, presumably because it added complexity and cognitive load and set
up expectations of enjoyable gameplay that were not met by the underlying basic
experimental tasks. Mollick and Rothbard (2014) found that having choice in the
theming of a workplace game (in their case, between a fantasy and farming theme)
positively affected user consent to the game, which moderated its affective and
performance effects.
In design practice, one can highlight two examples. One is the ubiquitous
commercial practice of theming websites and smartphone applications. For instance,
during special events like Halloween or Christmas, interface elements are being
redrawn with snow or pumpkins on them. At the high end of this practice
are websites and applications around a ﬁctional entertainment product, such as
promotional websites for movies and ﬁlm. Here, akin to attempts in game user
interface design to create immersive interfaces (Fagerholt and Lorentzon 2009),
interface elements are often designed to appear as if they are (a) taken out of the
ﬁctional world (e.g., a button in a website about the Stone Age looks like a rough-
hewn stone) and/or (b) actually exist within the ﬁctional world. For instance, in the
(now-retired) ﬁrst version of the website Pottermore.com, focused on the ﬁctional
world of J.K. Rowling’s Harry Potter novels, users could read books, which were
represented as actual books in an actual book library in the ﬁctional world.
The second practice has been called “Barely Games” (Davies 2009): often
artistic augmented reality works that layer themed elements of a ﬁctional world
into the everyday. Davies (2009) for instance created the Situated Audio Platform.

112
S. Deterding
This smartphone “browser for geo-tagged audio ﬁles” produces movement- and
place-appropriate sounds from an alternate ﬁctional world (such as movement and
door sounds from the video game Half Life 2) as the user walks through a city,
and triggers additional audio ﬁles when the user moves into the connected GPS
coordinates.
Storiﬁcation
If theming manifests make-believe entities in space here and now, storiﬁcation
extends their existence in a meaningful form across time (Akkerman et al. 2009). It
means creating and communicating a narrative that explains the past of the make-
believe entities and/or guides their (inter)action from the ﬁrst point of user contact
on. While theming and storiﬁcation are analytically separable, in practice, like
make-believe and narrative, they tend to entail each other. “Fitting” stories complete,
enrich, and reinforce the ﬁctional world conveyed by theming. In turn, while the
main way of communicating narrative is through written or spoken text, video, and
enactment, themed environments often partake in the process through “environmen-
tal storytelling”, particularly “embedded narrative” (Jenkins 2004): the environment
entails clues that the user can puzzle together to deduce their origin story.
The desirable effects of storiﬁcation have been studied and explored more
extensively than theming, particularly in game-based learning. Since narrative is
a fundamental structure in which humans make sense of and memorize the world
(Bruner 1990), presenting a subject matter in story form facilitates comprehension
and learning (Dickey 2011; Murmann and Avraamidou 2014a). A well-composed
dramatic story arc sparks suspense and curiosity, motivating sustained engagement
(Dickey 2006). Third, stories lend emotional signiﬁcance to actors and events:
we sympathize with the underdog we know has been treated unfairly in the past
(Carpenter and Green 2012). By connecting to values and (ﬁctional) persons we
care about, stories can similarly increase the perceived relevance of goals and tasks
a system suggests to the user. Fourth, good stories can engender “transportation”:
the audience becomes attentively, cognitively, and emotionally absorbed in the
events of the story, disregarding the outside world and the unreality of the narrated
events. Transported individuals are more susceptible to persuasion: they are more
likely to adopt the beliefs and attitudes proposed in the narrative (ibid.). There
is evidence across a number of learning interventions that well-designed narrative
drives motivation, enjoyment, and learning through these routes (e.g. Paulus et al.
2006; Dickey 2011; Carpenter and Green 2012; Murmann and Avraamidou 2014b).
Several authors have suggested that adding (ﬁctional) stories to a design is an
important dimension of gameful or playful design to drive engagement (Dickey
2006; Reeves and Read 2009; Langer et al. 2013; Sakamoto and Nakajima 2014).
One relatively common genre are tourism-focused mixed reality applications like
REXplorer (Ballagas et al. 2008) or Voices of Oakland (Dow et al. 2005). These
typically consist of smartphone applications or dedicated devices that deliver audio

7
Make-Believe in Gameful and Playful Design
113
ﬁles telling the story of historical sights in a city the user stands in front of, bound
together by a larger, overarching, and usually ﬁctional narrative, such as the ghost
of a recently deceased guiding tourists through a cemetery and its stories.
Unfortunately, there are again relatively few effect studies on storiﬁcation per
se. Flatla et al. (2011) gamiﬁed several software calibration tasks, including a
targeting task with a bare-bones ﬁctional backstory about the universe being
attacked by evil aliens; they found that gamiﬁcation increased reported enjoyment.
Halan et al. (2010) found that adding backstory, leaderboards, and deadlines to an
application prompting medical students to interact with a virtual patient to train the
underlying conversation model increased the participation rate. Downes-Le Guin et
al. (2012) created a gamiﬁed version of an online questionnaire including a ﬁctional
fantasy theme and backstory, ﬁnding no signiﬁcant effects. Chen et al. (2012)
achieved increased user enjoyment and goal pursuit by wrapping math learning
in a Tamagotchi-like pet nurturing game. Individual learning tasks were delivered
as quests presented by ﬁctional characters from the game world, complete with
a narrative backstory motivating the task. Recently, Prestopnik and Tang (2015)
compared player experience in two citizen science platforms that motivate players
to solve scientiﬁc tasks, one with a ﬁctional theme and story, the other with progress
feedback (points, scores), and found that players signiﬁcantly preferred the story-
based platform. But really, research on the effects of storiﬁcation in isolation is
severely lacking.
Scripting, Ruling, and Framing
Both theming and storiﬁcation are potentially passive forms of adding make-believe:
they only require that the user expose herself to the themed space or narrative.
In contrast, scripting and ruling turn the user into an active co-creator: rule or
instruction sets guide the user to perform certain actions that result in generating
a make-believe layer for herself (and potentially, initiated observers). These serve
as and go hand in hand with social signals or meta-communications that frame the
activity as e.g. play – frame here being understood with Goffman (1986) as a socially
shared type of situation with particular norms, understandings, and socio-material
organizations. Following Goffman (ibid, pp. 40–82), make-believe is not a frame,
but a set of secondary frames (“keyings”) that include daydreaming, theatre, movies,
playing, and gaming. This set shares an ethos of voluntary, autotelic engagement and
attentive absorption; the understanding of the situation being “as if”; muted social
and physical consequence; and as a result of that, a practical and social license to
temporarily engage in behaviours that in their non-keyed form would be physically
dangerous and/or socially deviant (Deterding 2014).
Consequently, one positive effect of scripting, ruling, and framing highlighted
in the literature is the exploration of new, alternative behaviours and experiences.
Framing an activity as e.g., pretend play temporarily loosens whatever social norms
prevail for the pre-existing situation, and replaces them with the norm to “play

114
S. Deterding
along,” opening users up for new, potentially transformative experiences (Flanagan
2009; Stenros 2015).
Second, a rich strain in the sociology of labour has studied how factory
workers spontaneously reframe work as a game, leading to increased perceived self-
determination and positive affect (see Mollick and Rothbard 2014, for a review).
Csikszentmihalyi (1975) likewise observed that workers approaching work as play
were more likely to have optimal or ﬂow experiences at work. Several studies have
found that verbally or visually framing an activity as “game”, “play”, or “fun” (vs.
“work” or “obligation”) positively affects motivation and performance, moderated
by personality factors like self-control, gender, and age (Webster and Martocchio
1993; Littleton et al. 1999; Laran and Janiszewski 2011; Lieberoth 2015). Two
main theoretical explanations are proposed: stereotype threat – performance anxiety
based on the negative stereotype that they are “bad” at games lowers the actual
performance of e.g., women or older people (Inzlicht 2011); and autonomy support:
framing an activity as (conventionally autonomous, voluntary) play cues partici-
pants to construe the activity as autonomous, which constitutes part of intrinsic
motivation (Deci and Ryan 2012).
Direct precursors of this practice are Situationist and Fluxus art pieces (Flanagan
2009) as well as pervasive games like Assassins (Montola et al. 2009). Like their
Situationist and Fluxus precursors, contemporary make-believe scripting, ruling,
and framing is chieﬂy artistic. One example are so-called subtlemobs, created by
the art group Circumstance. As the group explains its piece Our Broken Voice (Child
et al. 2010):
A subtlemob is an invisible ﬂashmob, it integrates with the beauty of the everyday world,
so only its participants are aware of it. It’s like walking through a ﬁlm. It is experienced on
headphones, and it is performed by you and hundreds of strangers. Armed with only an mp3
player this subtlemob takes you on a cinematic experience of twists and turns. A mixture
of narrative and richly textured music ﬁlls your ears. Different MP3 ﬁles are distributed to
different audience groups, so while some perform simple actions, the others hear stories
about these actions, so that everywhere they look the stories come alive in the world around
them. The roles swap back and forth, sometimes you’ll just be watching, sometimes you’ll
be following instructions.
In the case of Our Broken Voice, participants are cast into the roles of either
persecuted or persecutors in an ambiguous Orwellian surveillance state, instructed
to act inconspicuously while trying to identify their target or persecutors, running
away or persecuting a runner, etc.
Where Our Broken Voice works with scripts, Massively Multiplayer Soba
(Flanagan 2010) chieﬂy employs rules: Teams are instructed to procure ingredients
and stories about them for a shared noodle soup from residents of a local diverse
neighbourhood – ingredients whose names are written in different foreign lan-
guages. Thus, the game rules and materials prompt participants to talk to strangers
from other cultures about food, while the framing as a game provides the social
license or alibi to do so.
A ﬁnal example is the Drift Deck by Bleecker and Lozzi (2008). Picking up on
the Situationist art practice of dérive, letting oneself drift through a city guided

7
Make-Believe in Gameful and Playful Design
115
by its geographical and architectural cues to discover new, unbeaten paths and
experiences, it presents cards with intentionally ambiguous instructions such as
“Some Bit of Unevenness. Conﬁrm this with a passerby. Then turn and run.”
Participants are instructed to make sense of these instructions in their context, follow
them, to then draw new cards.
In summary, scripting, ruling, and framing can be seen to afford an open-
ended form of pretend and rule play that engages people in novel behaviours and
experiences. These have an interesting relation to make-believe: Some interventions
directly instruct participants to generate make-believe. Others constitute alternative
meanings and functions in the same way games do: moving a pawn-sized black
piece of wood on a chequered slate of wood has no meaning outside the game of
Chess. A third group uses the alternative frame of art or play expressly to prompt
participants to engage in activities that also already have function and meaning in
their surrounding everyday life context, e.g. paying compliments to strangers in a
park as a means to ‘assassinate’ them within the frame of the game (McGonigal
2011, pp. 191–197). That is, they intentionally use scripting and ruling to drive
desired activities – not so much (or not only) by organizing the activities to be more
motivating, but by changing the perceived governing norms of the situation.
Role-Playing
Following the distinction between pretend and role play in developmental psy-
chology, role-playing can be seen as theming, ruling, and scripting with “social
content”, that is, enacting alternative actors and roles. While role-playing in and
beyond simulation and gaming has been connected to a wealth of desirable effects
(see Schrier forthcoming), we here focus on those particularly salient with make-
believe social actors in HCI, which can be roughly split into two groups: the system
interacting with the user through a make-believe avatar, and users themselves taking
on make-believe roles.
Casting interactive systems or system components in the form of an avatar
has a long tradition in HCI and playful design, with famous examples like the
Microsoft Ofﬁce help dialogue rendered as “Clippy”, the talking paper clip, or the
Nabaztag, an ambient information console shaped as a cartoony white rabbit. The
rationale behind this strategy is what Reeves and Nass (1996) called “the media
equation”: people tend to relate to machines and virtual agents as if they were real
human actors, including liking, emotional bonding, and responding positively to
their praise. This emotional relating to systems can be increased through avatar
representations and game design patterns like making the well-being of the avatar
dependent on the user’s actions (Dormann et al. 2013). A recent example is “Freddie
Von Chimpenheimer IV”, the cartoon mailman-meets-chimpanzee mascot of e-mail
marketing software Mailchimp. Intentionally designed to evoke emotion (Walter
2011), the mascot personally greets logged-in users with their name and some new
irreverent joke each day, and gives them a congratulatory “high-ﬁve” when they
successfully send an e-mail campaign.

116
S. Deterding
Moving on to users enacting make-believe actors, one can name at least six
different desirable effects. The ﬁrst is self-efﬁcacy through vicarious experience (see
Liebermann 2006, for a survey): By playing the make-believe “nano-bot” character
ROXXI shooting down cancer cells in the ﬁrst-person shooter game Re-Mission,
teen cancer patients increased their beliefs in their own capacity to change reality
(self-efﬁcacy), speciﬁcally that they were able to ﬁght their own cancer through
medication (Kato et al. 2008). A related potentially desirable outcome is the so-
called Proteus effect (Yee and Bailenson 2007): people’s behaviour conforms to
their (digital) self-representation, even after they stopped interacting through it. That
is, users who act through a highly attractive avatar will later act as if they themselves
were more attractive. Third, role-playing can allow users to enact their desired
ideal selves, an experience that generates positive affect and intrinsic motivation
(Przybylski et al. 2012). Fourth, creating and customizing one’s make-believe avatar
is a self-expressive activity that offers motivating autonomy experiences (Turkay
and Adinolf 2015). Fifth, like scripting and ruling, role-playing can give participants
an alibi and rationale to explore new identities, experiences and behaviours they
wouldn’t otherwise (Turkle 1995). Sixth and ﬁnally, playing the role of another
person or group of people can be a visceral form of perspective-taking, increasing
empathy and understanding for the embodied person or group (Bachen et al. 2012).
Given this rich tapestry of desirable effects, it is all the more saddening that role-
playing is rarely discussed in gameful and playful design. Instead, the literature has
chieﬂy focused avatars as sensory representations of social actors (see above). Now
representational props (“this strange business of masks and disguises”, Huizinga
1949, p. 13) are indeed a crucial tool for role-playing: masks, costumes (Fron et al.
2007), and avatars allow a user to dissociate from their social identities and take on
new ones. Yet the avatars discussed in gameful design are mainly representations of
users’ everyday selves, and deployed for the informational purposes of displaying
(presumed-engaging) progress feedback and status markers to the avatar owner and
(presumed trust and coordination-facilitating) reputation information to other users
(Reeves and Read 2009).
Uniﬁed Experiences
Although theming, storiﬁcation, scripting, ruling, framing, and role-playing do
function and sometimes appear in isolation, they can complement and reinforce each
other, and often occur together in one integrated design. While frequently labelled
as playful or gameful design in media and research, such uniﬁed make-believe
experiences are formally hard to distinguish from pervasive games (Montola et
al. 2009), alternate reality games (ibid.; McGonigal 2011), live-action role-playing
games (Harviainen et al. forthcoming), or mixed reality performances (Benford
and Giannachi 2011). They represent the most sophisticated and compelling make-
believe designs across application domains. For instance, in education, we ﬁnd
multi-player classrooms (Sheldon 2011), practo-mimetic learning (Travis 2011), or

7
Make-Believe in Gameful and Playful Design
117
role-immersion games (Carnes 2014), which organize whole college courses as role-
playing games set in a world ﬁtting the educational topic, and use backstory and
plot to engage students in their roles and motivate their learning tasks. As public
education, the website campaign World Without Oil (Eklund et al. 2007) encouraged
people across the world to join in the creation of the ﬁctional ﬁrst 32 days of a
global oil crisis, with participants sending in ﬁctional videos, blog posts, images
etc. imagining the effects in their local community.
To illustrate how uniﬁed experiences make use of all dimensions of make-
believe design, one may look at one much-publicized example in health and ﬁtness,
Zombies, Run! (Six to Start and Alderman 2015). Zombies, Run! is a smartphone
application that encourages running by tracking the user’s location and speed and
blending a ﬁctional world on top of it. In the initial ﬁction, users embody the sole
survivor of a helicopter crash in a zombie apocalypse future that joins a fortiﬁed
village of survivors as a “runner”: somebody who runs into the world outside to
recover resources while avoiding (and ﬂeeing from) zombies. The app uses labels,
visuals, and sound to evoke the theme of a zombie apocalypse, mainly interfacing
with the user through headphone audio and the user’s movement. It rules and scripts
individual runs by setting target lengths and speeds to reach and including a sprint-
inducing mechanic: at set but unknown points in time, a zombie horde is stirred up,
meaning the user has to run at a higher speed for a certain period of time to escape
them. Every run is wrapped in a motivating story, and continued engagement is
motivated by the overall background story of the world being slowly told run by run.
The user is given a clear role within the ﬁctional world, and engages with established
ﬁctional characters that she builds up emotional relations with over time.
7.4
Conclusions
As the preceding pages have shown, make-believe – the constitution of ﬁctional, as
if functions and meanings – is a potent ‘active ingredient’ of play and games. Make-
believe can stoke curiosity and arousal through surprising theming and suspenseful
narrative. It can facilitate understanding and learning through organizing knowledge
in experientially grounded metaphor and story. It can make us like and care about
faceless systems as if they were real people, and lend tasks and goals relevance by
linking them to values and (ﬁctional) people we care about. It can open and motivate
us to explore new identities, behaviours and experiences that lie outside our normal
social roles. It can absorb and focus our attention, cognition, and emotion, making
us more susceptible to persuasion. It can allow us to express and then follow in the
footsteps of our own better selves, and enable us to see the world through the eyes
of others.
Yet as the preceding pages also demonstrated, make-believe has remained
somewhat at the fringe of applied games and play. Its desirable effects and their
underlying affordances are different from those typically targeted in gameful design
and gamiﬁcation. True to Roger Caillois’ contention, most current examples of

118
S. Deterding
make-believe are more readily classiﬁable as playful design, which is secondary
in public, industry, and research attention to both gamiﬁcation and serious games
(Deterding 2015b). And whereas the latter aim at commercial mass markets,
the make-believe designs we encountered are usually artistic, bespoke, one-time
installations. Make-believe on a mass-market scale is – today – found mostly in
theme parks.
This may be partially due to the particular affordances and requirements of
make-believe – theming and framing through labelling and art direction; storiﬁ-
cation through texts and environmental storytelling; scripting and ruling through
instruction sets; role-playing through scripts and representational props. The main
draw of theme and narrative consists in their novelty, which rapidly diminishes
with every engagement (cf. Koivisto and Hamari 2014). Common solutions to this
are either designs of such scope and complexity that they allow for many revisits
(cf. the immersive theatre experiences of Punchdrunk), or regularly producing
new content – both of which aren’t very scalable. Make-believe via scripting,
ruling, framing and role-playing typically requires and invites a great amount of
openness, emergence, ambiguity, and multiplicity of meanings and actions. While
humans routinely make sense of novel and ambiguous actions, this capacity still
proves elusive for computers (Suchman 2007). That puts another damper on the
(computational) scalability of make-believe designs, and is a likely reason why
existing computational make-believe designs typically rely on some “human in the
loop”.
Besides limited scalability, we observed two further potential downsides to make-
believe designs – increased cognitive load and stereotype threat – which again
diverge from the common critiques of gamiﬁcation around issues like coercion or
privacy.
Another point of interesting divergence is the underlying technology. Most
serious games are audio-visual experiences players interact with through standard
computer screens and controllers, with some underlying computational model that
assesses the player’s growing competencies based on their in-game actions. Most
gameful design likewise captures user behaviour through sensors or in-application
tracking, and audio-visually responds to the user through screens. Many of the
make-believe interventions we encountered – Situated Audio Platform, Voices of
Oakland, Our Broken Voices, You Are Not Here, Zombies, Run! – in contrast
rely on sound via headphones as the interface output, and time and location as
inputs. One reason for headphone sound as the output channel is that it affords a
non-embarrassing, unobtrusive individual layering of additional meanings on top
of everyday life: Wearing headphones in public is a socially accepted, normal
behaviour, and sound via headphones usually doesn’t reach nor disturb uninitiated
bystanders. Indeed, the thrill and community sense of participating in the “secret”
(Huizinga 1949) of a play society in plain sight is one of the explicit design
goals of subtlemobs (Child et al. 2010). The use of time and location inputs in
turn may link to the fact that make-believe typically needs to be coherent to
achieve involvement and transportation. Since both sense-making and dramatic
effects rely on the chronological sequence in which information is disclosed, and

7
Make-Believe in Gameful and Playful Design
119
since users in make-believe designs often encounter information by traversing a
space, make-believe designs often require the spatio-temporal choreographing of
user trajectories through them (Benford and Giannachi 2011).
Yet there are also points of convergence. Like ‘mainstream’ serious games and
gamiﬁcation, there is a world of difference between most research studies testing
the bare-bones addition of one line of ﬂavour text to a cursor pointing task and
real-world designs like Zombies, Run!, with multiple seasons of continuing and
intertwining storylines produced by seasoned writers, expert voice acting and sound
design, continually iterated interfaces and rules. This puts a question mark behind
the ecological validity of most existing experimental studies, and may be one reason
why some have actually found adverse effects of ‘adding’ make-believe (see Squire
2011, for a similar argument). A second shared shortcoming is that most designs and
studies involve multiple interventions at once: progress feedback and goal-setting
and story and avatars. From a design perspective, this often makes sense. From a
research perspective, however, this makes it hard to draw conclusions and advance
the systematic theorization of what the ‘active ingredients’ of make-believe are, and
how design can reliably afford them. It also reproduces the casual conﬂation of
concepts like make-believe, ﬁction, narrative, theme, and role-play prevalent in the
current literature.
All of this doesn’t make make-believe any less viable or appealing as a design
strategy or research topic. If anything, it suggests that make-believe remains an
unlifted treasure of gameful and playful design, to which the present chapter may
serve as a ﬁrst map and compass.
References
Aarseth E (2012) A narrative theory of games. In: Proceedings of the International Conference
on the Foundations of Digital Games – FDG’12. ACM Press, New York, pp 129–133.
doi:10.1145/2282338.2282365
Abbott HP (2014) Narrativity. In: Hühn P, Meister JC, Pier J, Schmid W (eds) The living handbook
of narratology. Hamburg University, Hamburg. Retrieved from http://www.lhn.uni-hamburg.
de/article/narrativity
Akkerman
S,
Admiraal
W,
Huizenga
J
(2009)
Storiﬁcation
in
history
education:
a
mobile
game
in
and
about
medieval
Amsterdam.
Comput
Educ
52(2):449–459.
doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2008.09.014
Bachen CM, Hernández-Ramos PF, Raphael C (2012) Simulating REAL LIVES: promoting global
empathy and interest in learning through simulation games. Simul Gaming 43(4):437–460.
doi:10.1177/1046878111432108
Ballagas R, Kuntze A, Walz SP (2008) Gaming tourism: lessons from evaluating REXplorer, a
pervasive game for tourists. In: Indulska J (ed) Pervasive 2008. Springer, Berlin, pp 244–261
Bareis A (2014) Fiktionen als make-believe. In: Klauk T, Köppe T (eds) Fiktionalität. Ein
interdisziplinäres Handbuch. De Gruyter, Berlin, pp 50–67
Barr P (2007) Video game values: play as human-computer interaction. Victoria University of
Wellington. Retrieved from http://pippinbarr.com/videogamevalues/?page_id=7
Bateman C (2011) Imaginary games. Zero Books, Winchester

120
S. Deterding
Bateman C (2015) Fiction denial and the liberation of games. In: DiGRA 2015 Ab extra. DiGRA,
Lüneburg
Benford S, Giannachi G (2011) Performing mixed reality. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Berger PL, Luckmann T (1967) The social construction of reality: a treatise in the sociology of
knowledge. Penguin, London
Birk MV, Mandryk RL, Bowey J, Buttlar B (2015) The effects of adding premise and backstory
to psychological tasks. In: CHI 2015 workshop on researching gamiﬁcation: strategies,
opportunities, challenges, ethics, Seoul
Bleecker J, Lizzi D (2008) Drift deck. Near future laboratory. Retrieved from http://blog.
nearfuturelaboratory.com/2008/09/02/drift-deck/
Blythe MA, Overbeeke K, Monk AF, Wright PC (eds) (2004) Funology: from usability to
enjoyment. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell
Bruner J (1990) Acts of meaning. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA
Burghardt GM (2005) The genesis of animal play: testing the limits. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Caillois R (2001) Man, play, and games. University of Illinois Press, Urbana
Carnes MC (2014) Minds on ﬁre: how role-immersion games transform college. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, MA
Carpenter JM, Green MC (2012) Flying with Icarus: narrative transportation and the persua-
siveness of entertainment. In: Shrum LJ (ed) Psychology of entertainment media, 2nd edn.
Routledge, Florence, pp 169–194
Carroll JM (1982) The adventure of getting to know a computer. Computer 15(11):49–58.
doi:10.1109/MC.1982.1653888
Carroll JM, Thomas JC (1982) Metaphor and the cognitive representation of computing systems.
IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern 12(2):107–116
Carroll JM, Thomas JC (1988) Fun. ACM SIGCHI Bull 19(3):21–24. doi:10.1145/49108.1045604
Chen Z-H, Liao CCY, Cheng HNH, Yeh CYC, Chan T-W (2012) Inﬂuence of game quests on
pupils’ enjoyment and goal-pursuing in math learning. J Educ Technol Soc 15(2):317–327
Child L, Grenier E, Speakman D, Anderson S, Stevens T (2010) Our broken voice. Retrieved from
http://wearecircumstance.com/project/our-broken-voice/
Cohn D (1990) Signposts of ﬁctionality: a narratological perspective. Poet Today 11(4):775–804.
doi:10.2307/1773077
Csikszentmihalyi M (1975) Beyond boredom and anxiety: the experience of play in work and
games. Jossey-Bass Publishers, San Francisco
Davies R (2009) Playful. In: This is playful 2009. London. Retrieved from http://russelldavies.
typepad.com/planning/2009/11/playful.html
Deci EL, Ryan RM (2012) Motivation, personality, and development within embedded social
contexts: an overview of self-determination theory. In: Ryan RM (ed) The oxford handbook
of human motivation. Oxford University Press, New York, pp 85–107
Deterding S (2009) Fiction as play: reassessing the relation of games, play, and ﬁction. In: Sageng
JR (ed) Philosophy of computer games 2009. University of Oslo, Oslo, pp 1–18. Retrieved from
http://proceedings2009.gamephilosophy.org
Deterding S (2011) Situated motivational affordances of game elements: a conceptual model. In:
CHI 2011 workshop “Gamiﬁcation.” Vancouver. Retrieved from http://gamiﬁcation-research.
org/chi2011/papers
Deterding S (2014) Modes of play: a frame analytic account of video game play. Hamburg
University. Retrieved from http://ediss.sub.uni-hamburg.de/volltexte/2014/6863/
Deterding S (2015a) The lens of intrinsic skill atoms: a method for gameful design. Hum Comput
Interact 30(3–4):294–335. doi:10.1080/07370024.2014.993471
Deterding S (2015b) The ambiguity of games: histories, and discourses of a gameful world. In:
Walz SP, Deterding S (eds) The gameful world: approaches, issues, applications. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, pp 23–64
Deterding S, Zagal JP (eds) (forthcoming) Role-playing game studies transmedia foundations.
Routledge, New York

7
Make-Believe in Gameful and Playful Design
121
Deterding S, Dixon D, Khaled R, Nacke LE (2011) From game design elements to gamefulness:
deﬁning “Gamiﬁcation.” In: MindTrek’11. ACM Press, New York, pp 9–15
Dickey MD (2006) Game design narrative for learning: appropriating adventure game design
narrative devices and techniques for the design of interactive learning environments. Educ
Technol Res Dev 54(3):245–263. doi:10.1007/s11423-006-8806-y
Dickey MD (2011) Murder on Grimm Isle: the impact of game narrative design in
an educational game-based learning environment. Br J Educ Technol 42(3):456–469.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8535.2009.01032.x
Disselkoen D (2015) Man-eater: An intervention in the tram. Retrieved from http://
danieldisselkoen.nl/man-eater/
Dormann C, Whitson JR, Neuvians M (2013) Once more with feeling: game design patterns for
learning in the affective domain. Games Cult 8(4):215–237. doi:10.1177/1555412013496892
Dow S, Lee J, Oezbek C, Macintyre B, Bolter JD, Gandy M (2005) Exploring spatial narratives
and mixed reality experiences in Oakland cemetery. In: ACE’05. ACM Press, New York, pp
51–60
Downes-Le Guin T, Baker R, Mechling J, Ruylea E (2012) Myths and realities of respondent
engagement in online surveys. Int J Mark Res 54(5):1–21. doi:10.2501/IJMR-54-5-000-000
Eklund K, McGonigal J, Bracewell M, Cook D, Senderhauf M, Lamb M (2007) World without oil.
Retrieved from http://worldwithoutoil.org/metaabout.htm
Fagerholt E, Lorentzon M (2009) Beyond the HUD. User interfaces for increased player immersion
in FPS games. Chalmers University of Technology, Göteborg
Fernaeus Y, Höök K, Holopainen J, Ivarsson K, Karlsson A, Lindley S, Norlin C (eds) (2012)
Plei-Plei! PPP, Hongkong. Retrieved from http://playfulness.info
Fillmore CJ, Baker C (2009) A frames approach to semantic analysis. In: Heine B, Narrog H (eds)
The oxford handbook of linguistic analysis. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 313–340
Flanagan M (2009) Critical play: radical game design. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Flanagan M (2010) Creating critical play. In: Catlow R, Garrettm M, Morgana C (eds) Artists re:
thinking games. Liverpool University Press, Liverpool, pp 49–53
Flatla DR, Gutwin C, Nacke LE, Bateman S, Mandryk RL (2011) Calibration games: making
calibration tasks enjoyable by adding motivating game elements. In: UIST’11. ACM Press,
Santa Barbara, pp 403–412
Frasca G (2003) Ludologists love stories, too: notes from a debate that never took place. In: Copier
M, Raessens J (eds) DiGRA 2003. Utrecht University, Utrecht, pp 92–99
Fron J, Fullerton T, Morie JF, Pearce C (2007) Playing dress-up: costumes, roleplay and
imagination. In: Philosophy of computer games 2007. Modena
Gee J-P (2003) What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. Palgrave Macmillan,
New York
Goffman E (1986) Frame analysis: an essay on the organization of experience. Northeastern
University Press, Boston
Gottdiener M (2001) The theming of America: dreams, media fantasies, and themed environments,
2nd edn. Westview Press, Boulder
Gray D, Brown S, Macanufo J (2010) Gamestorming: a playbook for innovators, rulebreakers, and
changemakers. O’Reilly, Sebastopol
Grove SJ, Fisk RP (1992) The service experience as theater. In: Sherry JF, Sternthal B
(eds) Advances in consumer research, vol. 19. Association for Consumer Research, Provo,
pp. 455–461
Habgood MPJ, Ainsworth SE (2011) Motivating children to learn effectively: exploring the value
of intrinsic integration in educational games. Journal of the Learning Sciences 20(2):169–206.
doi:10.1080/10508406.2010.508029
Halan S, Rossen B, Cendan J, Lok B (2010) High score! – motivation strategies for user
participation in virtual human development. In: Allbeck J (ed) IVA 2010. Springer, Berlin,
pp 482–488. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-15892-6_52
Halter E (2006) From Sun Tzu to Xbox: war and videogames. Thunder’s Mouth Press, New York

122
S. Deterding
Hamari J, Koivisto J, Sarsa H (2014) Does gamiﬁcation work? – A literature review of empirical
studies on gamiﬁcation. In: HICSS’14. IEEE Computer Society Press, Waikoloa, pp 3025–3034
Harviainen JT, Simkins D, Stenros J, MacCallum-Stewart E, Hitchens D (forthcoming) Live-action
role-playing games. In: Deterding S, Zagal JP (eds) Role-playing game studies: transmedia
foundations. Routledge, London
Henricks TS (2015) Play and the human condition. University of Illinois Press, Champaign
Hocking C (2007) Ludonarrative dissonance in bioshock: the problem of what the game is
about. Click Nothing. Retrieved from http://clicknothing.typepad.com/click_nothing/2007/10/
ludonarrative-d.html
Huizinga J (1949) Homo ludens: a study of the play-element in culture. Routledge & Kegan Paul,
London
Huotari K, Hamari J (2012) Deﬁning gamiﬁcation – a service marketing perspective. In: Proceed-
ings of the 16th international academic Mindtrek conference. ACM Press, Tampere, pp 17–22
Imaz M, Benyon D (2007) Designing with blends: conceptual foundations of human-computer
interaction and software engineering. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA/London
Inzlicht M (2011) Stereotype threat: theory, process, and application. Oxford University Press,
Oxford
Jenkins H (2004) Game design as narrative architecture. In: Wardrip-Fruin N, Harrigan P (eds)
First person: new media as story, performance, and game. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp
118–130
Jenkins H (2006) Convergence culture: where old and new media collide. New York University
Press, New York
Jordan PW (2002) Designing pleasurable products. An introduction to the new human factors.
Taylor & Francis, London
Juul J (2005) Half-real: video games between real rules and ﬁctional worlds. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA
Kato PM, Cole SW, Bradlyn AS, Pollock BH (2008) A video game improves behavioral outcomes
in adolescents and young adults with cancer: a randomized trial. Pediatrics 122(2):e305–e317.
doi:10.1542/peds.2007-3134
Kim AJ (2011) Smart gamiﬁcation. Slideshare.net. Retrieved from http://www.slideshare.net/
amyjokim/smart-gamiﬁcation
Koivisto J, Hamari J (2014) Demographic differences in perceived beneﬁts from gamiﬁcation.
Comput Hum Behav 35:179–188. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2014.03.007
Korhonen H, Montola M, Arrasvuori J (2009) Understanding playful user experiences through
digital games. In: Proceedings of the 4th international conference on Designing Pleasurable
Products and Interfaces, DPPI 2009. Université de Technologie de Compiègne, pp 274–285
Krentz A (1998) Play and education in Plato’s republic. In: Olson AM (ed) Twentieth
world congress of philosophy. Boston. Retrieved from https://www.bu.edu/wcp/Papers/Educ/
EducKren.htm
Lamarque P, Olsen SH (1994) Truth, ﬁction, and literature: a philosophical perspective. Clarendon,
Oxford
Langer R, Hancock M, West AH, Randall N (2013) Applications as stories. CHI 2013 workshop
on gamiﬁcation – designing gamiﬁcation: creating gameful and playful experiences
Laran J, Janiszewski C (2011) Work or fun? How task construal and completion inﬂuence
regulatory behavior. J Consum Res 37(6):967–983. doi:10.1086/656576
Lieberman DA (2006) What can we learn from playing interactive games? In: Vorderer P, Bryant
J (eds) Playing video games: motives, responses, and consequences. Lawrence Erlbaum,
Mahwah, pp 379–397
Lieberoth A (2015) Shallow gamiﬁcation: testing psychological effects of framing an activity as a
game. Games Cult 10(3):229–248. doi:10.1177/1555412014559978
Lillard AS (2014) The development of play. In: Liben L, Mueller U (eds) Handbook of
child psychology and developmental science, vol 2. Wiley-Blackwell, New York, pp 1–44.
doi:10.2307/1131255

7
Make-Believe in Gameful and Playful Design
123
Lillard A, Pinkham AM, Smith E (2011) Pretend play and cognitive development. In: Goswami U
(ed) The Wiley-Blackwell handbook of childhood cognitive development, 2nd edn. Blackwell,
Oxford, pp 285–311
Linderoth J (2012) The effort of being in a ﬁctional world: upkeyings and laminated frames in
MMORPGs. Symb Interact 35(4):474–492. doi:10.1002/SYMB.39
Littleton K, Ashman H, Light P, Artis J, Roberts T, Oosterwegel A (1999) Gender, task contexts,
and children’s performance on a computer-based task. Eur J Psychol Educ 14(1):129–139.
doi:10.1007/BF03173115
Lukas SA (2013) The immersive worlds handbook: designing theme parks and consumer spaces.
Focal Press, New York/London
Malone T (1982) Heuristics for designing enjoyable user interfaces: lessons from computer games.
In: Proceedings of the 1982 conference on Human factors in computing systems. ACM, New
York, pp 63–68
Mäyrä F, Kultima A, Alha K, Tyni H (2013) Slide to work: the playful ofﬁce. In: Physical and
digital in games and play seminar: 9th Game Research Lab Spring Seminar. Tampere
McGonigal J (2011) Reality is broken: why games make us better and how they can change the
world. Penguin, London
Mollick E, Rothbard N (2014) Mandatory fun: consent, gamiﬁcation and the impact of games at
work. Retrieved from http://ssrn.com/abstract=2277103
Montola M, Stenros J, Waern A (2009) Pervasive games: theory and design. Experiences on the
boundary between life and play. Morgan Kaufmann, Amsterdam
Murmann M, Avraamidou L (2014a) Narrative as a learning tool in science centers: potentials,
possibilities and merits. J Sci Commun 13(02):1–16
Murmann M, Avraamidou L (2014b) Animals, emperors, senses: exploring a story-based learning
design in a museum setting. Int J Sci Educ B Commun Publ Engagement 4(1):66–91.
doi:10.1080/21548455.2012.694490
Paharia R (2013) Loyalty 3.0: how to revolutionize customer and employee engagement with big
data and gamiﬁcation. McGraw-Hill, New York
Paulus T, Horvitz B, Shi M (2006) ‘Isn’t it just like our situation?’ Engagement and learning in an
online story-based environment. Educ Technol Res Dev 54(4):355–385
Pellegrini AD (2009) The role of play in human development. Oxford University Press, New York
Pine BJ, Gilmore JH (2011) The experience economy, updated edition, 2nd edn. Harvard Business
Review Press, Boston
Prestopnik NR, Tang J (2015) Points, stories, worlds, and diegesis: comparing player experiences
in two citizen science games. Comput Hum Behav 52:492–506. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2015.05.051
Przybylski AK, Weinstein N, Murayama K, Lynch MF, Ryan RM (2012) The ideal self at
play: the appeal of video games that let you be all you can be. Psychol Sci 23(1):69–76.
doi:10.1177/0956797611418676
Reeves B, Nass C (1996) The media equation: how people treat computers, television, and new
media like real people and places. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Reeves B, Read JL (2009) Total engagement: using games and virtual worlds to change the way
people work and businesses compete. Harvard Business School Press, Boston
Ritzer G (2009) Enchanting in a disenchanted world: continuity and change in the cathedrals of
consumption, 3rd edn. Sage, Los Angeles/London/New Delhi/Singapore
Rucinska Z (2014) Pretend play as a basis of cultural games and norms. In: Enacting culture:
embodiment, interaction and the development of human culture. Heidelberg
Ryan M-L (2008) Fiction. In: Donsbach W (ed) The international encyclopedia of communication.
Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford
Ryan M-L (2014) Space. In: Hühn P, Meister JC, Pier J, Schmid W (eds) The living handbook of
narratology. University of Hamburg, Hamburg. Retrieved from http://www.lhn.uni-hamburg.
de/article/space
Sakamoto M, Nakajima T (2014) Gamifying intelligent daily environments through introducing
ﬁctionality. Int J Hybrid Inf Technol 7(4):259–276

124
S. Deterding
Salen K, Zimmerman E (2004) Rules of play: game design fundamentals. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA
Schier K (forthcoming) Education. In: Deterding S, Zagal J-P (eds) Role-playing game studies:
transmedia foundations. Routledge, New York
Seaborn K, Fels DI (2015) Gamiﬁcation in theory and action: a survey. Int J Hum-Comput Stud
74(2):14–31. doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2014.09.006
Searle JR (1975) The logical status of ﬁctional discourse. N Lit Hist 6(2):319–332
Searle J (1995) The construction of social reality. Free Press, New York
Sheldon L (2011) The multiplayer classroom: designing coursework as a game. Cengage Learning,
Boston
Silvia PJ (2006) Exploring the psychology of interest. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Six to Start, Alderman N (2015) Zombies, run! Six to Start, London. Retrieved from https://
zombiesrungame.com
Squire K (2011) Video games and learning: teaching and participatory culture in the digital age.
Teachers College Press, New York
Stenros J (2015) Behind games: playful mindset as basis for ludic transformative practice. In:
Walz SP, Deterding S (eds) The gameful world: approaches, issues, applications. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, pp 201–222
Stenros J (forthcoming) The game deﬁnition game: a review of the meanings of “Game.” Games
and culture
Suchman L (2007) Human-machine reconﬁgurations: plans and situated actions, 2nd edn. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge
Sutton-Smith B (1997) The ambiguity of play. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA
Travis R (2011) Practomimetic learning in the classics classroom: a game-based learning method
from ancient epic and philosophy. N Engl Class J 38(1):25–42
Turkay S, Adinolf S (2015) The effects of customization on motivation in an extended study with
a massively multiplayer online roleplaying game. Cyberpsychol: J Psychosoc Res Cyberspace
9(3). doi:10.5817/CP2015-3-2
Turkle S (1995) Life on the screen: identity in the age of the internet. Simon & Schuster, New York
Walter A (2011) Designing for emotion. A Book Apart, New York
Walton KL (1990) Mimesis as make-believe: on the foundations of the representational arts.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA
Warﬁeld Rawls A (2009) An essay on two conceptions of social order: constitutive orders of action,
objects and identities vs aggregated orders of individual action. J Class Sociol 9(4):500–520.
doi:10.1177/1468795X09344376
Webster J, Martocchio JJ (1993) Turning work into play: implications for microcomputer software
training. J Manag 19(1):127–146
Werbach K, Hunter D (2012) For the win: how game thinking can revolutionize your business.
Wharton Digital Press, Philadelphia
Yee N, Bailenson J (2007) The proteus effect: the effect of transformed self-representation on
behavior. Hum Commun Res 33(3):271–290. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2958.2007.00299.x
Zichermann G, Cunningham C (2011) Gamiﬁcation by design: implementing game mechanics in
web and mobile apps. O’Reilly, Sebastopol
Zipfel F (2001) Fiktion, Fiktivität, Fiktionalität. Analysen zur Fiktion in der Literatur und zum
Fiktionsbegriff in der Literaturwissenschaft. Erich Schmidt, Berlin

Chapter 8
The Role of Make-Believe in Foley
Lindsey Carruthers and Phil Turner
8.1
Introduction
Pretending is almost exclusively studied in the context of child development, where
it is often treated as a synonym for pretend play. Pretend play (and play more
generally) merits this attention because it is recognised to be essential to a child’s
cognitive, affective, and social development (e.g. Seja and Russ 1999; Russ 2004;
Jent et al. 2011), but our interest here is in pretending alone. Children begin to
pretend, quite spontaneously, early in life. Nakayama (2013), for example, has
presented evidence that children as young as 7 months old are able to pretend to
cry as a means of obtaining attention. So, surprisingly, children can pretend before
they have learned to speak, walk, or feed themselves.
Earlier work by Leslie (1987, p.412) informs us that pretending can be observed
at “the very beginning of childhood”, while Harris (2000) agrees but argues that it
appears later, and equates it with the development of language.
While the appearance of pretending remains a matter of some debate, its
purpose is astonishing. Garvey (1990) writes that pretend play is the “voluntary
transformation of the here and now, the you and me, and the this or that, along with
any potential action that these components of a situation might have”. Harris (ibid)
writes, “Children’s pretend play is [ : : : ] an initial exploration of possible worlds”,
and others suggest that pretend play is “acting as if something is when it is not”
(Rutherford et al. 2007, p.1025). We can but echo Leslie’s questions (which we
paraphrase); if children are still learning about the complexities of the world and
L. Carruthers ()
School of Life, Sport, and Social Sciences, Edinburgh Napier University, Edinburgh, UK
e-mail: L.Carruthers@napier.ac.uk
P. Turner
School of Computing, Edinburgh Napier University, Edinburgh, UK
e-mail: p.turner@napier.ac.uk
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
P. Turner, J.T. Harviainen (eds.), Digital Make-Believe,
Human–Computer Interaction Series, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-29553-4_8
125

126
L. Carruthers and P. Turner
are still well short of cognitive maturity, why are they engaged in the “voluntary
transformation of the here and now”, the creation of “possible worlds” and acting
as though “something is when it is not”. If all of this is in the service of cognitive
development, is it fair to assume that it is discarded in adulthood?
We distinguish pretending/pretend play from make-believe by observing that the
latter is typically associated with a prop (Walton 1990, 1993) of some kind and
for this reason it is more structured (e.g., a pirate’s costume will tend to constrain
make-believe to the piratical). These props might include an established story and
roles, which we might describe as “psychological tools” to borrow Vygotsky’s term
(1930), or they may include costumes, “swords”, “magic wands”, and other toys
that extend into the physical world.
It is of note that pretending and make-believe have tended to be treated as the
province of small children alone as there appears to be little or no reported work on
adults engaging in these behaviours. Yet we all pretend. We pretend to like, believe,
or feel (and so forth) one thing while actually liking, believing, or feeling another
so as to avoid an argument, disappointing someone, to play along with a scheme, or
while playing with a child. We all regularly make-believe when envisioning whether
a new item of furniture will ﬁt into our living room for example, and we may even
pretend to sit on it. People will hold up an item of clothing against themselves
and pretend they are wearing it. The entertaining World Air Guitar Championships
that are held annually involve people pretending to play guitars that are not there,
and to make-believe a rock star persona. These simply would not exist if people
were unprepared to spend time practicing with thin air, nor would Star Trek™
conventions with their array of visiting aliens in their homemade costumes.
But more than this, considering the statistics reported by McGonigal (2011),
50 % of the UK population play video games and many of these have spent upwards
of 10,000 h engaged in gaming by the age of 21 years. Without engaging in a
discussion of the psychology of game playing we can conclude by saying, that is
a lot of adult make-believe.
So How Does Pretending Work?
At present, there are a number of accounts of how pretending works. Again this has
been directed at explaining the behaviour of children but, as we shall see, there is
little reason to suppose why they cannot be extended to adults. We begin with a
consideration of the oldest of these, which is based on meta-representation.
Leslie (1987) began by supposing that the child is able to create a representation
of the world that is accurate and faithful. This he calls the primary representation
and this has a direct semantic relation with the world. For pretending to occur, he
tells us that the child makes a copy of this representation and changes it. This copy
is decoupled from the world, becoming a copy of a copy. This copy of a copy is a
meta-representation, and it is this that forms the basis of our ability to pretend. Of
course, children also need to be able to distinguish between acting and believing

8
The Role of Make-Believe in Foley
127
in the real world, and pretending in a make-believe world. This is achieved by
quarantining the meta-representation from the real copy (of the world).
Further and unlike other accounts, Leslie recognises that pretending is a process
with identiﬁable stages. He proposes three stages or forms of pretending: immediate,
planned, and remembered. Interestingly, this mirrors some of the current thinking
in user experience that recognises a number of quite discrete forms of experience
with technology. The key to Leslie’s account is the de-coupler which has three main
components: perceptual processes, cognitive systems, and the de-coupler itself. The
perceptual processes feed representations of the current situation to the central
cognitive systems, which comprise general knowledge, the ability to plan, and
so forth. The de-coupler in turn comprises, a further three elements, namely, the
expression raiser, the manipulator, and the interpreter, which are responsible for
making a copy of the primary representation and its subsequent manipulation and
quarantining. It should be noted that this model is speculative and is based on a
number of additional, signiﬁcant assumptions, not least of that there is a common
representational code governing the whole process (cf. Prinz 1984). This model of
pretending has had a measure of both support and criticism.
The next model, based on the conception of a “possible world box”, has been
developed by Nichols and Stitch (2005) and has proved to be inﬂuential. This
cognitive model of pretending is based on a modiﬁcation to what they describe
as the “widely accepted account of cognition as adopted by people working in this
ﬁeld”. Nichols and Stitch make it clear that they do not believe that their account
is necessarily complete or deﬁnitive but that they do think they have, in contrast to
other researchers, described pretending quite fully. Their most frequent criticism of
other accounts is that they are “under-described”. They begin by noting that the mind
(sic) contains two quite different kinds of representational states, namely, belief and
desires, which operate differently. Beliefs are what we know, true and false, about
the world. Desires are what we want, and Nichols and Stitch implicate the bodily
systems of being the source of them. To pretend is to create another “world” in
a “possible world box” (or partition) created by our cognition. They tell us that
pretending begins with a premise (say, “let’s have a tea party”) that, if adopted by the
pretender, forms the basis for subsequent inference and embellishment. They also
recognise that the premise may be bound or constrained by schematic structures,
writing: “clusters or packets of representations whose contents constitute ‘scripts’
or paradigms detailing the way in which certain situations typically unfold” (p.
34). These they describe as “soft constraints”. This idea has been developed more
fully by Turner et al. (2015). The contents of these possible world boxes have
full access to our beliefs, and from there, to our practical reasoning faculties. An
updater mechanism keeps us informed as to the status of the pretend episode. These
possible world boxes are populated with representation tokens, which are different
from those found in the beliefs and desires boxes. These tokens do not represent the
world as it is or what we would like it to be, but rather represent what the world
“would be like given some set of assumptions that we neither believe to be true (that
is, we believe to be the case) or want to be true” (Nichols and Stitch, ibid p. 29). As
for the precise nature of this possible world box it is a little under-described, though

128
L. Carruthers and P. Turner
it does appear to function in a manner that is logically very similar to Leslie’s meta-
representation account. Again, this model of pretending has had a measure of both
support and criticism.
Finally, between these two accounts (at least chronologically) lies Lillard’s
(2001) “Twin Earth” proposal. She rejects the meta-representation account of
pretending and offers the “Twin Earth” model in its place. The “Twin Earth” model
has its origins with Putnam’s Twin Earth thought experiment, which asks us to
believe (pretend) that elsewhere in the universe there is a planet exactly like Earth
in virtually all respects, referred to as “Twin Earth”. Having said “virtually all
respects”, Putnam goes on to propose some differences between the two for the
purpose of philosophical discourse and exploring the nature of semantics. Lillard
writes that pretend play for children is similar to this Twin Earth thought experiment.
She tells us that when children pretend, they create another world that shares many
of the characteristics of the real world. While much remains the same, there are, of
course, signiﬁcant changes, such as the “child becomes the mother [and] : : : sand
becomes apple pie” (p. 22). Then, not unlike a philosopher, the child reasons about
the constituent parts of this twin world. Many of the relationships are unchanged,
for example, while the child may pretend to be the mother, this (twin) mother treats
her children just like the real world version. Lillard notes that both pretend play and
Twin Earth are quarantined worlds that are decoupled from the real world. She also
adds that children engaged in playing signal to each other that they are pretending,
that is, they make it explicit that they are making believe. Lillard also proposes her
own model of pretending. She notes (twice) that pretending is “mental” for which
we might read “cognitive”.
While all three authors are proposing solutions to the same set of observed
behaviours their solutions, it might be said, differ only as matters of implementation.
They recognise the need for the pretender to have access to the real world and to be
able to distinguish between their make-believe and it; they recognise the need for
rule, or more speciﬁcally, schematic behaviour, and all require a de-coupler. Finally,
whatever the mechanism, all three accounts result in what has been described as
“cognitive decoupling” – a temporary, partial dislocation from the here-and-now, to
the world of make-believe we have created.
8.2
A Study of Adult Pretending
So where might we ﬁnd evidence of adult pretending? Any such investigation poses
signiﬁcant methodological issues: whereas childhood pretending occurs naturally
in the course of day-to-day activity, and may therefore be explored in a relatively
naturalistic fashion even in controlled settings, this is not the case in ordinary
adult life. However, there are situations where make-believe, and pretending might
reasonably be considered to have a central role. Goldstein and Bloom (2011) suggest
that we take to the stage. They suggest that acting might be a promising candidate
were it not for the convincing argument that (a) acting describes pretence as

8
The Role of Make-Believe in Foley
129
entailing a degree of exaggeration in the expression of the qualities assumed, which
(b) characterises historic acting styles but not the more naturalistic performances
of contemporary theatre. In similar vein, Cook (2007) equates “pretending” with
“imitating”, arguing that actors do not imitate actions, but perform them, the effect
of such performance being to activate mirror neurons in members of the audience.
Hence, she suggests, “it is the power and pervasiveness of audience imitation that is
central to theatre” (p. 591).
8.3
Foley
A related role, and one much closer to the concept of make-believe as proposed
above, is that of the Foley artist, and this chapter describes the result of a series of
interviews with professional Foley artists talking about their work. A Foley artist
is someone who recreates sounds in movies, television, radio, or theatre. On a ﬁlm
or television set, the only sound recorded is the dialogue. Other sounds, such as
footsteps, the placing of a glass on a table, ﬁddling with a pen or pencil, and all
other prop noises are added post-production. Thus every noise heard whilst watching
a movie or show that is not a voice (although voices can be edited afterwards too)
has been recorded after ﬁlming. It is the job of a Foley artist to add these sounds to
a scene, and they do so by using props and their own bodies to recreate the sound
in synchronisation with the picture. It was our belief that these artists were likely
to engage in pretending and make-believing as part of their work to reproduce or
recreate these sounds. Sound effects, as such, the “roar of a dinosaur” are not within
the remit of a Foley artist, and are not considered here.
The job title derives from Jack Foley, who was one of the ﬁrst to create post-
production sounds in this way in the 1920s/1930s. Perhaps the most familiar
example is the use of coconut shells to sound like horses’ hooves. Somewhat
surprisingly, this is not apocryphal, but a technique still used by Foley artists today,
although alternatives have been developed. Foley presents a potentially rich domain
for the exploration of adult pretending: the practice, as will be seen from the data
reported below, involves (at least) a dual layer of pretence. Not only do Foley
artists, for example, perform the bodily actions of actors in the ﬁlmed story, but
such behaviour generally requires an extra layer of pretence, since the physical
environment of the Foley studio is not that of the ﬁlm-set.
Research Aim
We emphasize that this was an informal investigation that aimed to get a sense of
the world of the Foley artist. This was an investigation of the artists’ professional
practice rather than a laboratory study. In short, we were interested in what they did,
in their own words.

130
L. Carruthers and P. Turner
Method
The project used a qualitative approach, with the use of semi-structured interviews
that aimed to elicit rich, detailed, personal data from ﬂexible discussion with
the target group of practitioners. The study was granted ethical approval by the
Edinburgh Napier University Faculty Research Integrity Committee.
Participants
Ten Foley artists were involved in the study, ﬁve male and ﬁve female. Each partic-
ipant identiﬁed themselves as a Foley artist, although many also had experience as
sound editors or Foley recordists. The participants were recruited via email. Their
contact details were found on the professional persons social media site LinkedIn
(www.linkedin.com), using the simple search term “Foley Artist”. A general email
was originally sent to potential participants, explaining that the project was taking
place, and requesting a reply if they were interesting in contributing. Many of the
people contacted were keen to take part, and from there the details of the consent
and interview process were speciﬁed.
Materials
As we have indicated, the study aimed to investigate the processes of pretending
and make-believe in Foley artists. Determining the phrasing of questions to be
asked was a difﬁcult process, the biggest challenge being the avoidance of leading
questions. We wanted the artists to discuss these concepts spontaneously, without
a cue from the interviewer, yet ﬁnding ways of inducing a discussion about make-
believe and pretending, without using those terms, is near impossible. Therefore,
the terms occasionally appear in the questions.
The process of creating the questions involved multiple iterations. After the
production of version one, a pilot interview was conducted with a sound design
academic, who has experience in Foley. At that point, several inappropriate ques-
tions were removed as they referred to the job within a special effects department,
and not a Foley artist, for example: “Where do you start for sounds that are make-
believe? For example, mythical creatures or animals, lasers, space crafts, and so on”.
Furthermore, this ﬁrst version contained only 12 questions, which proved to be over-
generic and unproductive of discussion. Subsequently the questions were reﬁned
several more times with version six being the ﬁnal form. This version contained 22
questions, some referring explicitly to the way participants performed, their mind-
sets and strategies, and their acting processes.
Although the interviews were principally concerned with investigating the
cognitive processes in Foley artistry, we added some practical, descriptive items
designed to be easy to answer. While the main purpose of these questions was to set
participants at ease, they also elicited material that was useful for our study. The list
of questions is provided in Table 8.1.

8
The Role of Make-Believe in Foley
131
Table 8.1 The list of interview questions
1.
For how long have you worked as a Foley artist?
2.
What do you do to prepare for a recording session? Do you rehearse?
3.
Do you think there is a state of mind or mood you have to get yourself into before 
you perform? 
4.
Can you describe how you perform?
5.
When performing, do you wish to take on the role of the character? If yes: How 
important do you think it is to take on the role of the character? How do you do this?
6.
Is there an element of acting in your job?
7.
Do you use your body when you perform? Do you make gestures and movements?
8.
Are your performances real, or are they an act of make-believe? 
9.
Tell me about your props, how do you know what will work for the scene or the 
audience?
10.
Are you able to watch a film and enjoy it without paying full attention to the sound? 
Or are you susceptible to the same effects as the audience?
11.
How do you come up with new sounds? What is your process?
12.
Do you ever get time to experiment?
13.
Do you find yourself discovering new sounds or techniques when you’re off the 
clock?
14.
Do you think there is a specific mind-set or ability that one must have to successfully 
work in Foley?
15.
What is the single most important skill a Foley artist must have?
16.
Are there one or two scenes that stand out in your memory for being particularly 
difficult or unusual?
17.
Have you learnt anything important from other Foley artists?
18.
Are there any misconceptions about Foley?
19.
As a Foley artist, what are your three biggest obstacles to a successful performance?
20.
If we were to grant you three wishes to make your job easier / better / more effective, 
what would they be and why?
21.
Do any scenes spring to mind that were particularly fun for you to create?
22.
What have I forgotten to ask in terms of Foley?
Questions three to eight were of particular interest, as they relate directly to the
aims of the study. If by the end of the interview, the participant had not mentioned
the concepts of pretending, make-believe, and imagination, the interviewer asked
directly if they were important aspects to the individual and to their job.

132
L. Carruthers and P. Turner
Procedure
After the initial contact with each participant, the information sheet and consent
form were sent to sign and return. Each of our ten participants returned their form
and agreed to allow us to acknowledge their contribution to the study within any
publications. Thereafter, the interview arrangements were made at a time to suit the
participant.
The interviews were conducted by the ﬁrst author using online video calling, and
lasted between 20 and 55 min, depending on the depth of the participant’s answers.
With the participant’s permission, each conversation was recorded to allow for later
transcription and analysis. After a brief introduction on both parts, the interviewer
began asking the questions above. Additional, ad hoc questions were added when
appropriate, and if single sentence answers were provided by the participants,
they were encouraged to expand if possible. Furthermore, some questions had to
be reworded if those with a ﬁrst language other than English struggled with the
terminology, although this only happened rarely. The questions were not always
asked in the same order, but were guided by the ﬂow of the discussion. Upon the
completion of the session, the participants were asked if there was anything they
would like to add, and were provided with the opportunity to ask any questions of
their own. Finally, they were thanked for their time.
Adopting common practice in qualitative analysis, the transcribed data was
reduced, then displayed, and conclusions were drawn (Miles et al. 2014). Each
interview was played back several times and the answers from questions three to
eight, along with any other discussion relevant to the study, were manually tran-
scribed, according to the question asked. This top-down analysis was complemented
by interrogating the data for emergent ideas and themes that were not predicted
by accounts of childhood pretending. All of the transcriptions were read and re-
read, after which an exploratory analysis was conducted that involved selecting key
terms, phrases, and themes. These were generally found to be in accordance with the
overall proposition that pretending remains available to adults, and more speciﬁcally
to the aspects of childhood pretending, identiﬁed in the earlier sections of this paper.
The interview data obtained are presented below, in the form of participants’
answers to a number of the questions posed. We illustrate this with direct, extended
quotations from participants, having removed identity indicators, hesitations, and
non-verbal vocalisations. The use of extended quotations is in keeping with the
reporting recommendations of Pollio et al. (1997).
Findings
No one really knows the amount of effort that goes into producing a soundtrack. [ : : : ]
No one can believe that all the feet they hear in the movie aren’t even made by the real
characters on the screen. I say ‘No, that’s all me’. All those feet and all those hands, and
all those sips, and all those kisses, all of those bits and pieces, none of them are the actor,
that’s all me.

8
The Role of Make-Believe in Foley
133
What Is Foley?
All of the Foley artists we interviewed noted that their work was little understood
and peppered with misunderstandings. For example:
There’s a misconception that it’s all tricks, they’ll say ‘Do a trick! Do the sound of a dragon
now!’ as if you could do it with anything. It’s not tricks, it’s a slow, laborious process. [ : : : ]
That’s a misconception, that we’re sonic magicians that can make the sound of anything out
of anything.
Not tricks but a reproduction of the behaviour of the onscreen actors.
Sometimes, people [think that] you invent sound effects. [This is] a completely different
situation. We are doing the movements of the actors, and some particular sounds, but we
are not able to invent an airplane landing or other sounds from the effects part. They are
other kinds of sounds.
And : : :
Some people think it’s fake, which I think is a misconception. It is not really faking it, it
is recreating sound that isn’t there. If they could record all of this stuff on location they
would use it. The physical reality is they can’t do that. [ : : : ] I feel it’s much more a crafted
recreation of a soundtrack rather than faking it or trying to fool the public in any way.
As we have already noted, Foley artists are primarily concerned with recreating
the sounds that one would expect to hear from the image or scene a viewer is
watching. This is different from a special effects team, who work with sound
libraries and other instruments to create non-replicable and somewhat fantastical, or
novel sounds. However Foley artists can add to the work of special effects editors.
There might be a car crash. So they’ll [the special effects editors] add the tyre skids and the
main impact, but I’ll add some real little creaks, and some scrapes, and glass tinkling on
the ground, and maybe the hubcap sound falling and doing a spin. So Foley is a real detail
adder, and brightens things up.
Foley artists’ work is “not as fun and easy as people imagine”. The main obstacles
they face are a lack of time, budget, and studio space. The work they do allows us,
the audience, to enjoy television shows and ﬁlms. Foley effects are indispensable
to ﬁlm and television, without them, the sense of reality would diminish, along
with the quality and enjoyment of the ﬁlm. While this is perceived as under-
appreciated and undervalued by audiences, it is testament to just how seamless the
Foley performances are. As most of the interviewees stated, only poor Foley effects
are noticeable.
It feels very uncomfortable as a viewer to have something that’s ﬁlling your screen and not
being able to hear anything that sounds like its natural movement.
The thing with Foley is, if it is done well, you don’t notice it. [ : : : ] If I do my job well, you
shouldn’t notice it.
You shouldn’t really be aware of sound. You should be sucked up in the experience and you
shouldn’t be focusing on the sounds per se. [ : : : ] If it is a bad sound or a wrong sound,
that’s where you spot it. But if it’s [the Foley] been done well, you can just sit back and
enjoy the ride.

134
L. Carruthers and P. Turner
If the Foley stands out because it is out of sync or bad, then I will notice it.
[When watching a ﬁlm] “I try not to listen to the sound. Sometimes what happens is the
sound, and usually if it is unsuccessful, it will jar me out if the movie.”
Having established how important Foley is and the evident pride these profes-
sionals take in their work we now consider a little of the detail involved in this.
All those interviewed described building sounds, one layer at a time. For
example, they may perform all of the footsteps, followed by all of the clothing
sounds, and then they will add the sounds of additional props in the scene. A day
or two spent performing only footsteps and cloth scenes can be very physically
demanding. Each character’s footsteps will be recorded separately, with a pair of
shoes that suit the image, be it a high heel or a heavy boot. Furthermore, the surface
on which the footsteps take place is also matched to the scene, and will be recreated
in the studio on concrete, gravel, wood, or whatever is appropriate. The speed and
weight of the footsteps will also match the scene, as well as the rhythm and pace.
So you’re watching how the little character moves around, [ : : : ] he’s got big ﬂappy feet and
he walks a bit funny so you’ve really got to watch how he goes and try and walk [that way].
He’s meant to be light you can’t have as much weight as a normal person, but you’ve got
to be careful that you can hear him, so that’s his character, [he] sort of sneaks around a bit.
And then you’ve got the bigger fellas, [ : : : ] the big guy which eats all the time, [ : : : ] you
almost sort of blow up a bit like a big ﬁsh and sort of plonk around and try to get as much
weight down, and we over emphasise his feet a lot to make him stand out from everybody
else.
The clothing sounds will then be recorded for each main character, involving
the manipulation of several pieces of fabric or garments that are the same texture,
weight, and type as those seen in the ﬁlm. Thereafter, anything the actor touches, or
any other ‘visible’ sounds in the scene will be recreated.
When the Foley artists are in the studio, they are usually accompanied by a
recordist, and they physically perform the sounds required. Many have a background
in music, dance, acting, or sound editing; such past experience is considered as
a valuable foundation for the job. Most Foley artists do not simply sit at a table
surrounded by props, grabbing the most appropriate one as they follow the scene,
unless for a live recording. It is an active role that requires physical ﬁtness, stamina,
and rhythm. They tell us:
Quite often it is not fun. It’s painful, it’s exhausting : : :
You have to be able to come up with stupid sounds on the spur of the moment, its essential.
You have to have a good sense of rhythm, but not be locked into it : : : [Musicians] work to
a very tight, constant beat, but people don’t walk like that. Sync wise you can be bang on
to begin with, but then the pace will alter, and I wouldn’t catch it, and I would stick to my
rhythm. [ : : : ] So you need to have a good sense of rhythm but be ﬂexible with it.
: : : anybody coming into doing Foley, you need basic skills such as good coordination and
really good timing, and be able to pick up on rhythms.
Conﬁdence is necessary to produce a convincing performance, with some
participants stating that if they are not conﬁdent or happy with a sound they produce,

8
The Role of Make-Believe in Foley
135
they may revisit it at a later time. Another key skill that contributes to a successful
performance is the ability to concentrate.
[One of the most important skills a Foley artist must have is] “the ability to focus and the
ability to listen. You just have to listen. [ : : : ] The focus is difﬁcult, it takes a lot of practice
and you have to really want to focus. [ : : : ] Focusing that hard all of the time is difﬁcult, but
you have to ﬁnd a way to get through it.”
Are You Acting?
In response to the question, “Is there an element of acting in your job?” for a number
of the artists, the answer was that there was:
I think the ability to act, it’s the difference between being an average Foley artist and a super
Foley artist.
Absolutely, this is all about acting. [ : : : ] Yes, I think that it’s like 70 % acting, and 30 %
about being a sound generator.
Oh yes absolutely, because you’re giving the subject life. So you have to take into account
the context of the ﬁlm, and what’s going on with the ﬁlm, and you’re basically trying to
give somebody character through sound.
Yes, you become each character and each movement. [ : : : ] It really is acting, I really feel
that you take on the character and the mood. [ : : : ] Each effect has to be acted : : : we can
change or enhance all of the sounds that can communicate. So acting is a very big part of it,
although not in the traditional way.
Yes. I would say so. But it is acting that is not acting with your feet, or acting with your
energy, or it is not in how we dress, mostly I’m alone when I do it, nobody sees me, so I am
just play acting maybe.
So, do they act? It would appear so, for perhaps 70 % of the task, but not
in a traditional way, more a case what they describe as “play acting” or as we
might put it, pretend acting rather than the form that is associated with delivering a
soliloquy.
Are the Performances Real, or Are They Just Pretend?
We asked the artists if their performances were real or were they just pretending. We
recognise that this is a leading question but we encouraged our participants to offer
more than a simple afﬁrmation or denial.
One artist thought that it is all pretending, another thought that it was real, while
many others thought they are a bit of both.
Eh, well I guess it’s all pretend isn’t it. Because nothing I do is real, it’s the industry’s real,
we’re just making a noise and we try and make it believable I guess, that’s the main thing,
so people think that the noise I make is coming from the actor on the screen, that’s the main
job really, is to make it, people think it is actually happening.
I would say they were real. Because you are very much constrained by your environment
really because you’re in a studio, and you have other people there, and a monitor and a

136
L. Carruthers and P. Turner
microphone, you have to make sure that you’re not going off mic[rophone]. That’s why I
think they are real. You can’t get too involved in it because you’ll end up just not being, the
recording side of it just won’t be as good.
It is a mix between those things because sometimes you’re doing the same situation that the
actors made, and you can have to decide if it sounds good. But sometimes, if you’re doing
the same, you have to change it a little bit to make it a better sound.
Eh, they would be both, because when they are real, I work within the conﬁnes of the screen.
There is something happening on the screen, I have to match it I have to follow it, but how I
get there comes from my imagination. But I actually don’t think too hard about it, I’ve done
it long enough it just ﬂows out of me.
Bit of both. Sometimes you come across stuff, certainly if you do a lot of animation, there’s
stuff that you’ve never seen before, and will probably never see again. I did a sequence
where there was a chicken suspended from a cable car, and his chicken friend had to rescue
him but he was also tied up, so the only way they could get out was to swing, grab with
his teeth, swing the other one, and that one grabbed with his teeth, he released, and they
carried on down the cable. So in cases like that you have to imagine ‘what’s that going to
sound like’, then try and come up with something that’s going to work. But for something
a lot more straightforward, like you know, straight drama or straight natural history, it’s
purely about trying to recreate what’s going on in front of you, so you play it quite
straight.
I have to do my pretending synced to a picture, whereas an actor doesn’t. An actor creates
it then I do it synced to the actor. That may make it less pretending. Somehow I feel like it
is less pretending because I have to do what they want me to do. Even with animation once
I’ve got my sound, I have to move how the picture moves. I have to follow the picture. I
can’t make it up how she’s going to move, or when she touches her face.
When asked the direct question as to whether or not these artists regarded their
performances were real or pretending we received a mixture of replies, but we have
found our evidence of adult pretending.
Evidence of Make-Believe
It will be recalled that we deﬁne make-believe as, effectively, pretending with a prop.
The artists told us that the job calls for creativity, conﬁdence, and as we have seen, a
degree of acting. Another important part of being a Foley artist is the ability to select
the right prop for the sound. When the sound is unusual or novel, or if the ﬁlm is
animated, the artist may be required to create the sound using their own ingenuity
and initiative. Creativity also inﬂuences the way in which the artist chooses to layer
their sounds, the manner in which they move to produce sounds, and their attempts
to add life and emphasis to characters.
: : : you have to interpret other people’s ideas and make something up from nothing with
the few props that you’ve got.
Things you wouldn’t normally hear on a ﬁlm as well, for instance women’s jewellery and
earrings, it is not something you’d think about. But suddenly when you add a little tiny
tinkle on it, it really brings the character out forward.

8
The Role of Make-Believe in Foley
137
As an example, when you’re doing the glass scene, if the actor is putting the glass like a
stiff move (i.e., straight onto a table), you have to fake it a little bit to sound like a ‘cinema
glass on table sound’, and it has to be like ‘tap tap’, two times, so that is where you are
playing with the realness and the “ﬂakiness”, I don’t know how to explain it. First of all ok,
you have to do the same movement as the actor made and everything, but it has to sound
good, so sometimes you have to forget about what the actor is doing and use another prop
to get a better sound.
One artist continued,
When you do real ﬁlms like live action ﬁlms, you’re just trying to reproduce the real [ : : : ].
You know when I’m trying to have the sound of the real wine glass on a real table, it’s
really, looking for the right props, and acting. And it’s your acting that will get you through
whether that wine glass sounds like the same wine glass as the actor put down. And to do
big things like car doors and crashes and stuff like that you have to separate the sounds into
different tracks so that you can come up with the one ﬁnal sound. Like in a car crash we
might have a car door in the studio and you might smash on that then you might add some
glass breaking, and then a screech of metal and I guess those three tracks take some know
how.
One point of interest here. Another layer of make-believe is occasionally in play,
namely, the difference between animation and live action.
Well deﬁnitely when I am asked to do the moves of a wax character, that is, made of wax,
and she becomes soft when it’s warm and hard when it’s cold that is very imaginative.
We’re all day long thinking about what to do, her hair moves and its made of wax and its
different gloves and pieces of wax, I didn’t want it to be too hard so I didn’t want to use
candles, so that was an imagination, the imagination is a big part of it at that point.
This is a nice example of Walton’s props forming a seed around which a make-
believe episode can be formed. There is evidence of make-believe here in the regular
reference to the use of props.
Explicit Evidence of Decoupling?
Unsurprisingly, none of our informants volunteered that they had consciously
practiced cognitive decoupling when performing but one did distinguish between
what he called “reality” (i.e., the ﬁnished ﬁlm he is working on, which he treats as
immutable) and what he does, which lies between this and his imagination.
: : : if you call a ﬁlm “reality”, that’s the picture set in stone, that’s the reality, and it is up to
me to come up with a sound which I think best ﬁts that image. : : : I have different scales of
high heels, so if it was quite a sassy young lady with sexy heels, I’ve sharp heels for that, or
if it is a sort of middle-aged woman who sort of clumps in I’ve got some old blocky heels.
So it’s up to me to think, right I think she should have, it would ﬁt her to have this sounding
shoe or this sounding dress. Or a guy comes in and he’s a violent, heavy guy, he might have
a big, heavy boot, so you’ve got to read it. I’ve gotten quite good I’ve been doing it for
11/12 years. I guess it meets in the middle of imagination and reality.
We see how an artist describes how “ﬁlm reality” is created using sexy heels,
blocky heels and big heavy boots – which, of course, are never seen.

138
L. Carruthers and P. Turner
8.4
Discussion
The research reported here reﬂects our interest in the work of what we hoped would
be professional make-believers.
The interviews revealed abundant evidence of these professional Foley artists
engaging in pretending, making-believe, acting, play acting, and being imagina-
tively creative. Firstly, we do not argue with the artists’ use of “imagination” or “play
acting” as we wanted their words, but we are happy to suggest that our deﬁnitions
of pretending and make-believe seem to have a good measure of support in the
transcripts. There is some, though more scant, evidence of what they are engaged in
being recognised as not being real.
Secondly, there are frequent and occasional oblique references to creativity
and imagination in conjunction with their use of props. This suggests that make-
believe may function as, or be in the service of, improvised cognition. Cosmides
and Tooby (2000), writing from the perspective of evolutionary psychology, argue
that our ability to pretend is the result of making use of contingent information
and the artefacts that embody that information. They write, “Arguably, one central
and distinguishing innovation in human evolution has been the dramatic increase
in the use of contingent information for the regulation of improvised behaviour”
(p. 53). This ability they describe as “cognitive de-coupling”. From this reading,
pretending is revealed as improvised behaviour that exploits external artefacts and
representations that are, to use Heidegger’s term, ready-to-hand.
Cosmides and Tooby suggest that this ability to decouple from the “here-and-
now” and to engage with the “what-if” as offering signiﬁcant advantages over
“hardwired” forms of problem solving. They write, “The beneﬁts of successful
improvisation are clear [ : : : ] what 10 years of ordinary battle on the plains of Troy
could not accomplish, one Trojan Horse could”.
Further empirical evidence of this kind of improvised behaviour has been
reported by Dalton et al. (2012) when they describe their “nomadic TUI [tangible
user interface] that takes advantage of the fact that the world is full of potential
tangibles and that people appear to be comfortable in improvising with them”.
In a ﬁeld trial they found that people readily appropriated a range of available
objects (including teabags, mobile phones, jewellery, and drinks containers) to
act as tangible tokens to be used within their interactive system. These acts of
appropriation reﬂect our immediate needs and the range of artefacts that are ready-
to-hand. This also serves to cast pretending/make believe as a form of what Clark
(2008) would call “external cognition”.
Finally, the artists’ many references to acting (and its variants) suggest that
pretending is embodied, that is, it reﬂects the opportunities, capabilities, and
restrictions afforded by their bodies. This comes as no surprise. When children
pretend, it is often a whole hearted endeavour with little holding back. Witness the
sheer exuberant energy of a school ground at mid-morning break. It is interesting to
note that pretending may not have been wholly internalised as Vygotsky suggests,
and that any account of pretending/make believe needs a place for embodiment.

8
The Role of Make-Believe in Foley
139
Acknowledgements Considering how busy the artists are, and the small time frames they have
to complete projects, we were delighted and very grateful that they enthusiastically took time
out of their schedules to speak to us. Thank you to Julie Ankerson, Céline Bernard, Ronni
Brown, Mauricio Castañeda, Richard Hinton, Carlos de la Madrid Valencia, Maureen Murphy,
John Simpson, Barnaby Smyth, and Lise Wedlock.
We recognise and are grateful for the ﬁnancial support from Edinburgh Napier University for a
summer internship. Thanks also to Iain McGregor for his technical support.
References
Clark A (2008) Supersizing the mind. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Cook A (2007) Interplay: the method and potential of a cognitive scientiﬁc approach to theatre.
Theatr J 59:579–594
Cosmides L, Tooby J (2000) Consider the source: the evolution of adaptations for decoupling and
metarepresentation. In: Sperber D (ed) Metarepresentations: a multidisciplinary perspective.
Oxford University Press, Oxford
Dalton N, MacKay G, Holland S (2012) Kolab: appropriation & improvisation in mobile tangible
collaborative interaction. DIS 2012, June 11–15, 2012, Newcastle, UK, pp 21–24
Garvey C (1990) Play. Harvard University Press, Cambridge
Goldstein TR, Bloom P (2011) The mind on stage: why cognitive scientists should study acting.
Trends Cogn Sci 15(4):141–142
Harris P (2000) The work of the imagination. Blackwell, London
Jent JF, Niec LN, Baker SE (2011) Play and interpersonal processes. In: Russ SW, Niec LN (eds)
Play in clinical practice: evidence-based approaches. Guilford Press, New York
Leslie AM (1987) Pretense and representation: the origins of “theory of mind”. Psychol Rev
94:412–426
Lillard AS (2001) Pretend play as twin earth: a social cognitive analysis. Dev Rev 21:495–531
McGonigal J (2011) Reality is broken. Jonathan Cape, London
Miles MB, Huberman AM, Saldana J (2014) Qualitative data analysis: a methods sourcebook.
Sage Publications Inc., California
Nakayama H (2013) Changes in the affect of infants before and after episodes of crying. Infant
Behav Dev 36(4):507–512
Nichols S, Stich S (2005) Mindreading: a cognitive theory of pretense. Oxford University Press,
Oxford
Pollio HR, Henley TB, Thompson CJ (1997) The phenomenology of everyday life. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Prinz W (1984) Modes of linkage between perception and action. In: Prinz W, Sanders A-F (eds)
Cognition and motor processes. Springer, Berlin, pp 185–193
Russ SW (2004) Play in child development and psychotherapy. Erlbaum, Mahwah
Rutherford MD, Young GS, Hepburn S, Rogers SJ (2007) A longitudinal study of pretend play in
autism. J Autism Dev Disord 37(6):1024–1039
Seja AL, Russ SW (1999) Children’s fantasy play and emotional understanding. J Clin Child
Psychol 28:269–277
Turner P, Hetherington R, Turner S, Kosek M (2015) The limits of make-believe. Digital Creativity
Vygotsky LS (1930) The instrumental method in psychology. Available from https://www.
marxists.org/archive/vygotsky/works/1930/instrumental.htm. Last retrieved 3 July 2015
Walton KL (1990) Mimesis as make-believe: on the foundations of the representational arts.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge
Walton KL (1993) Metaphor and prop oriented make-believe. Eur J Philos 1(1):39–57

Chapter 9
Enactive Mechanism of Make-Belief Games
Zuzanna Ruci´nska
9.1
Introduction
Make-belief games, such as pretend play games, are typically considered to require
mental representations. Mental representations are considered indispensable to
explain how one can ‘act as if’ one thing was another. Mental representations, in
turn, are features of cognitivist approaches to make-believe, and cognitivists (Leslie
1987; Nichols and Stich 2000, 2003) propose a mechanistic explanation of pretence.
This chapter shows that pretence can be re-described in enactivist terms without
the use of mental representations. It uses a particular conception of affordances
from ecological psychology (Turvey 1992) to show how else might it be possible
to explain pretending that one thing is another. The chapter further shows that with
the conception of affordances, we can consider pretence affordances to be present
possibilities for play (instead of absent entities that need to be represented). Finally,
the chapter argues that even enactivist explanation of pretence is compatible with
a type of mechanistic explanation: wide and situated mechanism (Bechtel 2009;
Zednik 2011).
The chapter considers what is involved in the best explanation of pretence. It
unfolds in the following way. Section 9.2 showcases the two popular explanatory
mechanisms of pretence as proposed by cognitivists Leslie (1987) and Nichols
and Stich (2000, 2003). It sets the stage for questioning the need to posit mental
representations in explaining certain aspects of pretence, and opens up the room
for alternative structures that do not posit mental representations in the best expla-
nation of pretence. Section 9.3 proposes approaching pretence from the enactivist
perspective. It suggests that a particular conception of affordances as dispositional
Z. Ruci´nska ()
Leiden University, Leiden, Netherlands
e-mail: z.a.rucinska@phil.leidenuniv.nl; z.rucinska@hotmail.com
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
P. Turner, J.T. Harviainen (eds.), Digital Make-Believe,
Human–Computer Interaction Series, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-29553-4_9
141

142
Z. Ruci´nska
properties of the environment can make affordances explanatorily useful. Sec-
tion 9.4 explains what an enactive mechanism of pretence might look like, showing
how environmental affordances (and corresponding animal effectivities) can form
the wide and situated mechanism of pretence. The chapter is a ﬁrst step towards
reconsidering the conceptual bases of make-belief interactions, and has potential to
contribute to the search for new models of human-computer interaction. It concludes
with suggestions for potential applicability of the affordance-based explanations to
virtual environments.
9.2
Cognitive Mechanisms of Pretence
To date, there are at least two developed and interestingly different theoretical
accounts of pretence in the literature: metarepresentational (Leslie 1987) and
behaviourist (Perner 1991; Harris and Kavanaugh 1993; Lillard 1994; Nichols and
Stich 2000, 2003). These accounts form the standard frameworks for understanding
pretence and what best explains it (see Liao and Gendler 2010). They can be
considered as explanatory models of pretence, as they feature both a theory about
what pretence is (the models assume some pretence characteristics), and propose
mechanisms to explain how pretence comes about. These models further attribute
speciﬁc functions to mental representations, which explain why they were posited
in the ﬁrst place. This section will mainly focus on the mechanisms that the
cognitivist models of pretence posit in explaining how make-belief gets achieved.
Such exemplar mechanisms are Leslie’s (1987) Decoupling Mechanism and Nichols
and Stich’s (2000) Inference Mechanism. These will be brieﬂy discussed in turn.
A caveat is in order with regard to how the term ‘mechanism’ will be used in
this chapter. Firstly, the pretence scholars often speak of mechanisms on what can
only be described as the ‘algorithmic level of explanation’ on Marr’s (1982) scale.
This means that they propose mechanisms that explain cognitive phenomena like
pretence through representations, targeting how the system does the pretending,
without explaining how the mental representations work on the physical level.
They do not provide causal explanations on the physical level explanation of how
the unorthodox pretence representations get selected. One may have to go deeper
into the workings of the human body, including the human brain, to propose
explanations of pretence that physically cause the pretence. My explanation will
target the same level of explanation as the one proposed by cognitivists, but instead
of representations, the explanatory tools will be of affordances. Should a further
explanation of the ‘deeper’ causes of pretence on the physical level explanation
be necessary, my account is also open to accommodate a variety of neuroscientiﬁc
ﬁndings.1
1For example, Bruineberg and Rietveld (2014) propose to explain how affordances that invite
action ‘move’ us through a story involving action readiness potentials of the human brain.

9
Enactive Mechanism of Make-Belief Games
143
To explain pretence phenomena, Leslie (1987) has posited metarepresenting.
To metarepresent is to represent oneself as the actor who engages in representing
the banana as a phone. This requires possession and exercise of the concept
‘PRETEND’. The function of metarepresentation is to enable the side-by-side
coexistence of the two kinds of representations: primary and pretence representa-
tions. Leslie proposed that acts of pretending are best explained by manipulation
of representations of how things are pretended to be (pretence representations),
which are distinct from representations of the real world (primary representations).2
The problem occurs when Leslie tries to explain how perception of a real banana
can invoke a “this is a phone” representation, in such a way that the latter is
not taken seriously. The primary representations fail to explain how children can
engage in symbolic play like the banana-phone play. Here, the pretender is at risk of
representational abuse. This is the danger of applying the signiﬁer (“banana”) and
another signiﬁer (“phone”) to the very same object in a way that makes no sense.
According to Leslie, unless these representations are somehow kept apart (what he
calls ‘cognitive quarantine’), the pretenders would be at risk of confusing the banana
and its properties with those of a phone. Of course, pretenders do not make this
sort of mistake. For this reason, Leslie concluded that there must be a decoupling
mechanism present in the cognitive architecture of those capable of pretence. The
decoupling mechanism marks (or makes a copy of) the primary representation (‘this
is a banana’) and decouples it into a pretence representation (‘this is a banana’*).
According to Leslie, manipulations on the pretence representation can now be made
(such as transforming ‘this is a banana’* to ‘this banana is a telephone’) without
losing the original representation. Decoupling allows ‘normal semantics’ to be
suspended, and the pretence representation to be treated as a purely formal object
(1987, p. 417). As it is part of a metarepresentational model, Leslie’s decoupling
mechanism requires a manipulator (sequence ‘I PRETEND’), which manipulates
the expression (‘this is a banana’*), thereby, allowing for manipulation of the
content that is cut free from literal connotations. Moreover, an interpreter allows
the decoupled expressions to be anchored to parts of primary representations and,
thereby, not refer to actual objects (idem, p. 418). Finally, inference rules are part
of the decoupling mechanism. It makes inferences on the already decoupled input
(for example, an inference from “this is a phone” to “this can be used to call with”).
While Leslie’s model has been heavily criticized (see, for example, Harris 1994),
his proposal that cognitive quarantine is needed has been inﬂuential.
Another proposal of how to explain pretence was elaborated on by Nichols and
Stich (2000, 2003). They are the ‘behaviourists’ of pretence, though they share
2Primary representations, on Leslie’s model, feature in everyday perception and cognition. Their
main job is to provide a “literal and sober” account of the world and to represent accurately. For
example, the current perceptual situation (there being a banana) is represented by a token “this is a
banana.”

144
Z. Ruci´nska
little to nothing with behaviourism as such.3 The ‘behaviourist’ model of pretence
emerged as a direct response to Leslie’s model; it redeﬁned pretence from ‘thinking
as if’ to ‘behaving as if’ (hence the name). Its representatives (i.e. Perner 1991;
Harris and Kavanaugh 1993; Lillard 1994; Nichols and Stich 2000, 2003) all agree
that entertaining a concept ‘pretend’ and engaging in metarepresenting need not be
invoked in order to explain pretence. The behaviourists in the debate on pretence
share the assumption that what is required to pretend is simply to be behaving
appropriately as if the situation was real. The central claim of this account is that
pretenders need only behave ‘as-if’ a scenario obtained by having beliefs and desires
about how to do so appropriately. This does not require the pretenders’ beliefs about
their own mental states (to metarepresent “I pretend : : : ”), the concept ‘PRETEND’,
or the need to conceptualise the mental states of others, in order to preserve the
cognitive quarantine.
In some respects, however, the behaviourists are not different from the metarep-
resentationalists. They still consider pretending to be a cognitively demanding
task. Offering a ‘cognitive architecture underlying pretence’ (p. 125), Nichols and
Stich (2000) posit an inference mechanism that incorporates a cluster of smaller
mechanisms (e.g., Possible World Box and UpDater). Unlike Leslie, they do not
posit special ‘pretence representations’, or mental representations with pretend
contents, to do the explanatory work. Instead, they only speak of ‘initial premises’,
which are akin to Leslie’s primary representations, but what takes care of the
representational abuse is the special structure of the cognitive mechanism called
‘Possible World Box’ (henceforth: PWB). The initial premise is an assumption that
decides what is to be pretended, e.g., that the child is going “to make a phone call
with the banana”, or in a restaurant play context, “that one person is a waiter and
one a customer”. The content of the initial premise speciﬁes the impending pretence
play episode. The premise is a proposition, which represents a speciﬁc situation
and which can be evaluated. Initial premises form scripts (hypothetical scenarios
or event representations), which detail the way in which certain situations typically
unfold. Scripts have plans that guide action or sets of rules of what to do. According
to Nichols and Stich, scripts “play an important role in guiding and constraining the
description of a possible world which gets elaborated in the course of a pretense
episode” (2003, pp. 126–127). They provide general structure to pretence episodes,
but need not be themselves accurate descriptions of the world. Moreover, on
Nichols and Stich’s account, pretence involves a distinct type of attitude: supposing
(alongside believing and desiring). The token primary representations, which form
initial premises, are what the pretender supposes about what the world would be like.
Then, the pretender’s “cognitive system must start generating thoughts and actions
that would be appropriate if the pretense premise were true” (Nichols and Stich
3While these accounts are called ‘behaviourist’, they share little to nothing with psychological
behaviourism (Pavlov, Skinner) or logical behaviourism (Ryle). They still represent cognitivist
frameworks of explanatory account, referring to beliefs and desires in their theories of cognition
and using mental representations in their cognitive explanations.

9
Enactive Mechanism of Make-Belief Games
145
2000, p. 119). The initial premises enter the PWB, leaving the Belief Box with the
true beliefs (e.g. “this is really a banana”) and the Desire Box (really wanting to play
banana-phone) intact.4 The PWB contains tokens of primary representations, whose
function is “not to represent the world as it is [which is the domain of the Belief
Box] or as we’d like it to be [which is the domain of the Desire Box], but rather to
represent what the world would be like given some set of assumptions that we may
neither believe to be true nor want to be true” (2000, p. 122). In addition, Nichols
and Stich posit an “Up-Dater” component of the overall mechanism, whose function
is to ensure that the beliefs that go into the PWB remain fresh and intact. Thus, the
PWB plays the same role as Leslie’s decoupling mechanism, which is to quarantine
the pretence-initiating representations, and thereby avoid representational abuse
and conceptual confusion (Nichols and Stich 2000, p. 136). This account is said
to be simpler than Leslie’s as it does not require additional metarepresentational
structures, and it provides a clear place for storing intact primary representations
(Belief Box). Only the relevant token primary representations that form the initial
premise have to be manipulated.
To summarise, it is clear that the main explanatory proposals of pretence posit
(mainly mechanistic) structures with mental representations, whose contents are
said to do the required explanatory work. Across the models we mainly ﬁnd contents
that are formed of propositions and have conditions of satisfaction.5 For example,
the banana-phone play would not count as pretend play without the child being
able to think counterfactual thoughts like ‘there is an imaginary voice coming out
of this banana’, regardless of whether additional metarepresenting is required or
not. As is especially clear in the models of Leslie or Nichols and Stich, mental
representational contents and cognitive mechanisms are important in explaining
how pretence occurs. As summarised by Varga (2011), Leslie’s account explains
the following aspects of pretence: object substitution (using an object as if it is
something else, e.g., using a banana as a phone); attribution of false properties
(ascribing a pretend property to something, e.g., pretending that the doll’s dry hair
is wet); and making a reference to an absent object (the invention of an imaginary
object, e.g., feeding the doll invisible cake, and referring to it as if it were present).
According to Leslie, the primary representations manipulated in the decoupling
mechanism explain these capacities, which to Leslie is the having of ‘pretence
representations’ that allows thinking as if one thing were another. According to
Nichols and Stich, the initial premises manipulated in the PWB component of the
overall inference mechanism explain pretence, which they see as behaving as if one
4By a ‘box’, Nichols and Stich refer to a metaphor, or a “notational device for distinguishing
representations that have systematically different functional or computational properties.” (2000,
p. 136).
5Other models of pretence propose the contents to be image-based or formed of motor plans (see,
for example, ‘Active Imagination Thesis’ by van Leeuwen 2011). Whether these contents form
mental representations of the necessary kind is, however, debated (see Rucinska 2014b).
www.allitebooks.com

146
Z. Ruci´nska
thing were another. Whether their explanatory proposals are satisfactory or not will
not be assessed in this chapter, although there are reasons to be sceptical of them.6
Overall, while there are two distinct models of pretence in the literature, they
are similar in at least one interesting way. They commit to some form of mental
representationalism, where mental representations are the underlying enablers of
the assumed mental abilities, playing various explanatory roles in each model of
pretence. However, that is not necessary, as other non-representational structures
can be introduced to allow for some of the same functions to be performed,
implementing them in a different way. While to date, there is no explanatory model
of pretence that is based on the enactive framework, it is possible to seek non-
mental representational structures to explain how children play in an imaginative
way (Rucinska 2014a) or to explain what guides pretend play (Rucinska 2014b).
What is at stake in this chapter is to show what an alternative explanatory mechanism
of pretence could look like on the enactive framework. This will be proposed in
Sect. 9.4 of this chapter. However, before that, it is important to clarify the tools that
the enactivists could use in their explanatory work. Certain conception of Gibsonian
affordances can be introduced to the enactivist explanatory model. This will be
addressed in the next section.
9.3
Enactivist Model of Pretence: Making Use of Affordances
The term ‘affordance’ has been used in multiple ways in the ecological, embodied
and enactive cognition literature (incl. Gibson (1979/1986, 1982), Turvey (1992),
Reed (1996), Chemero (2003, 2009), Noë (2004), Withagen et al. (2012), and
Rietveld and Kiverstein (2014)). The concept has been predominant in Gestalt
psychology and phenomenology. There is even mention of affordances in the HCI
literature, but they are often considered as having limited relevance to HCI due to
their vague meaning (see, for example, Kaptelinin and Nardi 2012). This section
attempts to mediate this worry, showing how affordances should be conceived of so
that they are useful explanatory tools of make-belief.
The only consensus with respect to affordances is that they are possibilities
for action. With respect to what they are (properties or relations), where they are
6For example, it is debatable whether Nichols and Stich’s model can claim to be superior to Leslie’s
model in its economic value and simplicity. Nichols and Stich do not explain why these and not
other primary representations form the initial premise, or where the PWB come from. It is also
intriguing how the PWB could hold a detailed description of the entire world in which a banana
would be a phone; there are presumably close to inﬁnite descriptions that would ﬁt the bill. In
addition, this model fails to capture the sense in which the pretence is not serious (for example, it
does not explain why children do not, in reality, expect someone to pick up on the other side of
the ‘banana’), unless more descriptions of the relevant kind are added. So as it stands, it is unclear
whether there is a beneﬁt in appropriating the cognitivist explanations even of the weak version;
there are reasons to believe both models fail in their explanatory role.

9
Enactive Mechanism of Make-Belief Games
147
located (in the environment or cutting between the environment-animal dichotomy),
or how do they work (whether they invite actions or not) is a matter of great
debate. I propose that the most fruitful way of thinking about affordances for
the purposes of explaining pretence is to conceive of affordances as dispositional
properties of the environment (ala Turvey 1992).7 This conception might best serve
the explanatory function of affordance-based account of pretence, as it divides the
explanatory burden equally between the animal and the environment. Thinking of
affordances as dispositional properties of the environment relative to the animal
asks for something else to act as the dispositional properties of the animal, relative
to the environment. Introducing effectivities (below) as animal-relative counterparts
of affordances makes room for the dynamic relationship between the environment
and the animal.
The coining of the notion of affordance has been attributed to ecological psychol-
ogist James Gibson. Gibson (1979/1986) emphasised the relational nature of affor-
dances, as existing in the environment for the animals. As Gibson famously writes,
“The affordances of the environment are what it offers the animal, what it provides
or furnishes, either for good or ill” (1979/1986, p. 127). On one interpretation, affor-
dances are to be placed in the environment. They might be thought of as properties
of the environment. Chemero (2003) clariﬁes that to Gibson, “an affordance ( : : : ) is
a resource that the environment offers any animal that has the capabilities to perceive
and use it. ( : : : ) Thus, affordances are properties of the environment but taken rela-
tive to an animal” (p. 182). Hence, affordances seem to be properties of the environ-
ment, which exist not completely independent of the animal (they ‘refer’ to the ani-
mal), but are mind-independent, or independent of the animal’s perceiving of them
in the broad sense. However, on another interpretation, Gibson’s affordances are not
clearly properties of the environment; some quotes suggest that affordances have a
peculiar ontological status. For example, in Gibson’s own words, “An affordance is
neither an objective property nor a subjective property; or it is both if you like. ( : : : )
It is equally a fact of the environment and a fact of behaviour. It is both physical and
psychical, yet neither. An affordance points both ways, to the environment and to the
observer” (1979/1986, p. 129). On this description, affordances seem to go beyond
mere animal-environment coupling; they occupy an ontological space of their own;
perhaps they can be considered as a relation. Also, if it is a ‘fact of behaviour’ of the
animal, it is difﬁcult to understand how they are ‘mind-independent’. The seeming
inconsistency has sparked a great discussion, and many interpretations of what is
the nature of Gibsonian affordances, including how best to think of them, have
been proposed since Turvey (1992), Reed (1996), Chemero (2003), Noë (2004),
Withagen et al. (2012) or Rietveld and Kiverstein (2014). It is beyond the scope of
this chapter to explain how each of these positions differs from each other. What is
to be noted, however, is the fact that each of these positions takes a slightly different
7One may consider these to be relational dispositions of the environment, such as the disposition
to elicit certain actions from certain agents in certain circumstances.

148
Z. Ruci´nska
stance on what role the environment and the animal play in shaping affordances,
which in turn makes a difference on what explanatory role affordances can play.
On the one hand, Reed’s conception of affordances would have to commit to the
view that the ‘phoneness’ affordance of the banana exists in the banana, completely
independent of any subjects. Reed would further have to commit to saying that, as
long as affordances can be used to explain pretence, even ‘phoneness’ affordance
of a banana inﬂuenced the types of animals that evolved (human beings), with
the capacities to respond to such affordances in phone-like ways. His position is
most animal-independent. On the other hand, Varela et al. (1991) disagree that the
affordances do not depend in any way upon the perceptually guided activity of
the animal (p. 203). If we follow Varela et al., affordances should be understood
as dependent on how the animal perceives the world. They seem to place more
focus on the capacities of the animal than on the properties of the environment in
securing affordances.8 Hence, Varela et al. promote that affordances only come into
existence when there is a self-sustaining organism present; on their view we can
only speak of the world affording action when it shows up for animals. To take
yet another example, Rietveld and Kiverstein (2014) speak of capacities that could
be found in a whole set of animals, or forms of life; the ‘phoneness’ of a banana
would then be found in the landscape of affordances. This means that we do not
look at dispositions of a particular animal, but look at practices of types of animals.
In the case of pretence, they would have to say that there is a practice of playing
‘phone’ that is part of our ‘human’ form of life. The practice shapes the landscape
of affordances, where cultural niches such as ‘phone play’ practices exist. On this
story, the particular animal is not as important as the animal’s socio-cultural context
that forms the landscape of affordances. The way of using bananas as phones is
independent of the individual, but not independent of the society the individual is
part of.
I propose to follow another conception of affordances, inspired by Turvey (1992).
His story depicts a dynamic relationship between the objects in the environment
and animals, where the object is just as important as the animal that it interacts
with. Turvey introduces effectivities, or dispositions of the animals. Effectivities are
based on the animal’s interaction history with the object. They shape the object
to have a disposition that is essentially connected to that animal. Turvey’s notion
of effectivities can be extended to involve capacities of animals, capabilities, as
well as moods, all shaped by histories of interactions. On this story, the banana
affords ‘phoneness’ only if there is a subject with the capacity to play ‘phone’ with
a banana (dispositions that could be shaped by, e.g., the history of interactions with
phones) and if there are objects with right dispositions to be like phones (bananas
due to their shape and size). It is not a view about emergence of phone qualities
8Several things they say come close to suggesting this; for example, “the meaning of this or that
interaction for a living system is not prescribed from outside but is the result of the organization
and history of the system itself (idem, p. 157).

9
Enactive Mechanism of Make-Belief Games
149
in the direct manipulation by the animal of the banana; rather, the idea is that the
‘phoneness’ affordance, or possibility for action, is residing in the banana only in
so far as it is matched with an individual agent who has latent dispositions (prior to
the interaction) to manipulate the banana in relevant phone-like ways. The animal
does not have to act upon the affordance, but the affordance is there in the virtue of
there being an animal that can interact with it. This means that the affordance is in
the environment even when the animal is not interacting with the environment; it is
there in the sense of being disposed to be taken up by a particular animal should that
animal be present.9 In short, the story can be cast in terms of animal-environment
mutuality: just as the objects we shape have a pull on us with respect to how to
engage with them (Malafouris 2013), so the affordances of the environment can
invite speciﬁc behaviours when the right effectivities are in place.
However, Turvey’s account appropriated to pretence does not yet explain why
we pretend. After all, an object has many affordances and just as many effectivities.
What explains which affordance-effectivity pair is actualised that would lead to
action? Turvey (1992, p. 180) suggests a right actualising context: “Let Wpq (e.g.,
a person-climbing-stairs system) D j(Xp, Zq) be composed of different things Z
(person) and X (stairs). Let p be a property of X and q be a property of Z. Then
p is said to be an affordance of X and q the effectivity of Z (i.e., the complement of
p), if and only if there is a third property r such that (i) Wpq D j(Xp, Zq) possesses
r; (ii) Wpq D j(Xp, Zq) possesses neither p nor q; (iii) Neither Z nor X possesses
r. Thus, a person cannot execute locomotion in the highly particular manner of
stair climbing unless a sloped surface is underfoot composed of adjacent steps with
suitable dimensions (of rise and horizontal extent). When it is, then the disposition
to locomote in this highly particular way is actualised.
To clarify, something can actualise an affordance-effectivity pair if and only if
there is a third property given by the context. One such property can be a sloped
surface. Applying Turvey’s conception of affordances to pretence context, we can
explain the banana-phone pretend play using a similar structure. Let Wpq (a child
pretend playing that banana is a phone) be composed of different things Z (the
child) and X (the banana). Let p (phoneness) be a property of X (banana). Let q
(‘capacity to play phone with’) be a property of Z (the child). Then p (phoneness)
is said to be an affordance of X (banana) and the q (capacity to play phone) the
effectivity of Z (the child). The effectivity is a complement of the affordance,
hence, we can conceive of the effectivity as the ﬂexibility to play ‘phone’ with,
history of interactions with the phone, know-how to use phones, etc. Then, what
actualises this affordance-effectivity pair is the right circumstance, such as being in
a playful context, which is shaped by the presence of toys, other people playing,
or narrative contexts (see Rucinska 2014a). The third property can also be another
9This is similar to Chemero’s (2003) conception of affordances being ‘lovely’: “Affordances,
which are the glue that holds the animal and environment together, exist only in virtue of selection
pressure exerted on animals by the normal physical environment. They arise along with the abilities
of animals to perceive and take advantage of them” (p. 190).

150
Z. Ruci´nska
agent. For example, one is strongly disposed to play phone with the banana when the
circumstances are inviting, and such a disposition is brought forth by mere presence
of other people who create playful contexts.10 Once the right context is in play, these
factors can invite action.
Turvey’s account of affordances is a good candidate for the best conception
of affordance to explain pretence, for the following reasons. It allows us to ﬁnd
affordances in the environment, and treat them as real properties of the environment,
and as dispositions of the environment relative to the animal. As real properties,
pretence affordances are simply present possibilities for action. Instead of absent
entities that need to be represented (as ‘phones’), the child is simply switching
between affordances (from non-pretence ones like eating the banana, to pretence
ones like playing phone with it), triggered by the right contextual factors. Hence,
cognitive quarantining or decoupling from the ‘real’ or ‘primary’ affordance does
not need to take place, as there is no ‘real’ or ‘primary’ affordance to begin with;
the possibilities for action are all equal. However, even if some affordances invite
more strongly as they are part of the typical engagements with objects (such as
‘canonical’ affordances of Costall 2012), and so even if eating the banana invites
more strongly, there is no reason to assume that any representational decoupling of
the relevant sense is needed to step away from the ‘eating’ practice to the ‘pretend
phone’ practice; the switching of practices is triggered directly by the context.
Moreover, if we speak of affordances as properties of the environment, and
effectivities as properties of animals, we have clear component parts to provide a
wide-and-situated mechanistic explanation of pretence. As such, affordances can
form explanatory mechanisms that can serve as alternative explanatory mechanisms
to the cognitivist ones. For these reasons, it is fruitful to conceive of affordances
as dispositional properties of the environment. What such alternative mechanism
would look like will be proposed below.
9.4
Introducing Wide and Situated Mechanism
By now, it should be clear that the philosophical frameworks of cognitivism and
enactivism make use of very different conceptual tools: mental representations and
affordances, respectively. This has implications for what methods of explanation
of cognitive phenomena these positions typically rely on: mechanistic explanations
vs. covering law explanations, respectively. To secure the claim that possible non-
representational explanation of pretence can provide a genuine counter proposal to
representational explanation of pretence, it could be shown that enactivists actually
use the same explanatory method as cognitivists, which is providing a mechanistic
explanation of pretence. To show this, we ﬁrst have to understand what are
the criteria of mechanistic explanations. The section shows that affordance-based
10See McKitrick (2003) on ‘extrinstic dispositions’.

9
Enactive Mechanism of Make-Belief Games
151
explanations of enactivists, while dynamical, are actually compatible with mecha-
nistic explanations understood in a certain way, but in which there is no reason to
think that mental representations ﬁgure as proper parts. Such explanatory structure
is a wide and situated mechanism, which incorporates both the relevant animal-
pertaining and environment-pertaining factors as components of its explanatory
mechanism, where none of these factors must be mental representations.
Enactivism contrasts cognitivism not only on its theoretical commitments to
positing mental representations, but to methodological strategies to studying cog-
nition as well. Many E-theorists, such as radical enactivists, do not seek to explain
cognition at all, but re-describe it (see Hutto and Myin 2013). Other E-theorists
such as embodied cognition theorists and ecological psychologists, who do attempt
to explain cognitive phenomena, rely not on mechanistic explanations, but on
providing covering law explanations (Varela et al. 1991; Chemero 2009). The target
of this section is to showcase methodological commitments of enactivists in light of
the ones of cognitivists, examples of whose methods we have seen in Sect. 9.2.11
Enactivists have entirely different approach to studying cognitive phenomena
than cognitivists, with whom they disagree on several points. Two of them will
be mentioned below. Firstly, according to enactivists, cognition is not ﬁrst and
foremost representation, with respect to both the essence of cognition and its
implementation. As Varela et al. (1991) claim, “(Enactivism) questions the centrality
of the notion that cognition is fundamentally representation. Behind this notion
stand three fundamental assumptions. The ﬁrst is that we inhabit a world with
particular properties, such as length, color, movement, sound, etc. The second is
that we pick up or recover these properties by internally representing them. ( : : : )
We propose as a name the term enactive to emphasize the growing conviction that
cognition is not the representation of a pregiven world by a pregiven mind but is
rather the enactment of a world and a mind on the basis of a history of the variety of
actions that a being in the world performs (p. 9).”
Secondly, enactivism proposes the study of living organisms, and describes
autopoietic systems in their environments (Varela et al. 1991; De Jaegher and Di
Paolo 2007). In this respect, enactivism is modelled on ecology, and ecological
approaches stress the dynamic relation between organisms and their environments.
That is a sharp methodological contrast to the cognitivist approaches, which focus
on manipulation of mental representations or representational mapping in imple-
mentation of cognition. Enactivism also stresses the activity of the animals in their
11For the purposes the argument in this chapter, the distinction between enactivists, radical
enactivists, radical embodied cognition scientists and ecological psychologists need not be
made, as they all importantly contrast cognitivists in the same way. For example, as Chemero
(2009) clariﬁes, “Ecological psychology’s core concepts—perception for action, direct perception,
affordances, environmental information—form the core of the embodied cognition movement”
(p. 86), and he deﬁnes “radical embodied cognitive science as the scientiﬁc study of perception,
cognition, and action as necessarily embodied phenomenon, using explanatory tools that do not
posit mental representations” (pp. 28–29). Hence, for simplicity sake, I will refer to all e-theorists
as ‘enactivists’, as they share lack of positing mental representations.

152
Z. Ruci´nska
environments (Hutto and Myin 2013). It considers the animal in its context, focusing
on the role of the objects and other animals in this context in shaping the animal
cognition (Froese et al. 2013; De Jaegher and Di Paolo 2007). The outcome of
taking an enactive approach to cognition is that it ﬁnds mentality in the interactions
between organisms and environments, not in encapsulated mental representations.
It can be concluded that enactivist explanations of cognitive engagements will not
posit mental representations, but rather will focus on interactions of the animals with
their environments, which dynamically shape their cognition.
In general, enactivists do not provide mechanistic explanations because living
things are importantly unlike mechanisms. Instead, they propose covering law
explanations. Covering law explanation (Kelso 1995) “relies on a lawlike regularity
to deduce properties of the target phenomenon” (Zednik 2011, p. 242). In The
Embodied Mind, Varela et al. claim that “( : : : ) the overall concern of the enactive
approach to perception is not to determine how some perceiver-independent world is
to be recovered; it is, rather, to determine the common principles or lawful linkages
between sensory and motor systems that explain how action can be perceptually
guided in a perceiver-dependent world” (idem, p. 173). An example of covering
law explanation outside philosophy and other studies of cognition is law of gravity.
It provides us with a principle of why objects fall to the ground, explaining
this phenomenon without having to posit an underlying mechanism in the object.
Dynamical explanation is just a special case of covering-law explanation. Therefore,
it may seem that mechanistic explanations are not compatible with dynamical
explanations.
Clearly, there seems to be two different kinds of explanatory projects occurring.
This is a slight problem for a non-representational alternative explanation of
pretence, as it can be argued that enactivists and cognitivists are engaging in
different work, hence, they need not be in each other’s way (see Aizawa 2014).
However, that conclusion also seems principally unﬁtting the strong contrast
between theoretical and methodological commitments provided by both accounts
that motivated enactivists to counter cognitivists. Clearly, enactivists should not
want to just provide a different explanation to cognitivists, but one that substantially
rivals it. This motivates the question: could enactivists propose a mechanistic
alternative explanation of cognition? I will argue that they can, but ﬁrst, it is
imperative to clarify what actually is meant by a mechanistic explanation.
It is useful to begin with the most inﬂuential conception of a mechanism in
contemporary philosophy of science. “A mechanism is a structure performing
a function in virtue of its component parts, component operations, and their
organization. The orchestrated functioning of the mechanism, manifested in patterns
of change over time in properties of its parts and operations, is responsible for one
or more phenomena (Bechtel and Abrahamsen 2010, p. 323; see also Machamer
et al. 2000; Bechtel and Abrahamsen 2005; Craver 2007)” (in Zednik 2011).
Mechanisms have typically two explanatory heuristics: decomposition and location
(Bechtel and Richardson 1993; Craver 2007; Zednik 2011). Location refers to the
idea that mechanisms typically occupy some space in time. Decomposition can be
structural and functional. “Structural decomposition involves breaking a complex

9
Enactive Mechanism of Make-Belief Games
153
system down into a collection of simpler subsystems or parts. ( : : : ) Functional
decomposition involves re-describing the behavioral phenomenon as a series or
organized collection of simpler behaviors or operations” (Zednik 2011, pp. 240–
241). Those operations are working parts of the system and are realised in the system
from which the target phenomenon arises. This shapes what is to be considered as
a mechanistic explanation. According to Zednik (2011), “mechanistic explanation
consists of describing the particular organized collection of parts and operations that
is responsible for the behavioral regularity being explained” (p. 240). Furthermore,
mechanistic explanation is “a form of reductive explanation; phenomena manifested
at one level of organization are explained in terms of component parts and operations
at lower level(s) of organization (Machamer et al. 2000; Craver 2007; Bechtel
2008)” (p. 261).12
Considering these characteristics, it may be clear why speaking of mechanisms
and mechanistic explanations have been applied to philosophy by cognitivists.
Decomposability seems to ﬁt with cognitivist explanatory strategies, which break
down the phenomena they study (e.g., cognition) into smaller component parts (e.g.,
mental representational structures).13 Cognitivists also appeal to the location heuris-
tic of the mechanism. The idea is that the cognitive mechanism reﬂects some sort
of internal processing, which is often said to be located in the brain. It would look
like mechanistic explanations have a good ﬁt with cognitivist types of explanations.
There are two ways to challenge this apparent ﬁt. First is to note Ramsey’s (2007)
caution against considering mechanistic explanations of cognitive phenomena as
necessarily representational. Mere correlations between internal states and inputs
do not sufﬁce to amount to a satisfying notion of mental representation as held by
cognitivists. Ramsey’s argument opens the door for mechanistic explanations to be
applied to non-mental representational explanations as well. Hence, second way to
challenge the ﬁt between mechanistic explanations and cognitivist explanations is
to show that enactivists could also rely on mechanistic explanations.
There are clear reasons why relying on mechanistic explanations have not
been popular in enactivism. On the surface, both heuristics of mechanisms do not
seem to ﬁt the enactivist framework, making mechanistic explanations unlikely to
be appropriated by enactivists at face value. With regard to the decomposability
heuristic, enactivists would not study cognition by breaking it down to component
12Other, yet similar, deﬁnitions include Bechtel’s (2009): “mechanism is understood as an
organized set of parts that perform different operations which are orchestrated so as to realize in
the appropriate context the phenomenon in question. The explanation itself consists of representing
the mechanism and showing how it realizes the phenomenon (often by simulating its functioning)”
(p. 544).
13This seems to follow Marr, but that is confused. Marr suggested that his levels of classiﬁcation are
to be treated as independent of one another. What should follow is that, for example, the structure
of the mechanism of the algorithmic level should not make a difference to the description of the
phenomenon on the highest computational level. However, this is the one key point that many
decide not to follow Marr on, assuming that the ﬁndings about one level will make a difference on
the ﬁndings about the other (see, for example, Nichols and Stich 2000, p. 11).

154
Z. Ruci´nska
parts in virtue of following the principle of Gestalt psychology, namely, that the
properties of the parts are not properties of the wholes. As enactivists are interested
in studying cognition holistically through a dynamic interaction of the animal in
its environment, they would argue against the method of singling out properties of
cognition and studying those independently of cognition as a whole.
There is also a clear worry with the location heuristic. If there is a speciﬁc
location of the cognitive process, it is natural to locate it in the brain. For example,
computational models “specify the component operations of a mechanism that are
then (in ideal cases) localized in neurobiological component parts” (Zednik 2011,
p. 241). Location may imply internalisation of the cognitive processes, such as by
encapsulation of the cognitive process in a representational structure, most often
found in the brain and realised by neural structures alone. As location of the
mechanism suggests its internalisation (and, possibly, representationalism), it is not
compatible with non-representationalism and worldly interactionism of the enactive
accounts. Finally, another worry might be that mechanistic explanations posit chains
of causes and effects, whereas dynamical systems explanations do not, which is
why enactive explanations are not mechanistic. The worry has to do with positing
inputs and outputs that mechanisms usually mediate. It is the cognitivist approach
to understanding cognition that pertains to an input-output relation between the
mind and behaviour, whereas the ecological approach as appropriated by enactivists
stresses the dynamic relation between the organism and its environment.
However, these heuristics are actually not problematic for potential enactive
explanations. The structural decomposition can be made to (minimally) two working
parts: animal and environment (see Beer 2003).14 These components could form a
wide-mechanism (to be explained shortly). Also, location is not threatening. As
Clark and Chalmers (1998) argued, the mind can extend beyond skin and skull
into the world and its objects, such as notebooks. Many enactivists endorse this
idea, taking it even further; for example, they argue that the cognitive processes
are already extensive, or reaching wide into the world (Myin and Zahidi 2015).
Hence, make-belief could also be located in the world. Finally, the worry about
positing inputs and outputs can be adhered to with the notion of wide and situated
mechanism. The wide and situated mechanism has non-hierarchical components
that engage in continuous reciprocal causation, and its location is extended, in the
sense that the components are distributed in the world. Furthermore, continuous
reciprocal causation is how the component parts stand in relation to each other,
without proposing that a particular component is the ‘input’, where the ‘output’ is
the behaviour.
Hence, adhering to wide and situated mechanism is not a worry for an enactive
explanation of pretence that has, for instance, affordances in its explanatory toolkit.
14Beer (2003) relies on the explanatory heuristic of structural decomposition to identify two
working parts—the embodied brain on the one hand and the environment on the other ( : : : ). Then,
he provides a detailed dynamical analysis to describe the operations associated with each part (see
Zednik 2011, p. 254).

9
Enactive Mechanism of Make-Belief Games
155
It is possible to understand enactivist claims as compatible with mechanistic expla-
nations, when mechanism is understood in a certain way, as wide (Zednik 2011), and
situated (Bechtel 2009). Firstly, Zednik (2011) argues that dynamical explanations
“may be uniquely able to describe mechanisms whose components are engaged
in complex relationships of continuous reciprocal causation (p. 239), and that
dynamical explanations “actually resemble mechanistic explanations rather than
covering-law explanations” (p. 245).15 He argues that dynamical explanations “are
well suited for describing extended mechanisms whose components are distributed
across brain, body, and the environment” (p. 239). The structural decomposition
can be made to (minimally) two working parts: animal and environment (see Beer
2003).16 Applied to enactivism, the enactive mechanism could involve taking the
environment and taking the animal as a single thing, with no representing. For
example, animal’s know-how can be said to be a component located ‘in the body’,
and the affordance could be said to be located ‘in the environment’. Moreover,
“insofar as it makes sense to talk of body and environment as the components of
a (minimally) cognitive mechanism, that mechanism is extended; its components
are distributed across brain, body, and environment” (Zednik 2011, p. 256). The
parts and operations of the mechanism are distributed. Additionally, it could include
social structures and cultural environment. Moreover, Zednik argues that continuous
reciprocal causation implies that the interacting parts do not have static inputs and
outputs. This takes care of the problem of input-output structure of traditionally
understood mechanisms. The continuous reciprocal causation can be thought of as a
form of coupling between the components. As he clariﬁes, “Coupling is a technical
term that applies whenever two or more dynamical systems mutually inﬂuence one
another’s change over time. In the philosophical literature, such mutual inﬂuence
is more commonly known as continuous reciprocal causation ( : : : ). Systems B and
E are engaged in a relationship of continuous reciprocal causation because each
system’s behavior is at all times determining, as well as being determined by, the
other’s” (p. 258). Hence, a wide and situated mechanism does not posit chains
of causes and effects, but speaks of dynamical reciprocal causation. This is not a
problem for affordance-based explanations. Even understood as components of a
wide and situated mechanism, they can causally interact with effectivities and other
affordances as part of the mechanism, without being causes of behaviour in the
sense of providing inputs, where the outputs are pretencebehaviours. Affordances
15“Therefore, [he claims] a closer look at dynamical cognitive science will reveal that the
extant philosophical conception of mechanistic explanation may have underestimated practicing
scientists’ willingness and ability to describe increasingly complex and distributed cognitive
mechanisms” (p. 239).
16Beer (2003) relies on the explanatory heuristic of structural decomposition to identify two
working parts—the embodied brain on the one hand and the environment on the other ( : : : ). Then,
he provides a detailed dynamical analysis to describe the operations associated with each part (in
Zednik 2011, p. 254).

156
Z. Ruci´nska
and can be said to form components of a continuously reciprocating causal system.
Thus, what is clear is that affordance-based explanation is compatible with a type of
a mechanistic explanation.
Secondly, I propose to follow Bechtel’s (2009) notion of a mechanism, whose
components interact in complex ways, and which is situated in a wider context.
As Bechtel claims, “Accounts of mechanistic explanation have emphasized the
importance of looking down—decomposing a mechanism into its parts and oper-
ations. ( : : : ) But once multiple components of a mechanism have been identiﬁed,
researchers also need to ﬁgure out how it is organized—they must look around
and determine how to recompose the mechanism. ( : : : ) Researchers also need to
look up—situate a mechanism in its context, which may be a larger mechanism
that modulates its behavior. When looking down is combined with looking around
and up, mechanistic research results in an integrated, multi-level perspective”
(p. 543). By ‘looking around and up’, Bechtel emphasizes both the organisation
of a mechanism and its situatedness in a wider context (‘larger mechanism’), where
external factors further affect the behaviour of the mechanism. For example, by the
original mechanism he refers to the visual system, claiming that it cannot be best
understood without also situating it in a context where the animal, or object in the
environment, is moving. To explain the mechanism of perception, the movement of
the perceiver and objects in the environment should be appealed to, as it impacts
what information is received by the visual system. Bechtel claims that is in line with
Gibson’s notion of “optic ﬂow, the manner in which the visual scene changes as
a result of the relative movement of the perceiver and objects in the environment”
(Bechtel 2009, p. 558). Thus, he concludes that the mechanism is always situated.17
Such understanding of a mechanism (as wide and situated) is compatible with
the explanations proposed by enactivists thus far. For instance, Varela et al. (1991)
look for ‘common principles’ or ‘lawful linkages’ that can be generalised to all
perception to explain what colour experience is. However, they look also at the
relation of the sensory-motor systems to the external world, one that is perceiver-
dependent. Their explanation of colour experience includes the description of the
physiognomy of the human eye as well as the inﬂuence of the colour concepts of our
culture on perception. In that respect, it could be considered as a wide and situated
mechanistic explanation. Similarly, Chemero (2009) speaks of component parts of
the dynamical system.18 He looks for a uniﬁed model to explain the coupling of
brain-body-environment systems and interpersonal (social) coupling, looking for
17“The behavior of mechanisms is highly dependent on conditions in their environments, including
any regularities that occur there. But these are not discovered by looking inside the mechanism to
the parts and operations or how these are organized. They must be discovered by examining the
environment in which the mechanism operates and employing tools appropriate for such inquiry”
(idem, p. 559).
18“In dynamical explanations, the behavior of a system is typically explained in terms of collective
variables ( : : : ). A collective variable describes the emergent, coordinated activity of the parts that
compose a dynamical system, and in some cases this collective variable is causally responsible for
the component parts” (p. 199).

9
Enactive Mechanism of Make-Belief Games
157
models to be applied to data that are “widely applicable and easily extensible”
(p. 100). Again, such models could be interpreted in the line of a wide and situated
mechanism.
It is clear that neither Varela et al. nor Chemero speak of mechanisms, but provide
their explanations as covering law explanations. If that is the case, why is it a good
idea to think of them as providing explanations that are compatible with wide and
situated mechanistic explanations? Aside securing the claim that enactivists can
give genuine alternative explanations of pretence that contrast in relevant ways
the cognitivist explanations, speaking of a mechanistic explanation is better for
explaining pretence or make-belief than providing a covering law explanation.
The reason is that mechanistic explanations are not general, but speciﬁc, whereas
covering law explanations generalise. Dynamical models understood as providing
covering law explanations describe general principles, and thus, account for wide
range of cognitive phenomena.19 Hence, their explanations are not restricted to
any particular system. This may be why providing covering law explanations is
not most applicable to pretence, because there may not be a unique phenomenon
of pretending that would pertain to such a law: pretence comes in various forms
(object-substitution, role-play, playing with an imaginary friend, acting, etc.). Since
there is no one unitary account of what can be covered by the phenomenon of
pretence, it may be difﬁcult to establish whether what we are trying to explain can
have one law. Moreover, what follows from generalisation is decontextualisation.
Giving laws of pretence would also imply de-contextualizing pretence, so that the
component parts of a functioning mechanism would always hold for any pretence
case. The worry is that perhaps the phenomenon of pretence is so varied that we
can only at best speak of exemplars, or speciﬁc tokens of pretence acts. However,
we don’t have that worry when speaking of a wide and situated mechanism. The
mechanism can be multiply realisable, in the sense that different environmental
affordances and different animal effectivities, actualised in different contexts, can
form the wide and situated mechanistic structures of individual pretence acts,
explaining individual pretence acts and accounting for their variety.
To conclude this section, I have shown that there is nothing about the deﬁnition of
‘mechanism’ that is incompatible with enactivist explanations and that if enactivists
take on a liberal notion of mechanisms that is wide and situated, their explanations
are not different in kind from the explanations of cognitivists. What this results in
is that enactivist explanations could be considered as genuine rival explanations to
cognitivist explanations in the sense that both could propose a kind of explanation
that is scientiﬁcally respectable.20
19As Chemero claims, “This would allow scientists to predict that other, similar behaviors would
fall under the same covering laws, and then test that prediction” (2009, p. 85).
20However, should dynamical explanations be not mechanical in the end, and it turns out that
affordance-based alternative is right, then it would have meant that mechanistic explanations are
not appropriate to target cognitive phenomena like pretence. Given any outcome of the debate,
proposing affordance-based explanations is a valuable contribution.

158
Z. Ruci´nska
9.5
Conclusion and Application to HCI
This chapter clariﬁes what type of explanation of make-believe an enactivist may
provide in response to the explanations provided by cognitivists. Many think it
is necessary to give an explanation of pretence that posits mental representations.
In this chapter I have shown that this is not the only option. I have suggested
what an enactivist explanation can look like. It can appropriate a certain notion
of affordances found in the literature (Turvey 1992) to show how environmental
affordances and animal effectivities can form component parts of a wide and situated
mechanism of make-believe. While more work is required to spell out how the
component parts interact with each other (for example, to explain exactly how
the affordance-effectivity pairs are actualised, or what triggers the right pretence
affordances to ‘come forward’ and invite speciﬁc behaviours in the play context),
this account sets the stage for developing the affordance-based explanatory structure
and applying it to explaining speciﬁc pretence cases. While the enactive explanation
of pretence will be complex and multi-faceted, it is clear that it need not posit mental
representational structures, but it still should be considered a genuine alternative
explanation of pretence that stands in sharp contrast to explanations proposed by
cognitivists.
Establishing the possibility of conceiving of wide and situated mechanism of
pretence could form a nontrivial contribution to various ﬁelds studying pretence,
such as redeﬁning the possibilities for human-computer interaction in make-believe.
Next I suggest some possible implications for the way we theorise the experience of
virtual environments. Virtual environments are ‘as if’ environments, which agents
experience as real. This could be explained by the fact that the degree to which
agents experience an environment as real depends on the degree to which they
are inclined to act in this world, including interacting with the computer.21 Various
forms of interactions with the computer (hence, not just passively receiving visual
stimuli, but acting with the features of the computer, such as using a joystick,
gaming tools or moving in the virtual environment while wearing the ‘gaming
glasses’) could bring out and intensify the make-belief experience. As Turner (this
issue) claims, “the experience of presence or immersion in a movie, game or virtual
environment is not automatic but is the product of our deliberate engagement with
( : : : ) the world” (p. 1). However, decoupling understood as ‘stepping away’ from
the world by representing it ‘as pretend’ is no longer necessary with the affordance-
based account of a wide and situated mechanism of pretence. One is simply attuned
to the different possibilities for action (including make-believe possibilities) when
one is directly engaging with the computer, and the virtual environment forms the
right actualising context. Moreover, the wide and situated mechanism approach to
make-believe is compatible with situated accounts of HCI.Acknowledging that the
21Thanks to Marc Slors for suggesting this point.

9
Enactive Mechanism of Make-Belief Games
159
environment is more than a context in which gaming occurs, but active component
of the gaming experience, supports the need to look for ways to adapt the computer
to the user.22
References
Aizawa K (2014) The enactivist revolution. Avant 5(2):19–42
Bechtel W (2008) Mental mechanisms: philosophical perspectives on cognitive neuroscience.
Routledge, London
Bechtel W (2009) Explanation: mechanism, modularity, and situated cognition. In: Robbins P,
Aydede M (eds) Cambridge handbook of situated cognition. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, MA, pp 155–170
Bechtel W, Richardson RC (1993) Discovering complexity: decomposition and localization as
strategies in scientiﬁc research. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Bechtel W, Abrahamsen A (2005) Explanation: a mechanist alternative. Studies in history and
philosophy of biological and biomedical sciences 36:421–441
Bechtel W, Abrahamsen A (2010) Dynamic mechanistic explanation: computational modeling of
Circadian rhythms as an exemplar for cognitive science. Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science A 1:321–333
Beer RD (2003) The dynamics of active categorical perception in an evolved model agent. Adaptive
Behavior 11(4):209–243
Bruineberg J, Rietveld E (2014) Self-organization, free energy minimization, and optimal grip on
a ﬁeld of affordances. Front Hum Neurosci. doi:10.3389/fnhum.2014.00599
Chemero A (2003) An outline of a theory of affordances. Ecol Psychol 15(2):181–195
Chemero A (2009) Radical embodied cognitive science. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Clark A, Chalmers D (1998) The extended mind. Analysis 58(1):7–19
Costall A (2012) Canonical affordances in context. AVANT 3(2):85–93
Craver C (2007) Explaining the brain. Oxford University Press, Oxford
De Jaegher H, Di Paolo E (2007) Participatory sense-making: an enactive approach to social
cognition. Phenomenol Cogn Sci 6(4):485–507
Froese T, Gershenson C, Rosenblueth DA (2013) The dynamically extended mind. In: Evolutionary
computation (CEC), 2013 IEEE congress on IEEE, pp 1419–1426
Gibson JJ (1979/1986) The ecological approach to visual perception. Houghton Mifﬂin, Boston
Harris PL (1994) Understanding pretense. In: Lewis C, Mitchell P (eds) Children’s early
understanding of mind: origins and development. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, pp
235–259
Harris PL, Kavanaugh RD (1993) Young children’s understanding of pretense. Monogr Soc Res
Child Dev 58:1
Hutto DD, Myin E (2013) Radicalizing enactivism: basic minds without content. MIT Press,
Cambridge
Kaptelinin V, Nardi B (2012) Affordances in HCI: toward a mediated action perspective. In:
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems. ACM,
pp 967–976
Kelso JAS (1995) Dynamic patterns: the self-organization of brain and behavior. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA
22As Mills and Scholtz (2002) propose, “researchers must ﬁnd a means to endow cyberspace with
a better understanding of the physical and logical world in which people live and work” (p. 4).

160
Z. Ruci´nska
Leslie A (1987) Pretense and representation: the origins of “theory of mind”. Psychol Rev 94:
412–426
Liao S, Gendler T (2010) Pretence and imagination. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Cogn Sci 2(1):79–94
Lillard A (1994) Making sense of pretense. In: Lewis C, Mitchell P (eds) Children’s early
understanding of mind: origins and development. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, pp
211–234
Machamer P, Darden L, Craver C (2000) Thinking about mechanisms. Philos Sci 67:1–25
Malafouris L (2013) How things shape the mind. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Marr D (1982) Vision. Holt, New York
McKitrick J (2003) A case for extrinsic dispositions. Australas J Philos 81(2):155–174
Mills KL, Scholtz, J (2002) Situated computing: the next frontier for HCI research. National
Institute of Standards and Technology Gaithersburg MD Information Technology Laboratory
Myin E, Zahidi K (2015) The extent of memory: from extended to extensive mind. In:Moyal-
Sharrock D, Munz V, Coliva A (eds) Mind, language & action, proceedings of the 36th
international Wittgenstein symposium. Ontos Verlag, Berlin, Germany
Nichols S, Stich S (2000) A cognitive theory of pretense. Cognition 74:115–147
Nichols S, Stich S (2003) Mindreading: an integrated account of pretence, self-awareness and
understanding of other minds. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Noë A (2004) Action in perception. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Perner J (1991) Understanding the representational mind. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Ramsey WM (2007) Representation reconsidered. Cambridge University Press, New York
Reed ES (1996) Encountering the world. Oxford University Press, New York
Rietveld E, Kiverstein J (2014) A rich landscape of affordances. Ecol Psychol 26(4):325–352
Ruci´nska Z (2014a) Basic pretending as sensorimotor engagement? Lessons from sensorimotor
theory for the debate on pretence. In: Bishop JM, Martin AO (eds) Contemporary sensori-
motor theory: studies in applied philosophy, epistemology and rational ethics 15. Springer,
Cham/New York, pp 175–187
Ruci´nska Z (2014b) What guides pretence? Towards the interactive and the narrative approaches.
Phenomenol Cogn Sci 13(3):1–17
Turvey MT (1992) Affordances and prospective control: an outline of the ontology. Ecol Psychol
4(3):173–187
Van Leeuwen N (2011) Imagination is where the action is. J Philos 108(2):55–77
Varela FJ, Thompson E, Rosch E (1991) The embodied mind: cognitive science and human
experience. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Varga S (2011) Pretence, social cognition and self-knowledge in autism. Psychopathology 44:46–
52
Withagen R, de Poel HJ, Arauja D, Pepping G (2012) Affordances can invite behaviour:
reconsidering the relationship between affordances and agency. New Ideas Psychol 30:
250–258
Zednik C (2011) The nature of dynamical explanation*. Philos Sci 78(2):238–263

Chapter 10
Immanent Story Worlds: The Making
of Punchdrunk’s The Drowned Man:
A Hollywood Fable
Carina Westling
Coyne’s critique of the rationalist modernist perspective in information technology
proposes the relevance of a postmodernist perspective, drawing on Derrida’s
deconstruction of the metaphysical and logocentrism (Coyne 1995: 102–104).
Derrida’s contemporaries Deleuze and Lyotard also sought to deconstruct the
metaphysical as the undeclared totalising principle of liberal humanism; Deleuze
via establishing the dichotomy of the transcendental and immanence in his critique
of the Cartesian subject-event relationship (Deleuze 2014: 203), and Lyotard in
his discussion of narrative and scientiﬁc knowledge generation (Lyotard 1984).
Twenty years after Coyne’s critique, the postmodernist perspective on information
technologies is still not fully established in the design and analysis of human-
computer interaction, although media theorists in the interim period, e.g. Hayles
(2002) and Galloway (2004), have addressed the subject in their critique of the
totalising inﬂuence present within both cyber-Romanticism and distributed network
protocols, respectively. In the interest of furthering a postmodern (or even post-
digital) approach to the design of interactive storyworlds, this study aims to identify
principles that counter or disable the facilitation of transcendental (totalising)
structures and support an immanent subject-event relationship through analysis
of the work of theatre company Punchdrunk, pioneers of immersive theatre as
interactive systems in physical space. The enquiry was formed around an analysis
of the conditions of making and experiencing storyworlds during and after the
build and run of The Drowned Man (beginning in spring 2012 and ﬁnishing in the
autumn of 2014), with part of the research occurring as a participant study within
the design team, complemented with semi-structured interviews with members
of the company (‘Com’) and audience (‘Aud’) participants. The objective of the
research was to gather observational data from the making of and participation in
C. Westling ()
Media and Cultural Studies, University of Sussex, Brighton, UK
e-mail: C.E.I.Westling@sussex.ac.uk
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
P. Turner, J.T. Harviainen (eds.), Digital Make-Believe,
Human–Computer Interaction Series, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-29553-4_10
161

162
C. Westling
live Punchdrunk productions. Further data was gathered on social media, followed
by analyses of lay reviews on TripAdvisor and the Punchdrunk fandom discourses
on Facebook and Tumblr. The concluding section of this chapter proposes three
features of Punchdrunk’s work that are key to immanence and can be implemented
in digital interaction design, and applies the conclusion to the reported outcomes of
Punchdrunk’s digital R&D project with MIT (Digital R&D Fund For the Arts 2012).
10.1
The Punchdrunk Formula
The Punchdrunk productions referred to in this chapter are three-dimensional
interactive sets housing a labyrinthine story world with story fragments embedded in
the set detail and enacted by overt (performers) agents, supported by covert (Black
Masks) agents. Participating audience members coming into this world are expected
to assume agency in order to compose and complete ‘their’ story, with no guidance
beyond recommendations to explore and follow what takes their interest. In 2013,
Punchdrunk began building the production The Drowned Man – A Hollywood Fable
in the old sorting ofﬁces at Paddington, London. The company had at that point been
running Sleep No More, an adaptation of Shakespeare’s Macbeth, in New York for
2 years. The story world of Sleep No More takes place in the ﬁctional McKittrick’s
Hotel, which had been created in over 100 fully realised and interactive rooms over
ﬁve ﬂoors in an old warehouse accommodating 400 audience members per night, but
The Drowned Man, based on Büchner’s Woyzeck, was to exceed this in scope, with
170 rooms distributed over four ﬂoors occupying 150,000 sq ft, accommodating 600
audience members every night.
The interactive sets constructed from a vast range of materials: furniture, books,
cars, caravans, live trees and, in the case of The Drowned Man, 3.5 tonnes of
sand. Story elements are encoded in layered metaphor and embedded into the sets
from the level of architecture to set detail, including the way the space is shaped
and furnished, with hidden references in books, drawers, purses and documents
to be found throughout. Sufﬁciently inquisitive audience members who choose to
engage with the sets will ﬁnd a level of resolution that aims to be ‘cinematic’
but in reality exceeds that. Audiences do not have seats and roam the sets on the
same level as the actors, free to explore set detail as closely as they would under
any normal conditions outside of the performance space. Prior to the show, they
are advised to be inquisitive and proactive, and to follow performers that interest
them as the narrative is played out across the entire set, without indications of
where and when participants can ﬁnd scenes as they are acted. There are no raised
or otherwise designated stages, and audiences and actors share the sets and the
performance environment. Stagehands and stage managers known as Black Masks
operate as mediators between the production and audiences; hidden within the set
unless direction of participants is needed, when they emerge from the shadows to
interact with audience members wordlessly, using speciﬁc techniques for interaction
to preserve the integrity of the story world:

10
Immanent Story Worlds: The Making of Punchdrunk’s The Drowned Man...
163
[ : : : ] the Black Mask workshops were often really interesting. And how easy you can move
an audience member, or get them not to do something – just by shaking your head, making
eye contact and shaking your head, and they’d put the prop back. And you couldn’t talk to
them either; it’s all sign language [ : : : ] The main thing about moving an audience member
is not to make them jump, so if you put your hand on their shoulder the likelihood is they’ll
do that, and then it’ll pull them out of the show. Or you know, break that wall. So everything
was sort of very in-motion (Com02).
Audience members must compose their own story from story elements embedded
in the set and played out by actors/performer in no given order, under disorientation
conditions created by labyrinthine ﬂoor plans in near darkness. The sets are so vast
that audience members may ﬁnd themselves completely alone at times, and without
immediately discernible plot fragments to follow. They are free to interact with the
set: open drawers, riﬂe through bags, books, rooms, and examine every object, as
they may hold clues to the storyline. This repeats nightly during production runs of
1–4 years (and counting).
Punchdrunk audiences fall into two relatively well-deﬁned groups: those who
come away with extremely positive experiences, and those who ﬁnd it an unsat-
isfactory experience. The latter (approximately 15 % of total audience numbers,
based on an analysis of lay reviews online; n D 708) (Tripadvisor 2015a, b) tend to
ﬁnd the lack of central presentation and narrative overly demanding, and as there
is no alternative option for participation without assuming agency and taking active
pursuit, a traditional approach (expecting a centrally presented story arc) will result
in disappointment. In spite of this, the company has gained a signiﬁcant following
and a reputation for creating extraordinary shows, and many fans travel the world
to go to their shows. Some ‘Superfans’ visit the same show in excess of 100 times,
and many visit dozens of times, documenting and cataloguing their experiences in
online fandom communities.
Like Sleep No More, which at the time of writing is still playing in New York,
The Drowned Man was 3 h long, with 12 h-long interwoven main story loops
comprising 12 scenes, enacted across 12 story zones, repeating three times with
slight variations. There were no intermissions or natural pauses, and audiences were
on foot for the duration of the show, often running through the space and up and
down stairs in pursuit of performers. The lighting was minimal, and the narratives
were fragmented, layered and looping rather than linear. The 12 main character
loops of The Drowned Man were sparingly scripted in regard of dialogue and relying
primarily on physical acting. Due to the number of possible permutations, it was not
possible to experience all of the story loops during one visit. Many ‘Superfans’
visited dozens of times and still could not individually exhaust the possibilities for
experience and narrative combinations.
The structure of the formula used in these productions suggests the relevance of
an analysis based on regarding them as not just theatre, but interactive systems.
Behind the scenes, Punchdrunk productions are run like clockwork, as the cast
and the Black Masks need to be in the right place at the right time, to enact
physically demanding story loops that overlap and cross throughout the sets, with
choreographic precision and quick connections while pursued by free-roaming

164
C. Westling
groups of audience members. The sheer scale and ambition of the productions,
as well as the volume of visitors (400/night for Sleep No More, 600/night for The
Drowned Man), require the system to be robust and consistently delivering a high
quality experience to the majority of the participating audiences, while accepting
that a relatively stable percentage of audience members will ﬁnd the experience
strongly aversive.
10.2
Embodied Making
Punchdrunk have developed a sophisticated embodied methodology for ‘thinking
with things’ and thinking with bodies. During the build, and even before the sets
have taken shape, performers and designers refer to the production as ‘the world’ –
held together by multimodal communication and infused with a shared aesthetic,
emanating from the meta-narrative of the company itself. Felix Barrett and Maxine
Doyle, joint creative directors of the company, work with a team of designers
and choreographers who interpret and distribute creative directions throughout the
larger team for implementation and further interpretation, with nested iterations
proliferating throughout the process:
The process necessitates for it to be constantly evolving and changing, which can be
hugely frustrating, so you could be going down one thread and then it would change, but
that allowance keeps it fresh and I think that’s why it has the result it does on people,
it’s never kind of, nothing remains stagnant, because if your performer’s got one, you
know he developed some new story, then the whole thing’s got room for manoeuvre, so
it’s : : : you : : : but that kind of working process, you’re going back and forth and you know,
it can take ten times as long (Com03).
Approximately 500 people were directly involved with the build and run of The
Drowned Man; the majority contributing with skilled interpretation of the narrative
in physical form through relayed communication, performing or making. This
methodology for making encourages and depends on distributed agency, generating
layered meaning through multi-step devising and a process intensity that embeds
metaphor within the set to a depth that cannot be fully known even by directors
of the company. The detail is realised to such a degree that it in some instances
may go unnoticed, but is nevertheless regarded as essential to the substance of the
experience:
And there’s always in the back of your minds that : : : you might be doing ten processes
that no one is ever going to notice, but if it catches one persons attention then it’s worth it,
you know? And there’s lot of stuff that we kind of design completely and it ends up being
in the dark: it’s something that you’re : : : that without it you can kind of see, you know
it’s just like : : : there’s something in the shadows, that you know is there, but that’s kind
of : : : [gesturing to indicate weight or heaviness] (Com03)
While the creative directors disseminate and inspire a shared aesthetic, the
company employs a design methodology that hides the full extent of details from full
view, thereby ensuring that the production is not fully known or controlled centrally

10
Immanent Story Worlds: The Making of Punchdrunk’s The Drowned Man...
165
or peripherally, only collectively, exemplifying distributed cognition. Even then, the
stories are not fully formed until they are realised by participating audiences, who
will combine and interpret story elements in ways that are unique to each participant,
and therefore unknowable to the company as well as other audience members.
Punchdrunk are regarded as pioneers of immersive theatre, but their work
is perhaps better termed immanent theatre: acentric principles pervade design
processes, set architecture and narrative structure, and makers and audiences are
positioned within the work and on the same level, disallowing the Cartesian
relationship between subject and event that traditional theatre design, as well as
much of interaction design, embodies. Devising is key to their design methodology,
and continues throughout the run of the production, with adjustments made to
both set and acting in response to how live audiences move and interact with the
set. Actors and designers working in direct physical contact with the work and its
performance are given signiﬁcant freedom to express and develop the interface at
close range. The emphasis on a close-range perspective during the making of and
participation in the work emerges as a key element of the company’s aesthetic and
design methodology, and opens their work up for critical understanding according to
the spatial theories of de Certeau and Deleuze, particularly in regard of how concepts
of space reﬂect organisational principles and orders.
The importance of a close-range relation with the interface, and the detailed
engagement with and articulation of the interface and interactions that results from
it, is conﬁrmed by it being mirrored on both sides of the interface, i.e. by both
designers and participating audience members:
And without feeling like “why am I here, and this feels like it’s trying far too hard to kind
of, live up to something that it doesn’t.” But when I got there it really did, I just loved
it; I just thought it was great : : : I just left : : : I was forced to leave all my cynicism at the
door. [ : : : ] The scale of how much detail and planning has gone into it was, I think, really
apparent (Aud02).
Several of the interviewed participants in this study remarked on how their
psychological immersion was a direct result of recognising how much work had
been invested in the interface, as made evident by its aesthetic characteristics.
Another participant commented in particular detail on the experience in terms that
suggest a state of immanence, where critical distance has collapsed into elated
psychological immersion:
I know it’s for entertainment, but it needed to exist. And it felt like this culmination of
like so many different talents, and they must’ve been inﬂuenced by so many other different
talents over the course of their careers, who were, you know again, going back. So it was
like, it felt like, my tiny little pinpoint experience of it, it felt like it was such, I don’t know,
I just felt at the same time so miniscule, my little eyes looking at this thing, but so inﬁnite
at the same time. And then kind of : : : quite thankful? But also, it was probably just kind
of like, joyful immersion, as well – like forced immersion. [ : : : ] if people can make you
fall off the cliff face of consciousness, then you drop into this pool of like, eternal oneness.
[ : : : ] (Aud05).
These remarks suggest that the process-intense design methodology of the
company, where embodied cognition in the form of iterative devising is central,

166
C. Westling
communicates across the interface layer and allows audiences to suspend disbelief
and assume an immanent subject position in relation to the work: the collective
imagining of the story world that guided its realisation throughout the design process
was given sufﬁciently articulated form to fully immerse the participant. This would
not have been possible without drawing on the interpretative templates, or narratives,
that audiences bring into the space. The reﬂexive process, where the subject creates
meaning from their experiences through narrative, and subsequently enact story
worlds against the background of this meaning, is exempliﬁed in the way story
worlds emerge, merge and extend through being called-upon and named by the
company; interpreted and embodied by designers and performers, and completed,
re-interpreted and enacted by audience members.
10.3
In the Beginning Was the Story
In order to be engaging, story worlds require an appropriate balance between rules
and possibilities. According to Caillois, all play falls somewhere on the ludus-
paidia axis; some forms are more rule-based and tend toward ludus, others are more
focused on unsettling the prevailing order, and are closer to paidia (Caillois 2001:
27). De Certeau’s theory of space and place offers a more articulated theory that
emphasises the importance of story to the making, maintenance and destabilisation
of thought-worlds and that which emanates from, and is materialised through,
thought-worlds. De Certeau (1988: 117) discusses place as a site or location that
is an expression of order, regulation and control, and contrasts it with space,
which is dynamically determined by actions; extending through exploration at close
range. According to de Certeau’s deﬁnition, place is deﬁned by constructions or
constructs (e.g. buildings, plans, hierarchies; imposing or implementing principles
and order), while space is dynamically actualised by the “operations [ : : : ] of
historical subjects” (Certeau 1988: 118).
De Certeau’s treatment of these concepts follows from the meaning of the French
lieu (place), and espace (space). Lieu is derived from the Latin locus; location in
relation to a deﬁnition or characterisation, a subdivision of ‘social space’, perceived
in relation to a speciﬁc purpose. It can refer to an occasion or a speciﬁc instance in
a context, as in an appropriate (or inappropriate) moment for a particular action or
statement, the situation of which is potentially both spatially and temporally bound.
Place/lieu describes locations within hierarchies, situations, constructs that stabilise
and establish positions and social order. The verb forms of ‘place’ and ‘space’ make
the differentiation clearer: ‘to place’ means to position, to set, while ‘to space’
implies an act of extension. The French noun espace (space) is derived from the
Latin spatium, and is close to the meaning of the English ‘extent’, as in ‘extension
of (time or space)’; a ﬁeld of directions and dynamic properties such as movement
and time. De Certeau speciﬁes that space occurs as a function of dynamic time and
location, and that space/espace only exists as it is performed, or practiced (Certeau
1988: 117).

10
Immanent Story Worlds: The Making of Punchdrunk’s The Drowned Man...
167
The enactment of space is thus an act of negotiation: iterative or adaptive
movement through a terrain that, in the course of progression, presents a succession
of conditions, circumstances, limitations and affordances.
De Certeaus deﬁnitions and differentiation of space and place form around
a discussion of narrative; storytelling as an act of practiced space; the creation,
unfolding and extension of a storytime and –place: “Its discourse is characterized
more by a way of exercising itself than by the thing it indicates.” (Certeau 1988:
79, original emphasis). Walking, which can be expanded to include other spatial
practices, is emphasised as a form of spatial discourse through which alternative
narratives can overwrite the order presented by the city. Narratives, which are
dependent on memory for their creation and interpretation, connect place and space,
and transform one into the other; they “organise the play of changing relationships
between places and spaces” (Certeau 1988: 118). In Punchdrunk’s work, narrative
is embodied in and produced by the set, performers and audience members through
a collaborative process or negotiation:
[ : : : ] you’re sort of in it together, and it’s a negotiation. I think a negotiation between
audience and : : : the space and the performers, and everything that’s going on. [ : : : ] and I
think that the space does that as much as the performers (Com04).
According to de Certeau, both the making and the telling of stories are spatial
practices; unfoldings or extensions of space that negotiate a terrain composed
of places. In the course of doing so, story-journeys can both deﬁne and undo
places. De Certeau’s theory of place and space, and its implications for the
founding, negotiation and unsettling of story worlds, thus underpins the way we
understand the world through discursive practices, which can be embodied as
well as told as stories of make-believe. In Punchdrunk’s work, this positions the
participant as an embodied story or nexus of storylines, in an unfolding process
of meaning-making that negotiates between disorientation and embedded story
elements through making physical and cognitive connections.
The concept of reality as discursively constructed and maintained supports early
play theory, which suggests that law, war and judiciary processes originated in play
behaviours, and that play underpins the formal patterns that are the foundations
of civilisation (Huizinga 1955: 76, 100–101). What, then, is not make-believe, if
that which we consider civilisation is founded on make-believe? The story of man
as distinct from his domains and transcending our animal origin may be told in
and through art, literature, science and technology, but it is no less a story. The
posthuman discourses of Hayles (1999, 2002) and Braidotti (2013) touch, via their
critique of man, on both Huizinga’s (1955) and Sutton-Smith’s (2001) work on play
theory, as they insist on the ambiguity of the boundaries between us and not-us.
[ : : : ] the human who inhabits the information-rich environments of contemporary tech-
nological societies knows that the dynamic and ﬂuctuating boundaries of her embodied
cognitions develop in relation to other cognizing agents embedded throughout the environ-
ment (Hayles 2002: 303)
The fundamental instability of identity, and its dependence of memory and
narratives that unfold in co-relation with the environment of the subject, is not

168
C. Westling
just revealed, but enacted in the acentric story worlds of Punchdrunk. Deeper
investigation of the interlocking narratives in The Drowned Man reveal the dou-
bling of the Wendy/William (for Woyzeck) Marshall/Mary (for Marie) character
pair in Woyzeck, with genders switched to deprioritise individuality in favour of
narrative. The main story is further supplemented with characters from The Day
of the Locust, elements of news stories of the era in which the play takes place,
and what the company calls ‘superstitions’, further undermining the concept of
inviolable identity, and highlighting the capacity of narratives to weave through
and in between stories, maintaining their coherence and meaning by travelling with
individual and collective memory, as stowaways or known passengers. Through the
embodied pursuit of meaning by walking, running, chasing, searching, examining
and connecting narrative motifs, audience participants become stories unfolding in
space.
The sublime fear of becoming-other (Braidotti 2013: 3) has enduring fascination
in the world of stories and make-believe, and transformations are a key motif
in our oldest stories from the Bible, through the Grimm fairy tales, to modern-
day cyborgian fantasies. Hayles, Braidotti and Clarke draw on this motif in
discussions of the posthuman not as a transhumanist machine fantasy that promises
to liberate the purely rational man from the imperfect ﬂesh, but as a fundamentally
relational subject who’s “cognition is a systemic activity distributed throughout
the environment and actuated by a variety of actors, only some of which are
human” (Hayles 2002: 303), and who is in a two-way relationship with their
environment. While focusing on our relationship to technology, and in particular our
interaction with information technology, the posthumanist discourse incorporates a
post-anthropocentric perspective that challenges the doxa that separates man from
animals and mind from body, suggesting that we de-polarise our constructs of
nature and culture and rethink our existential locale as a “nature-culture continuum”
(Braidotti 2013: 92) where technology is part of an environment we have always
existed within in a mutually shaping relationship. Clarke writes of stories of
metamorphosis that they “oscillate in the space between psychic constructions and
social discourses” – a space where social and psychic systems interpenetrate (Clarke
2008: 158). Metamorphosis, then, emerges as a narrative motif we use to regulate,
through story-play, transcendent longings and the fear of dissolution on this nature-
culture continuum that no longer allows us to regard our identity, as a species and
as individuals, as distinct from all else; exceptional and transcending the bounds of
the animal body.
If metamorphosis is the play child of make-believe and the sublime fear of dis-
solution, normative reality is conﬁgured to reinforce the exceptionalist supremacy
of man. Deleuze critiques the Cartesian perspective, and the Cogito on which it
is based, as fundamentally ﬂawed, as it relies on eight transcendental postulates
(Deleuze 2014: 217), two of which being the formation of problems in relation
to their solvability and the externalisation of fault. The dogmatic structure of
thought that underpins the Cartesian perspective is thus reliant on the exclusion of
uncertainty: an impossibility that reveals the make-believe origins of the Cartesian
subject position expressed in the Cogito.

10
Immanent Story Worlds: The Making of Punchdrunk’s The Drowned Man...
169
In place of the impossibility of a subject position outside the system in which
we exist, Deleuze and the posthumanist discourse proposes immanence, embedding
man within a culture-nature continuum, intrinsically complicit in the formation
of reality as it is created. Perhaps, then, what makes us Man is the making of
man, particularly our capacity for make-believe. In our world-building capacity, we
might therefore be called homo fabulans, rather than homo ludens. If one accepts
Deleuze’s argument that the Cartesian perspective is fundamentally ﬂawed and that
we are telling ourselves transcendent stories of gods, animals, and the god-like man
from within a plane of immanence, the telling of man, and the embodied story
worlds that emanate from the telling of man, collapse into one creative act and one
creative substance, extending across media and thought-worlds.
Metamorphosis invites art and science to negotiate the fear of becoming-other
and differentiate from doxa in order to realise dynamic possibilities. Clarke, in his
analysis of science ﬁction texts, and Hayles and Braidotti in their critique of the
modernist cyborgian fantasy, emphasise ambiguity in their posthuman discourses,
perhaps because ambiguity and uncertain deﬁnitions are so uncomfortable to so
many. Deleuze, in his analysis of Artaud’s work, states that difﬁculty is not
“a de facto state of affairs, but de jure structure of thought” (Deleuze 2014:
192–193), suggesting that discomfort is an essential part of differential thought
processes, abstract or embodied. The discomfort of ambiguity can be framed and
interpreted as pleasurable: audience members who were interviewed for this study
of Punchdrunk’s work, and the 80 % of highly positive lay reviews gathered from
a much larger compound sample of visitors to The Drowned Man and Sleep No
More on Tripadvisor, associate disorientation and challenge with positive arousal
and exploratory strategies as well as ambiguous psychological states (including
immersion and dreamlike states). The subset of Tripadvisor reviews that were
highly negative (15 %) used terms such as confusing, disorientating, alienating,
disorganised, uncomfortable and tiring to describe their experiences (Tripadvisor
2015a, b), suggesting a polarised response to ambiguity and uncertainty, based on
interpretative framing.
10.4
Complicity in Becoming-Other
The sublime in art, according to Lyotard, is a psychologically profound experience
associated with the secondary privation of a threat. Secondary in that the soul is
“deprived of the threat of being deprived of light, language, life” (Lyotard 1991: 99),
otherwise commonly described as the dissolution of being. The nested deprivation
described by Lyotard can be experienced in art, with the subject taking a position
in relation to the event that, in traditionally presented art, is outside the frame
of the depicted threat. In the work of Caspar David Friedrich, Turner and other
painters of the Romantic sublime, the primary threat (of dissolution of being, or
deprivation of “light, language, life”) is often represented as man before vast and
raging forms of nature; avalanches, storms at sea, or the plunging abyss of a gorge.

170
C. Westling
Nature, here, symbolises the unknowable beyond the meaning made by man, and the
deﬁnitions of being associated with that meaning. The posthumanist discourse seeks
to redeﬁne human-being through accentuating relationality, ambiguity and opening
towards becoming-other (Braidotti 2013: 3), which calls for a re-framing of the fear
of dissolution.
The sublime experience, where fear is rendered pleasurable, depends on threat
being twice removed: once through representation and the second time through
framing or containment. In traditional theatre, television, cinema and screen-
presented computer games, this framing is achieved in a similar fashion to painting,
by physical (visual) containment, where the subject-event relationship remains
mapped to the Cartesian concept where that which is observed can be regarded
within a three-dimensional grid (albeit ﬂattened within the frame): a transcendent
subject position. In Punchdrunk shows this is disallowed, as the subject position is
within the work, engulfed in a set designed to be disorientating which temporarily
deprives the participant of light (the sets are very dark) and language (audiences
are not permitted to speak within the performance space). The ﬁrst privation, the
sublimation of threat by representation, is already present: the experience is an
artistic representation of an acentric system, presented as puzzle with missing
pieces where the only meaning that can be extracted has to be produced through
completion and deduction by participants, whether ‘real’ or ‘imaginary’. The ﬁnal
threat deﬁned by Lyotard is deprivation of life. While the company boldly deprive
audiences of light and language, they are naturally not deprived of life, although
they are temporarily deprived of their quotidian identity. Audiences are required
to be masked during the performance, and are given a version of the Venetian
Bauta mask, adapted by the company so as to be more androgynous and resembling
the Grey Alien of science ﬁction lore, of undetermined gender and species. The
effects of wearing a mask for long durations are well documented, and include
the deprioritisation of the day-to-day identity of the wearer, as well as the licence
associated with anonymity; a function of the partial dissolution of the social contract
with which the quotidian identity is enmeshed.
The framing that the secondary privation of sublime experience calls for cannot
be achieved traditionally with a subject position within the work. Instead, the
containment of the experience that allows it to be rendered sublime has to be
provided by the participant, in the form of entering a play state. The physical
presentation of the work facilitates the establishment of a bounded zone for the
play state or, using Huizinga’s deﬁnition, a magic circle, as the experience is
limited in time (3 h) and space (the story world is contained within a building).
The assumption of a play frame of mind is an expression of agency in relation
to an experience, which may go some way towards explaining why Punchdrunk’s
theatre polarises their audiences so sharply. The agency required to enter a play state,
albeit encouraged and supported by the design of the experience, remains with the
participant, and voluntariness lies within the nature of play. The play state allows
the player to commit voluntarily to the situation while hiding their complicity to
themselves in order to support make-believe:

10
Immanent Story Worlds: The Making of Punchdrunk’s The Drowned Man...
171
It was very dreamlike : : : erm : : : it was dreamlike without being pretentious. Without kind
of trying to be dreamlike. I genuinely felt, with the mask on, completely passive. That was a
really new experience for me, feeling completely passive. Also, while walking around, and
you know, like, your body is really active but you’re not expected to intervene unless asked,
and.. and I remember at one point I tried to cross a room while the actors were dancing,
and : : : . You know, after being told “explore!” like this, I thought, “I will just cross the
room”, and I actually got stopped by one of the : : : kind of ‘bouncers’ : : : not bouncers
but the kind of people, and physically stopped. They were like “you can’t pass the room
right now”. Like there was all of these kind of, just kind of quite disconcerting experiences
(Aud02)
The ‘bouncers’ referred to here were the Black Masks, acting as mediators
between the interface (set and acting) and audience. Dressed and masked in black,
their attire is designed to allow them to move unseen in the shadows of the set,
only stepping forward to interact wordlessly with audience members in order to
prevent disruption of performances if needed, and in the event of health and safety
risks. While there were approximately 50 Black Masks working every night (stage
managers and front of house staff combined), for the most part they were invisible
and an audience member entering a room could have the sensation that they were
completely alone, inviting the surreptitious licence one might experience if left alone
in a department store or museum at night.
As the formation of meaning requires active participation in the composition of
narrative fragments into a whole (although that will not be identical to another par-
ticipant’s version), agency and the assumption of contributory authorship remains
central to ‘successful’ participation, meaning that it is entirely possible to fail
by remaining passive. This is not exclusive to Punchdrunk’s work; much of the
performance art and performance theatre that has emerged from the Social Turn in
live art relies on participatory practices that challenge, and even compromise the
audience. This type of practice reﬂects the “de-centered and heterogeneous net that
composes post-Fordist social co-operation” (Bishop 2012: 12), often with utopian
themes of collective desires replacing neoliberal individualism. Representations of
post-Fordist capitalism in the form of participatory systems in which it is possible
to fail may serve the sublime experience in contemporary art practice in the same
way that the abyss or void, by which the individual may be swallowed up, served
the sublime experience in eighteenth and nineteenth century Romantic art.
Masks, apart from supporting the primary deprivation of Lyotard’s formula for
the sublime in art through deprioritisation of quotidian identity and reinforcement
of the requested silence from audience participants, also contribute to secondary
privation through simultaneously being a play boundary and a frame, as the mask
has openings for the eyes. Some participants in this study reported that masks
added to their experience of dreamlike states and a sense of dissolution of personal
boundaries (Aud02, Aud03), but the recognition of how masks may contribute to
their experience of the sublime through secondary privation is more elusive, as
participants appear to become habituated to it. One participant articulated profound
experiences characterised by a combination of licence and awe, both in part
attributable to being masked, without recognising its inﬂuence, and only remarked
on masks in the context of the behaviour of others (Aud05).

172
C. Westling
10.5
Posthuman Design Principles
The sublime in Punchdrunk’s work, while supported by masking and the assumption
of a play state of mind, rests on the instability of identity that represents the
primary threat: dissolution of being. Anonymity and ambiguity are key devices
for destabilisation of the quotidian identity of the participant, and also support the
posthuman subject position. The incorporation or dissolution of individuals into
interactive digital systems can be represented by the way their behaviour is recorded
through data mining:
‘Data-mining’ includes proﬁling practices that identify different types of characteristics
and highlights them as special strategic targets for capital investment. This kind of
predictive analytics of the human amounts to ‘Life-mining’, with visibility, predictability
and exportability as the key criteria (Braidotti 2013: 62).
Braidotti’s critique of transcendence, as the principle underpinning the Cartesian
subject position, includes a critique of data mining that highlights three criteria that
signiﬁes the transcendence of the practice; visibility, predictability and exportability.
This analysis of Punchdrunk’s work as posthuman interactive systems takes the
opposites of these criteria into account as possible identiﬁers of immanence,
allowing the posthuman to be a subject that understands itself from a position of
embodied cognition in emergent relations to their environment (Hayles 2002: 303).
The capacity for becoming-other that is supported by the immanent subject position
serves the metamorphic narrative motif in embodied form, and contributes to the
psychological immersion, dreamlike states and sublime experiences reported by
participating audience members.
Wordless interaction by and with masked participants yields no information
beyond that which is contained within the performance situation at the point of
both entry and exit, and anonymity ensures that predictive modelling can only
occur decoupled from user-speciﬁc information. Audience modelling is primarily
based on observation of non-verbal behaviour, analysed in general terms without
demographic proﬁling (Com01). In place of recording information about speciﬁc
audience members or demographic proﬁles, in-system behaviours and micro-
interactions are given keen attention. When moderation of behaviour is called
for, it is based on observations of in-system behaviours, triggering in-system
responses (normally by the Black Masks). Overly predictive instructions are avoided
(Com04), and regulation of behaviours is designed as situation-speciﬁc responses,
implemented by actors and Black Masks on the interface level (Com01, Com03).
‘Records’ of in-system audience behaviours are only preserved as iterations of the
choreography and designed interactions.
Anonymity also supports ambiguity, which has further potential as a principle for
consideration when designing systems and can be opened up through the concept
of form as a two-sided construct; a proposed differentiation between an outside
and an inside (Clarke 2008: 87–88). This redeﬁnes form as a conceptual boundary,
drawing upon the cognitive narrative of the form-maker. Form has no meaning

10
Immanent Story Worlds: The Making of Punchdrunk’s The Drowned Man...
173
in a conceptual vacuum; it, like stories, draws on memory for meaning, and thus
emanates from within the world order of its maker: imposed, through making,
on the material at hand and in response to the imposition of the material on the
hand. Form-as-boundary is a negotiation between maker and material, an emergent
spatial practice. Personiﬁed form, according to Clarke, is a unity “created by holding
the inside and the outside of distinctions together”, allowing for metamorphosis
(Clarke 2008: 88). The requirement for audiences to be masked at all times during
Punchdrunk shows positions participants as personiﬁed form, an ambiguous state
described by several interviewees as ‘dreamlike’ (Aud01, Aud02, Aud03, Aud04,
Aud06). The two-sidedness of form is brought into acute focus during one-to-ones,
when audience participants are invited into enclosed spaces by a performer, who
proceeds to unmask them. The sudden exposure in close proximity to the performer
is often experienced as unsettling, even unnerving, as the boundary between what
has become the outside and the inside collapses, leaving only the instability of the
situation: “I was like “no no no no no, I want it back, I want it back, I want it back;
I feel safe with my mask on” (Com02).
Ambiguity also challenges ideological constructs that are embedded within sys-
tems through practices of classiﬁcation. Categorisation of participants in interactive
digital systems is an extension of the broader phenomenon of classiﬁcation for
use within administrative systems that inform “social and moral order” (Bowker
and Star 2000: 5). Classiﬁcation also underpins the discursive construction and
maintenance of concepts of gender, race and species:
In a brilliant mock taxonomy, Louis Borges classiﬁed animals into three groups: those we
watch television with, those we eat, and those we are scared of. These exceptionally high
levels of lived familiarity conﬁne the human-animal interaction within classical parameters,
namely, an oedipalized relationship (you and me on the same sofa); an instrumental (thou
shall be consumed eventually) and a fantasmic one (exotic, extinct infotainment objects of
titillation) (Braidotti 2013: 68).
Categorisation invites transcendent power relationships, with the ‘observer’
being the point of issue of the categories applied to that or those who are surveilled
and categorised. This transcendent relation also allows the ‘observer/categoriser’ to
remain uncategorised and unmarked, while deﬁning the norm through occupying the
only position that escapes scrutiny. As the Cartesian subject, transcending the animal
state, is the liberal humanist deﬁnition of man, it follows that those observed may
be positioned somewhere between not-quite-man and animal, according to Borges’
classes of animals, i.e. those we watch television with, those we eat, and those we
are scared of:
[ : : : ] Deleuze insists that a ‘minority’ is not a question of numbers, but of the subordination
of difference to a transcendent measure. Under majority rule, groups such as ‘women,
children, the South, the third world’ (but also nonhuman animals) are, despite their numbers,
constituted as subordinate minorities in relation to a standard measure: the supposedly
universal model of Man (Cull 2012: 20, original emphasis)
Cull focuses on what Deleuze calls minor theatre; forms of non-traditional theatre
that diverge from conventional narrative structure and representational techniques

174
C. Westling
(Cull 2012: 20). The use of the term ‘minor’ indicates, as in the case of Deleuze’s
deﬁnition of a minority, its relation to a transcendent measure, rather than an implicit
value.
[Deleuze] suggests that the revolutionary nature of a minor usage of theatre lies in its
afﬁrmation of the primacy of cross-categorical mutations, its emphasis on the tendency
of life perpetually to differ from itself, alongside its tendency to congeal into recognizable
or categorizable identities. (Cull 2012: 21)
In Punchdrunk’s theatre, anonymity and ambiguity combine to produce alterna-
tive conditions for interaction and social organisation within a system. Classiﬁca-
tions that are used within Punchdrunk systems are formed based on the particulars
of interactive processes, reﬂecting immanence. The resulting conditions facilitate
cross-categorical mutation, where the two sides of ambiguity, embodied in the
interface layer, facilitate metamorphosis as dynamic instability.
A third condition in addition to anonymity and ambiguity is the information-
rich (or high resolution) environment (Hayles 2002: 303). Audience participants
report that their psychological immersion, or their decision to suspend disbelief,
was supported and even made possible by the deeply layered and complex interface
detail (Aud02, Aud03, Aud05). Process intensity in making is not tied to aesthetics
similar to those in Punchdrunk productions, where every object is as ‘real’ as
possible with a patinated and deeply detailed surface appeal; applied to digital
materialities, process intensity might take a number of different expressions,
including reﬁned minimalism. Resolution can be regarded as a measure of the
outcome of a more or less intense process, with more or fewer iterative steps,
reﬂecting cognition in making. An artist working in oil would regard their process as
extending over a lifetime of development, in addition to it being reiﬁed in individual
paintings. Design is often more focused on products as objects in their own right,
but good design is also the result of process intensity, usually involving many
iterations, regardless of which particular aesthetic appeal the ﬁnished product bears.
A minimalistic aesthetic can bear the marks of reﬁnement, demanding a multi-step
process of simpliﬁcation rather than addition, and resulting in a product where
lack of excessive detail reveals well-considered priorities with enhanced clarity.
The meaning of the term resolution, in the context of the challenge or problematic
presented by a particular design project or artistic exploration, can draw on its
alternative meaning as an outcome of problem solving to clarify the importance
of process intensity. Ideally, process intensity results in an outcome that is coherent
and balanced in respect of aesthetic, semiotics, materials, technique, presentation,
dynamic tension and audience appeal.
10.6
Implications for Digital Interactive Systems
Conclusions from this study include observations regarding the inﬂuence of imma-
nent vs. transcendent subject-event relationships on the quality of experience in
interactive systems. To facilitate psychological immersion in digital interactive

10
Immanent Story Worlds: The Making of Punchdrunk’s The Drowned Man...
175
systems designed according to posthumanist principles, this study identiﬁes three
signatures of immanence in particular for consideration when designing interactive
storyworlds:
1. Process intensity, applied to the creation of semiotically rich interfaces with
deeply encoded layers of meaning that encourage close-range engagement with
the detail of interface and interactions.
2. Ambiguity, allowing participants a more ﬂuid in-system identity, and care-
ful consideration of how in-system actions are categorised to avoid over-
instrumentalisation when not strictly necessary for the purpose of the interaction.
3. Anonymity, in order to preserve an immanent subject position, as longitudinal
recording of in-system behaviours positions the in-system subject as event-
object, with a transcendent observing subject that is external to the interaction.
Taken together, these indicate the direction for a paradigm shift in interactive
system design, away from personalisation based on longitudinal tracking of par-
ticipants and towards moment-by-moment responsiveness to the precise quality
and detail of interactions. This could, for example, take the form of formulae that
identify antisocial in-system behaviour and trigger previously scripted responses,
an emerging concept in HCI (Cheng et al. 2015) and the design of online art
interventions (Zero Trollerance 2015).
The identiﬁed principles can be employed as a framework for interpretation of
the results of an R&D project undertaken by Punchdrunk in collaboration with MIT
(Digital R&D Fund For the Arts 2012), and provides a hypothetical explanation for
the reported lack of immersion experienced by many participants who participated
in the project. The aim was to extend the experiential space of Sleep No More
through the use of biometric sensors for real-time data gathering and mediated
communication between the in-system participant and the external confederates, via
portals embedded within the set. The external confederates also had access to the
biometric data via screen presentation. The stated goal for participants was that they
should be able to enter a playful mood, where they were “not directed by external
goals”, suggesting psychological immersion:
This project intended to test whether an online interactive experience could be created that
in some way matches the quality of the physical and visceral, live experience that is at the
heart of immersive work. The experiment would attempt to join two audience members
together to experience a coherent, shared storyline. One, physically present in the space of
Sleep No More, one online, remotely on a laptop or other computer (Digital R&D Fund For
the Arts 2012).
The external confederates, although they could interact with the in-system
participant as if they were a game character, however generally failed to experience
psychological immersion, with the exception of some external confederates who
reported a stronger connection with the experience when working alone and at
night in a one-to-one interaction with a performer. While the formal report on the
MIT R&D project puts forth the conclusion that psychological immersion relies on
induction into a liminal state through ritualistic story devices (including the masking
and the imposed silence), the research discussed in this chapter proposes that

176
C. Westling
ritualistic features are not necessarily sufﬁcient on their own. For the profound sense
of psychological immersion reported by a majority of live Punchdrunk audiences,
experiential conditions created according to the signatures of immanence introduced
above need to be in place.
As to the interface effect, the report suggests that digital screen presentation is not
conducive to intrinsic motivation for behaviours, a conclusion that can be contested
by the existence of autotelic digitally mediated, screen-presented experiences. The
authors of the report furthermore conclude that there is a limit to scalability, due
to the apparent need for this connection to be experienced as personal, with one
in-system participant connected to one external confederate. They state that AI
components in the system do not work in favour of immersion, and that a human
co-participant is needed (Digital R&D Fund For the Arts 2012). This conclusion
could be based on an incomplete analysis of the Punchdrunk format that does not
take into account all relevant factors. While the importance of process intensity
identiﬁed in this study supports part of the argument that scalability is limited, some
aspects of interactive systems could be designed using carefully scripted AI agents.
For example, the Black Masks are identiﬁed in audience interviews as key to the
elicitation of dreamlike states of mind due to the effect of their interference with
participant agency. In digital interactive systems, AI agents could serve the role of
scripted moderators according to a template based on the function and design of
the Black Mask interventions, translated and designed so as to be relevant to the
particular material circumstances.
An analysis of the subject-event relationship, key in postmodern discourses,
could reposition the observations made in the ofﬁcial report on the MIT project
and suggest fertile directions for augmented reality and interaction design research.
Several factors identiﬁed in the report are pertinent to the recognition of the
transcendence-immanence dichotomy as crucial to psychological immersion, e.g.
extrinsic vs. intrinsic motivation, AI vs. human participants, and the matter of
scalability. The question of extrinsic motivation is key to a critique of the tran-
scendent or metaphysical subject position in relation to the event, as it leaves
the structure of the experience exposed to extrinsic motives. Furthermore, the
argument that AI participants cannot be as effective as a human counterpart in
a digital interactive system is incomplete without a detailed analysis of how the
AI is scripted. The argument against scalability goes straight to the core of the
issue of transcendence vs. immanence, and is complex. Scalability is an inherent
feature of the transcendent subject-event relationship, and is generally encouraged
in digital design to optimise the return on process intensity. When over-optimised
or expressed as over-instrumentalisation, scalability impacts negatively on user
experience; an observation that is often acknowledged in commercial interaction
design. Several audience participants that were interviewed during the ethnographic
research in this study associated the intensity of detail and deeply encoded layers
of meaning designed into the interface with their psychological immersion and the
collapse of critical distance in relation to their experiences (Aud02, Aud05, Aud06),
supporting the hypothesis that the process intensity applied to the design and
build of the production supports suspense of disbelief. But while constructed with

10
Immanent Story Worlds: The Making of Punchdrunk’s The Drowned Man...
177
extreme attention to detail, both Sleep No More and The Drowned Man are scaled
experiences, built for large numbers of audience participants and long production
runs. The shows are also constructed, built and run according to replicable design
formulae that the company developed during previous productions, so scalability
expressed as repetition is demonstrably not counterproductive to the artistic aims
of the company, which speciﬁcally include inducing psychological immersion in
participants. Replicable formulae that are designed with sufﬁcient process intensity
to yield a reﬁned, information-rich, and high-resolution experience do not appear
to counter the suspense of disbelief, suggesting that scalability, as a concept used
in the commercial design environment, need to be further articulated to avoid the
conﬂation of overly reductive design and replicability. Scalability in itself is not
necessarily counterproductive to good or even excellent user experience, but we
need an incisive critique of exactly what – or whom – is scaled, and in what manner,
if we are to imagine and build story worlds that are posthuman, rather than inhuman.
The analysis of the MIT R&D project against the proposed design principles
above suggests that it was not the digital mediation or screenic presentation per
se that countered psychological immersion, but the conversion of an experience
characterised by immanence into one that allowed the incursion of transcendence.
In order to produce interactive storyworlds that are structurally supportive of deep
psychological immersion and the suspension of disbelief, this research therefore
proposes immanence as a condition, maintained through a design paradigm that
includes anonymity, ambiguity and process intensity.
References
Bishop C (2012) Artiﬁcial hells, 1st edn. Verso Books, London
Bowker GC, Star SL (2000) Sorting things out: classiﬁcation and its consequences. MIT,
Cambridge, MA
Braidotti R (2013) The posthuman. Polity, London
Caillois R (2001) Man, play, and games, 1st edn. Free Press of Glencoe, New York
Cheng J, Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil C, Leskovec J (2015) Antisocial behavior in online discussion
communities. arXiv: 1504.00680 [cs.SI]. Cornell University Library. [online] Available at:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1504.00680. Accessed 13 Jul 2015
Clarke B (2008) Posthuman metamorphosis: narrative and systems. Fordham University Press,
New York
Coyne R (1995) Designing information technology in the postmodern age. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA
Cull L (2012) Theatres of immanence. Palgrave Macmillan, Houndmills
de Certeau M (1988). The practice of everyday life. University of California Press, Berkeley
Deleuze G (2014) Difference and repetition. Bloomsbury, London
Digital R&D Fund For the Arts (2012) Between worlds: report for NESTA on MIT/Punchdrunk
theatre sleep no more digital R&D project. University of Dundee, University of West England
Galloway A (2004) Protocol: how control exists after decentralization. MIT, Cambridge, MA
Hayles K (1999) How we became posthuman. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Hayles K (2002) Flesh and metal: reconﬁguring the mindbody in virtual environments. Conﬁgura-
tions 2(2):297–320

178
C. Westling
Huizinga J (1955) Homo Ludens. Beacon, Boston
Lyotard J-F (1984). The postmodern condition: a reﬂection on knowledge. Manchester University
Press, Manchester
Lyotard J-F (1991) The inhuman: reﬂections on time. Polity, Cambridge
Sutton-Smith B (2001) The ambiguity of play. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA
Tripadvisor (2015a) Sleep No More. [Online] Available at: http://www.tripadvisor.co.uk/
Attraction_Review-g60763-d2631104-Reviews-Sleep_No_More-New_York_City_New_
York.html. Accessed 4 Apr 2015
Tripadvisor (2015b). The Drowned Man: A Hollywood Fable. [Online] Available at: http://www.
tripadvisor.co.uk/Attraction_Review-g186338-d4579588-Reviews-The_Drowned_Man_A_
Hollywood_Fable-London_England.html#REVIEWS. Accessed 4 Apr 2015
Zero Trollerance (2015). Self-help for sexists in six simple steps. [Online] Available at: http://
zerotrollerance.guru/. Accessed 13 July 2015

