O ’ R E I L L Y  D I G I T A L  S T U D I O  
Derrick Story
Pocket Guide
Digital
Photography

Digital Photography
P O C K E T  G U I D E

Digital Photography
P O C K E T  G U I D E
Derrick Story
Beijing • Cambridge • Farnham • Köln • Paris • Sebastopol • Taipei • Tokyo

55
Chapter 3C H A P T E R  3
How Do I…
Tips and Tricks for
Shooting and Sharing
By now you and your digital camera have become fast friends
and are working together to make great images. But like the
art of cooking, and life, there’s always more to learn.
This chapter is more conversational than the previous two. The
earlier sections of the book were designed for quick reference—
to use while standing on the battlefield of photography and
trying to survive. (“Quick, should I turn the flash on or off for
my daughter’s outdoor birthday party?” Answer: Flash on.)
But now the discussion becomes more free-flowing—like a con-
versation between two photographers trying to decide the best
approach for a given situation. The topics in this chapter focus
on both shooting and sharing pictures—what good is a great
shot if you can’t get it in front of others?
So, grab a fresh memory card, a charged set of batteries, and
prepare for the next stage of your journey.
Shooting Tips and Tricks—
How Do I…
How do I…? That’s the question in photography, isn’t it? Most
of the time you know what you want to do: capture that sun-
set, take a pretty portrait, preserve the memory of that monu-
ment. The trick is to make the camera see it the way you do.
That’s what you’re going to learn here: the “how to” of pho-
tography. Not every situation is covered in this chapter, but if

56
|
How Do I…
you master these techniques, there won’t be too many pic-
tures that get by your camera.
And when your friends mutter out loud something like, “How
do I shoot that object inside the glass case?” You can reply,
“Oh, that’s easy. Just put the edge of the lens barrel against
the glass to minimize reflections, then turn off the flash.”
Take Great Outdoor Portraits
When most folks think of portrait photography, they envision
studio lighting, canvas backdrops, and a camera perched
upon a tripod. But many photographers don’t have access to
lavish professional studios, and honestly, it’s not necessary for
dynamite portraits.
P R O  T I P
Figure 3-1 illustrates that you don’t need an expensive photo
studio to take pleasing outdoor portraits. After a little experi-
mentation, a high camera angle was used to minimize dis-
tracting background elements. The model was positioned so
the sun was on her back to create a rim lighting effect on the
hair and shoulders. Then fill flash was added for even expo-
sure on the face.
All you really need is a willing subject, a decent outdoor set-
ting (preferably with trees), and your digital camera. Then you
can be on your way to creating outstanding images.
First, start with the two magic rules for great outdoor por-
traits are:
Get close. The tighter you frame the shot, the more impact it
will have. Extend your zoom lens and move your feet to
create more powerful images. Once you’ve moved in close,
and have shot a series of images, get closer and shoot
again.
Use fill flash. Turning on the flash outdoors is a trick that
wedding photographers have been using for years. If you
really want to impress your subjects, position them in the

Shooting Tips and Tricks—How Do I…
|
57
open shade (such as under a tree) with a nice background
in the distance. Then turn on the fill flash and make sure
you’re standing within 10 feet (so the flash can reach the
subject). Your shots will be beautiful.
Once you’ve found a setting that you like and have everything
in order, then “work the scene.” Start by taking a few straight-
forward images. Pay close attention while you have the model
Figure 3-1
Outdoor portrait with fill flash and rim lighting (f-4 at 1/60th of a second)

58
|
How Do I…
turn a little to the left, then to the right. When you see a posi-
tion you like, shoot a few frames.
(Don’t get too carried away with this “working the angles”
thing, or people will hate you. You’re not a swimsuit photogra-
pher on a Sports Illustrated location shoot. But the point is,
don’t be afraid to experiment with different camera positions.
Just do it quickly.)
Then move in closer and work a few more angles. Raise the
camera and have the model look upward; lower the camera
and have the subject look away. Be sure to take lots of shots
while experimenting with angles, because once you’re finished
shooting and review the images later on your computer screen,
you’ll discard many of the pictures that looked great on the
camera’s LCD monitor. The problem is that when they’re
enlarged, you’ll see bothersome imperfections you didn’t
notice before.
P R O  T I P
What if you need to take a portrait in a chaotic situation,
such as this shot of an Olympic Torch carrier on a busy street
(Figure 3-2)? One solution is to lower the camera angle and
use the blue sky as the backdrop. Don’t forget to turn on the
fill flash!
Communicate with your subjects and try to put them at ease.
Nobody likes the silent treatment from the photographer. It
makes them feel like you’re unhappy with how the shoot is
going.
Here are a few other things to avoid when shooting outdoor
portraits.
Avoid side lighting on women’s faces.
Light coming in from the
side accentuates texture. That’s the last thing most female
models want to see in their shots because texture equates
to skin aging or imperfections. Use a fill flash to minimize
texture and avoid side lighting unless for special effect.

Shooting Tips and Tricks—How Do I…
|
59
Don’t show frustration.
Never, ever, never make subjects feel
it’s their fault that the shoot isn’t going well. They’re
already putting their self-confidence on the line by letting
you take their picture. Don’t make them regret that
Figure 3-2
Low camera angle using the blue sky as a backdrop
(f-5.6 at 1/250th of a second; fill flash)

60
|
How Do I…
decision. When shots go well, credit goes to the models.
When shots go bad, it’s the photographer’s fault. Keep
your ego in check so theirs can stay intact.
Avoid skimping on time or the number of frames you shoot.
Your images may look good on that little 2" LCD monitor,
but when you blow them up on the computer screen,
you’re going to see lots of things you don’t like. Take many
shots of each pose, and if you’re lucky, you’ll end up with
a few you really like.
Don’t torture models by making them look into the sun. Yes, you
were told for years to shoot with the sun to your back.
That rule was devised by the photographer, not the model.
Blasting your subjects’ retinas with direct sun is only going
to make them squint and sweat (and swear). Be kind to
your models and they’ll reward you with great shots.
Avoid busy backgrounds.
Bright colors, linear patterns, and
chaotic landscape elements will detract from your compo-
sitions. Look for continuous tones without the hum of dis-
tracting elements.
Now that the basics are covered, here are a couple of super
pro tips. These aren’t techniques that you should use until you
have good, solid shots recorded on your memory card. But
once you do, maybe try these.
Soft background portraits.
These are simply lovely. A soft,
slightly out of focus background keeps the viewer’s eye on
the model and gives your shots a real professional look.
The
mechanics
of
this
technique
are
described
in
Chapter 2 under “Aperture Priority Mode.”
Rim lighting for portraits.
When you place the sun behind the
model, often you get highlights along the hair. Certain hair-
styles really accentuate this effect. Remember to use fill flash
for this setup or your model’s face will be underexposed.

Shooting Tips and Tricks—How Do I…
|
61
Set Up Group Shots
Many of the rules for engaging portraits apply to group shots
too. So keep in mind everything that you’ve learned so far
while preparing for this assignment.
P R O  T I P
Figure 3-3 uses the classic “triangle” composition for a three-
person group shot. Notice that distracting background ele-
ments are kept to a minimum. The subjects are positioned in
the shade to eliminate harsh shadows on the face and
squinty eyes. A fill flash is used for even front illumination.
The first challenge is to arrange the group into a decent com-
position. If you’ve ever participated in a wedding, you know
this drill.
Figure 3-3
Outdoor group shot beneath a shady tree with fill flash
(f-5.6 at 1/80th of a second)

62
|
How Do I…
Remind everyone in the shot that they need to have a clear
view of the camera. If they can’t see the camera, then the cam-
era won’t be able to see them. Next, position people as close
as possible. Group shot participants tend to stand too far
apart. That might look OK in real life, but the camera accentu-
ates the distance between people and the result looks awk-
ward. Plus, you can’t afford to have this shot span as wide as a
football field, or you’ll never see people’s faces unless you
enlarge the image to poster size.
Remember to take lots of shots—for large groups, a minimum
of five frames. This gives you a chance to overcome blinking
eyes, sudden head turns, bad smiles, and unexpected gusts of
wind ruining your pictures.
Before pressing the shutter button, quickly scan the group
looking for little annoyances that will drive you crazy later:
crooked ties, sloppy hair, and turned-up collars will make you
insane during post production.
Finally, work quickly. You’re not John Ford making the great
American epic, so don’t act like it. Keep things moving for the
sake of your subjects (and for your own tired feet).
Capture Existing-Light Portraits
By now you’ve probably realized one of the great ironies in
good portrait photography: you should turn the flash on when
working outdoors. So guess what the great secret is for indoor
portraiture? That’s right; turn the flash off. Some of the most
artistic portraits use nothing more than an open window and
a simple reflector.
The problem with using your on-camera flash indoors is that
the light is harsh and creates a very contrasty image. “Harsh”
and “contrasty” are not two words models like to hear when
describing the pictures you’ve just taken of them.
Fill flash works outdoors because everything is bright. The
flash “fills” right in. But ambient light is much dimmer

Shooting Tips and Tricks—How Do I…
|
63
indoors, and the burst of light from the flash is much like a car
approaching on a dark street.
P R O  T I P
Using on-camera flash indoors for portraits (Figure 3-4) cre-
ates harsh highlights and ugly shadows on the backdrop. It’s
nice to have the built-in flash in a pinch, but you don’t want
to make a habit of using it for indoor portraits.
Of course there are times when you have no choice but to use
your camera’s flash indoors. It’s very convenient, and you do
get a recognizable picture. But when you have the luxury of set-
ting up an artistic portrait in a window-lit room, try existing
light only.
P R O  T I P
Using the light from an open window creates a more flatter-
ing portrait (Figure 3-5). The camera is on a tripod for steadi-
ness during the long exposure, and reflectors are positioned
on both sides of the model to minimize deep shadows.
First, position the model near an open window and study the
scene. You can’t depend solely on your visual perception,
because your eyes and brain are going to read the lighting a lit-
tle differently than the camera will, especially in the shadow
areas—you will see detail in the dark areas that the camera
can’t record.
This is why you need a reflector to “bounce” some light into
the shadow areas. Many photographers swear by collapsible
light discs, but a large piece of white cardboard or foam core
will work just as well.
Place your reflector opposite the window and use it to
“bounce” the light on to the dark side of the model. This will
help “fill in” the shadow area so you can see some detail.

64
|
How Do I…
Figure 3-4
On-camera flash produces harsh results for indoor portraits and should be
avoided as much as possible ( f-2.5 @ 1/60th of a second)

Shooting Tips and Tricks—How Do I…
|
65
Figure 3-5
Existing light portrait shot in the same setting as Figure 3-4, but with the flash
turned off (f-2.5 @ 1/4th of a second, ISO speed set at 50)

66
|
How Do I…
P R O  T I P
Figure 3-6 shows the existing light setup for Figure 3-5. The
model is facing the window with reflectors positioned on
both sides of her. The blank wall serves as the backdrop, and
the camera is secured on a tripod.
Now put your camera on a tripod and slowly squeeze the shut-
ter button. Review the image on the LCD monitor. If the
shadow area is too dark, you may want to add another reflec-
tor. If the overall image is too dark, turn on exposure compen-
sation, set it to +1, and try another picture. If the color
balance of the image is too “cool” (that is, bluish), then you
may want to set the White Balance control to “cloudy” and
see if that improves the rendering.
Figure 3-6
The existing light setup used for Figure 3-5
(f-2.5 @ 1/4th of a second, ISO speed set at 50)

Shooting Tips and Tricks—How Do I…
|
67
Remind your model to sit very still during exposure because
you may be using a shutter speed that’s as slow as 1/15th of a
second, or even longer.
You could increase the camera’s light-sensitivity by adjusting
the ISO speed to 200, but don’t go beyond that because you’ll
degrade the image quality too much for this type of shot.
Once you’ve played with these variables, go back to the artis-
tic side of your brain and work on the composition. Try to get
all the elements in the picture working together and let
nature’s sweet light take it from there. When it all comes
together, existing light portraits are magical.
Shoot Good Self-Portraits
Some people may think that turning the camera toward your-
self is the height of narcissism, but sometimes you need a shot,
and no one is around to take it for you. These are the times
when it’s good to know how to shoot a self-portrait.
Start with the basics by making sure your hair is combed, col-
lar is down, shirt is clean, and your teeth are free from spinach
(and lipstick!). Then find a location with a pleasing, unclut-
tered background. Put the camera on a tripod and set the
focus as close to the area where you’ll be standing or sitting
and activate the self timer. If the room is too dim for an exist-
ing light portrait, try using “slow-synchro” flash (see “Flash
Modes” in Chapter 2 for more information). This type of flash
provides enough illumination for a good portrait, but slows
the shutter enough to record the ambient light in the room.
Position yourself where you had focused the camera and look
directly into the lens. Don’t forget to smile.

68
|
How Do I…
P R O  T I P
When setting up a self-portrait, pay attention to background
elements so they don’t distract too much from the main sub-
ject: you! If you have to use flash, try slow-synchro mode to
preserve the room ambience (see Figure 3-7).
Take several shots, trying different poses until you hit on a few
you like. If you have a remote release for your camera, you can
save yourself lots of running back and forth from the tripod to
the modeling position.
Creative portraits are sometimes more fun when you’re both
photographer and model. In Figure 3-8, the rearview mirror of
a car is used to frame this self-portrait.
Figure 3-7
Self-portrait indoors using the flash set in slow-synchro mode (f-2.5 @ 1/30th
of a second)

Shooting Tips and Tricks—How Do I…
|
69
Self-portraits are also perfect for experimenting with different
“looks” that might make you feel more self conscious when
someone else is behind the camera. You can try different
expressions and poses, and erase the bad ones. The world will
never know the difference.
Take Interesting Kid Shots
Children are a challenge for digital cameras, primarily because
of shutter lag. In short, kids move faster than digicams can
react. But with a few adjustments, you can capture excellent
images that you’ll cherish for years.
One of the most important adjustments, regardless of the type
of camera you’re using, is to get down to kid level when shoot-
ing. This is “hands and knees” photography at its best. And if
you need to, get on your belly for just the right angle. By doing
so, your shots will instantly become more engaging.
Figure 3-8
Self-portrait using the rear view mirror of a car
(f-2.8 @ 1/20th of a second, no flash)

70
|
How Do I…
Next, get close. Then get closer. This may seem impossible at
times with subjects who move so fast, but if you want great
shots, then you’ve got to keep your subjects within range.
P R O  T I P
Kids are a challenge for digital cameras, but if you use focus
lock, fill flash, and work at their level, you can capture pleas-
ing shots (Figure 3-9) throughout their years.
Now turn on the flash, regardless of whether you’re indoors or
out. Not only will this provide even illumination, but flash
helps “freeze” action, and you’ll need all the help you can get
in this category.
Finally, use the “focus lock” technique described in the practi-
cal example “Capturing the Decisive Moment” in Chapter 2.
By doing so, you can reduce shutter lag and increase your per-
centage of good shots.
Figure 3-9
Go where the kids are to get good shots
(f-4 @ 1/250th of a second, fill flash and focus lock)

Shooting Tips and Tricks—How Do I…
|
71
Some of the most rewarding pictures you’ll ever record will be
of children. Like the child-rearing process itself, kid photogra-
phy requires patience. But the results far surpass the effort.
Capture Engaging Travel Portraits
Make sure you pack a spare memory card and extra batteries
when you hit the road with your digital camera, because these
compact picture-takers are perfect travel companions.
The best portraits on the road usually consist of two shots.
The first frame, often called the establishing shot, is of the point
of interest itself, such as an old church. Then the second image
is a nicely framed portrait with an element of the structure
included in the picture.
Why two shots? For the same reason that movie makers use
this technique. If you were to include the entire structure and
the model in the establishing shot, the model would be unrec-
ognizable. That’s the problem with so many vacation shots—
they’re taken at too great a distance.
P R O  T I P
You can’t capture the grandeur of great buildings and monu-
ments, and take a portrait, in the same shot. Can you find
the model in Figure 3-10? Look in the oval.
On the other hand, if you shoot all of your travel portraits
tightly framed only, your viewers won’t know the difference
between Denmark and Detroit. By using the two-shot method
you establish the scene and capture an engaging portrait.
Figure 3-11 illustrates the two-shot method.
One last note: don’t forget to take pictures of signs and plac-
ards. It’s a lot easier than taking notes, and the information
comes in very handy when recounting your travel experiences.

72
|
How Do I…
Figure 3-10
The model is dwarfed within this travel shot of a beautiful mission
(f-4.7 @ 1/600th of a second)

Shooting Tips and Tricks—How Do I…
|
73
Figure 3-11
Once you’ve captured the establishing shot, you can move in close for the
portrait—even if it’s of an architectural element

