
Digital Fonts
and Reading

Series on Computer Processing of Languages
Editors
Ching Y. Suen
Concordia University, Canada
parmidir@enes.concordia.ca
Lu Qin
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
csluqin@comp.polyu.edu.hk
Published
Vol. 1 	 Digital Fonts and Reading
	
edited by Mary C. Dyson and Ching Y. Suen
Forthcoming
Vol. 2	 Advances in Chinese Document and Text Processing
	
edited by Cheng-Lin Lu and Yue Lu

World Scientiﬁc

Published by
World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd.
5 Toh Tuck Link, Singapore 596224
USA office:  27 Warren Street, Suite 401-402, Hackensack, NJ 07601
UK office:  57 Shelton Street, Covent Garden, London WC2H 9HE
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Series on Computer Processing of Languages — Vol. 1
DIGITAL  FONTS  AND  READING
Copyright © 2016 by World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd. 
All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof, may not be reproduced in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or any information storage and retrieval 
system now known or to be invented, without written permission from the publisher.
For photocopying of material in this volume, please pay a copying fee through the Copyright Clearance 
Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA. In this case permission to photocopy 
is not required from the publisher.
ISBN	 978-981-4759-53-3	
Printed in Singapore

v
Introduction to the series
Language Processing, Pattern Recognition, and Intelligent Systems
This book is part of a series on Language Processing, Pattern Recognition, 
and Intelligent Systems evolved from the termination of the International 
Journal of Computer Processing of Languages (IJCPOL) in 2013, pub-
lished by World Scientific Publishing Co. (WSPC) for the Oriental Lan-
guage Computer Society (OLCS). OLCS was created in 1976 by some 
prominent professors of Chinese descent in North America, and was ini-
tially called the Chinese Language Computer Society (CLCS). The original 
aim of CLCS was to promote and facilitate the use of Chinese in computer 
technology. Gradually it received the support from many people in various 
regions of Asia, notably Hong Kong, Taiwan, Mainland China, Japan, Sin-
gapore, Korea, North America, and others. As research and digital technol-
ogy advanced, a variety of oriental languages became usable for computer 
input and output, leading to the change in name of the society to OLCS in 
2005.
Apart from promoting and organizing numerous international confer-
ences related to the theme of this society, CLCS also started its international 
quarterly journal called Computer Processing of Chinese and Oriental 
Languages (CPCOL) in 1983, which later changed its name to Interna-
tional Journal of Computer Processing of Languages (IJCPOL), published 
by WSPC. This journal and conferences stimulated substantial research in 
this area, made many valuable contributions, and played a critical role in 
international collaborations. As this field and computer science matured, 
coupled with the rapid growth of digital technology, IJCPOL’s role dimin-
ished. After successful negotiation with WSPC, a new book series in the 
field of CPL was founded by Dr. Ching Y. Suen of Concordia University in 
Canada and Dr. Qin Lu of the Hong Kong Polytechnic University of Hong 
Kong. To make it more attractive and marketable, we plan to expand the 
scope of this book series to include subjects like pattern recognition, image 
processing, neural networks, knowledge engineering and intelligent sys-
tems, in which most of the OLCS members have been engaged. Presently 

vi
Introduction to the series
two books are already in the pipeline: this one, Digital Fonts and Reading, 
and the next, Advances in Chinese Document and Text Processing. As time 
goes by, it is hoped that others will follow suit covering research and devel-
opments in different parts of the world. 
The publication of this book series could not have been accomplished 
without the tremendous help and encouragement from our colleagues, in 
particular Dr. Shi Kuo Chang of the University of Pittsburgh, Chao Ning 
Liu formerly with IBM Yorktown Heights, and Ms. Kim Tan of WSPC, as 
well as the beautiful memory of the founder of CLCS, the late Dr. Yaohan 
Chu of the University of Maryland.
Ching Y. Suen, Editor of the Book Series,  
Montreal, July 2015

vii
Preface
Digital fonts and reading is a collection of invited chapters contributed by 
different authors, whose writing reveals their perspectives, from science 
to design, and their experiences as researchers, teachers and practitioners. 
This diversity introduces a range of approaches to the topic which will res-
onate with all sorts of readers from academics to students to experienced 
or novice typographic or interface designers to software engineers, and 
especially those who have an interest in type. 
By focusing on reading, a common thread through all chapters is the 
reader’s perspective. This may seem an unnecessary observation but much 
is written about fonts without mentioning readers. Chapters which draw 
on the experience of designing fonts and explain the decisions that are 
made reveal the importance of judging how the characters or words will 
be perceived, not focusing only on the marks on paper or pixels on screen.
It should be no surprise to learn that legibility is frequently mentioned 
as an objective and is defined by several authors in broadly similar ways, 
with reference to Walter Tracy’s Letters of credit [1986] which distin-
guishes between legibility and readability. These issues are addressed 
through reporting on original studies or reviewing current knowledge, 
either as the primary focus for the chapter or as a contributory factor in 
making other judgments (e.g. harmonization of type or appropriateness of 
typefaces for specific media or purposes). 
Traditionally, there has been a separation between researchers and 
practitioners, with different agendas. Also, knowledge from within each 
separate discipline has not been accessible to those outside the discipline, 
either due to the lack of records of craft knowledge, or overly complex sci-
entific articles. The objective of bridging the gap between scientific testing 
and design experience underpins most of the chapters and is also made 
explicit by a number of authors. By combining knowledge across disci-
plines the validity and value of research outcomes are increased through, 
for example, recognizing the complexity of typographic test material. 
The seemingly simple task of comparing the legibility of fonts is com-
plicated by the need to consider the interrelationships of many variables 
within letters (such as x-height, stroke contrast, etc.) and between letters 

viii
Preface
(such as letter-and word-spacing, leading, etc.). The research reported here 
includes examples demonstrating awareness of the importance of carefully 
choosing or designing the form of test material alongside how it is tested. 
Focusing only on straddling the science-design divide would produce 
an incomplete account of the interdisciplinary opportunities inherent in the 
subject of this book. Combining knowledge from related fields is a key 
objective in putting together this book, which draws on historical and more 
theoretical analyses, which nonetheless feed into practical applications. 
The scope is also broadened by including research and analysis of Chinese 
and Arabic, as well as Latin typography. 
From apparently diverse standpoints, consistent themes emerge in 
addition to the ones already mentioned (considering the reader; managing 
interrelationships of type variables). These include: optimizing fonts for 
different types of readers and circumstances; consistency of style;  critique 
of simplistic analyses (of fonts or texts); opposing forces (regularity versus 
flexibility, economy versus readability); making explicit typographic prac-
tice (as an objective or exemplifying the process).
The four sections (‘Vision and reading’; ‘Scientific approaches to design 
for reading’; ‘Perspectives on type design practice’; ‘Using type’) perhaps 
reflect artificial divisions as, for example, scientific approaches are found 
in ‘Using type’ as are descriptions of type design practice. There are also 
overlaps in content but these are reassuring in confirming common threads 
and convergence of ideas. 
Chapters 1 and 2 (Beveratou and Bessemans) both look at visually 
impaired readers and carry out experiments to explore the optimization of 
fonts and typesetting parameters for adults or children. The authors use 
different test methods and test different aspects of fonts, but both start from 
the premise that increasing the size of print is too simplistic. Beveratou 
(chapter 1) looks at leading, spacing, type size, thickness of stroke and use 
of serifs in relation to reading. Bessemans (chapter 2) designed her own 
test material varying shape characteristics to identify what best supports 
reading. 
Chapters 3 to 6 differ in their objectives but each provides insight 
into how scientific studies are carried out from perspectives informed by 
design knowledge. Larson and Carter (chapter 3) demonstrate how collab-
oration works in practice by describing the iterative process of testing and 
refining a new typeface named Sitka. This typeface is also mentioned by 

ix
Preface
Sorkin (chapter 8) and Shaikh and Chaparro (chapter 13). Slattery (chapter 
4) reviews eye movement research as a methodology for studying reading 
and highlights the disconnect between psycholinguistic research and font 
design, discussing possible reasons. These resonate with my own expla-
nations of the divergence which have guided my efforts to bridge the gap. 
Beier (chapter 5) draws on scientific findings and designer’s experiences 
to review what we know about the legibility of fonts that are designed to 
be read at a distance. This knowledge is converted into practical guid-
ance on how shapes can be improved for optimal distance reading. Wang 
(chapter 6) reports an investigation of the effects of introducing interword 
spacing in Chinese text read by children in two age groups. As she found 
that the younger children (7-8 year olds) benefitted from additional space, 
the results have implications for the design of learning materials. 
Perspectives on type design practice (chapters 7-10) range from an 
introduction to Chinese typefaces, to coverage of specific issues, to the 
introduction of a more theoretical approach. Lu, Zhu, Zhang, and Tang 
(chapter 7) provide a detailed account of the complexities of designing 
Chinese characters, outline the typical workflow, and discuss partic-
ular challenges. Some concepts and methods common to the designs of 
Chinese and Latin typefaces can be identified. Sorkin (chapter 8) also 
deals with practicalities by describing the factors to consider when opti-
mizing type for different viewing distances, media, technologies, angle of 
viewing, and readers. Nemeth (chapter 9) focuses on the harmonization 
of type design across scripts, touched upon by Lu et al. In contrast to the 
preceding descriptions of practice, this chapter takes a critical look at the 
practice and questions the case for regularity and uniformity as opposed 
to flexibility. McKaughan (chapter 10) introduces the design method of 
pattern languages, illustrating with an example of designing newspaper 
typefaces. The approach works at a level of abstraction that can handle the 
multiple variables within and between letters and their interrelationships 
and can combine knowledge across disciplines. 
The final section on using type (chapters 11-14) explores various aspects 
of fonts in quite diverse ways, from scientific methods to case studies. 
Dyson, Tam, Leake and Kwok (chapter 11) pick up the theme of consis-
tency of stylistic characteristics of fonts and investigate whether designers 
have the expertise to enable them to perceive this consistency when they 
cannot read the (Chinese) characters. Lacava (chapter 12) examines the 

x
Preface
process of selecting fonts for newspapers through two case studies (one 
English, one Arabic), providing an interesting complement to the pattern 
language approach (chapter 10). The personality of the font is also touched 
upon, which is the subject of chapter 13. Shaikh and Chaparro focus on the 
perception of onscreen typefaces in terms of personality and the perceived 
appropriateness of typefaces for various document types. In common with 
Dyson et al., this research is concerned with the stylistic characteristics of 
fonts. Almuhajri and Suen (chapter 14) conduct experiments to compare 
Arabic fonts in terms of legibility and readability with a view to recom-
mending fonts for Personal Digital Assistants.
The publication of this book would not have been possible without 
the wonderful enthusiasm of authors, the support of colleagues in the 
Department of Typography & Graphic Communication at the University 
of Reading, and the patient assistance and skill of Natassia Swulinska in 
typesetting and laying out pages. 
Mary C. Dyson

xi
Contributors
Mrouj Almuhajri
Department of Computer Science, Saudi Electronic 
University Dhahran, Saudi Arabia
m.almuhajri@seu.edu.sa
Sofie Beier
School of Design, The Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts,  
Schools of Architecture, Design and Conservation, DK
sbe@kadk.dk
Eleni Beveratou
ebeverat@gmail.com
Ann Bessemans
PXL-MAD (Media, Arts & Design), University Hasselt, Belgium, 
READSEARCH
Ann.Bessemans@PXL.be
Matthew Carter
Type designer, Carter & Cone Type Inc., USA
cartermatt@earthlink.net
Barbara Chaparro
Software Usability Research Lab; Department of Psychology;  
Wichita State University; Wichita
Barbara.chaparro@wichita.edu 
Mary C. Dyson
Department of Typography & Graphic Communication,  
University of Reading, UK
M.C.Dyson@reading.ac.uk

xii
Contributors
Brian Kwok
School of Design, Hong Kong Polytechnic University
brian.k@polyu.edu.hk
Kevin Larson
Advanced Reading Technologies, Microsoft, USA
kevlar@microsoft.com
Lucie Lacava
Lacava Design Inc., Montreal, QC
lucie@lacavadesign.ca
Clare Leake
Department of Typography & Graphic Communication,  
University of Reading, UK
Xiaoqing Lu
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University
lvxiaoqing@pku.edu.cn
Rob McKaughan
Advanced Reading Technologies, Microsoft, USA
robmck@microsoft.com
Titus Nemeth
info@tntypography.eu
A. Dawn Shaikh
Google
dawns@google.com
Timothy J. Slattery
Department of Psychology, Bournemouth University, UK
tslattery@bournemouth.ac.uk

xiii
Contributors
Eben Sorkin
Sorkin Type Co. Easthampton MA, USA 
sorkineben@gmail.com
Ching Y. Suen
Centre for Pattern Recognition and Machine Intelligence  
Concordia University Montreal, Canada
suen@cenparmi.Concordia.ca
Keith Tam
Department of Typography & Graphic Communication,  
University of Reading, UK
k.c.tam@reading.ac.uk
Ting Tang
Founder Fonts Business Division, Beijing Founder  
Electronics Co., Ltd
tang.ting@founder.com.cn
Hsiu-Feng Wang
Department of e-Learning Design and Management,  
National Chiayi University, Taiwan
robin0612@hotmail.com

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

xv
Contents
Introduction to the series............................................................................ v
Preface......................................................................................................vii
List of contributors.................................................................................... xi
Section 1: Vision and reading
Chapter 1: The effect of type design and typesetting on visually  
impaired readers..................................................................................................1
Eleni Beveratou
Chapter 2: Matilda: a typeface for children with low vision...................19
Ann Bessemans
Section 2: Scientific approaches to reading 
Chapter 3: Sitka: a collaboration between type design  
and science..........................................................................................................37
Kevin Larson and Matthew Carter
Chapter 4: Eye movements: from psycholinguistics to font design......54
Timothy J. Slattery
Chapter 5: Designing legible fonts for distance reading...........................79
Sofie Beier
Chapter 6: Effects of interword spacing on Chinese children’s  
reading abilities..................................................................................................94
Hsiu-Feng Wang
Section 3: Perspectives on type design practice
Chapter 7: Elements of Chinese typeface design......................................109
Xiaoqing Lu and Ting Tang
Chapter 8: Optimizing type for use in specific media.............................131
Eben Sorkin
Chapter 9: ‘Harmonised type design’ revisited..........................................150
Titus Nemeth
Chapter 10: Using pattern languages in typographic design.................173
Rob McKaughan

xvi
Contents
Section 4: Using type
Chapter 11: How does expertise contribute to the recognition of 
Latin and Chinese characters? ..................................................................193
Mary C. Dyson, Keith Tam, Clare Leake, Brian Kwok
Chapter 12: Newspaper text.............................................................................209
Lucie Lacava
Chapter 13: Perception of fonts: perceived personality traits and 
appropriate uses..............................................................................................226
A. Dawn Shaikh and Barbara Chaparro
Chapter 14: Legibility and readability of Arabic fonts on .
Personal Digital Assistants    PDAs.............................................................248
Mrouj Almuhajri and Ching Y. Suen
Index...................................................................................................... 267

1
Chapter 1
The effect of type design  
and typesetting on visually  
impaired readers
Eleni Beveratou
The term ‘visually impaired readers’ refers to people who have a sight impairment that 
cannot be improved with the use of corrective aids. The vast majority of such readers have 
developed this impairment only in the later years of their lives. Therefore, reading habits 
and letter recognition patterns have already been established in earlier stages, making the 
challenge of adaptation to the new situation even harder. Documents referred to as ‘large 
prints’ have come to facilitate the reading process. In compliance with a range of guide-
lines, they manage to bridge the gap between the needs of the readers and their impairment. 
However, there are factors concerning readability and legibility that are neglected or, often, 
misinterpreted in their implementation, decreasing the efficiency of large print documents. 
This chapter analyses the typesetting parameters and the typographic details that optimize 
typefaces for visually impaired readers. Through a series of conducted experiments, issues 
concerning the leading, spacing, type size, thickness of the stroke, as well as the use of 
serifs are examined. The experiments focus mainly on the comparison of various typefaces’ 
reading rates to highlight the typographical details which cause misreading and confusions. 
As a conclusion, the results will draw attention to the interdependency of all the afore-
mentioned variables; none of them alone can make a typeface ideal for use in documents 
intended for visually impaired readers.
1.1   Introduction
Visual impairment is a sight deficiency, affecting mainly the elderly, which 
cannot be improved with the use of correction aids. Having established 
their reading habits and letter recognition patterns from early years, the 
disruption becomes harder to adapt to. Documents referred to as ‘large 
prints’ have come to facilitate the reading process. In compliance with a 
range of guidelines, they bridge the gap between the needs of the readers 
and their impairment. However, factors concerning readability and legi-
bility are neglected or misinterpreted in their implementation, detracting 
from the efficiency of these documents.

2
Digital fonts and reading
At this stage, it is important to clarify two terms that tend to be mis-
used: ‘readability’ and ‘legibility’. Tracy [1986] refers to legibility as the 
ability to distinguish single typographic characters, and to readability as 
the comprehension of a text, implying reading ease.
The aim of this chapter is to analyze the typesetting parameters and 
typographic details that optimize typefaces for visually impaired readers. 
Through a series of experiments, issues concerning the leading, spacing, 
type size, thickness of the stroke, as well as the use of serifs will be ex-
amined. However, it is important to clarify that this research is qualitative, 
not quantitative.
1.2   Previous research on the topic
1.2.1   Type size
Extensive research underlines type size as the main factor impeding the 
reading process of sighted [Legge and Bigelow, 2011] and partially sight-
ed people [Rubin et al., 2006]. From a simple scientific point of view, a 
retina is formed by multiple sensors; the smaller the shown element, the 
fewer sensors are activated, making shapes harder to distinguish [Bailey 
et al., 1993]. As such, a person with central field vision loss benefits from 
a larger font size [Chung et al., 1998]. In fact, in order to read with ease 
people require a much bigger font size than that of their acuity thresh-
old [Rubin and Turano, 1994]. Reading speed is optimal for font sizes 
between 16 to 18 points [Russel et al., 2007]. However, one should take 
into account that the reading distance will change the perceived size of the 
typeface [Legge and Bigelow, 2011].
Nonetheless, other research shows that the amelioration of letter iden-
tification is non-significant even when letter size is increased [Parish and 
Sperling, 1991]. Consequently, there are probably some additional factors 
that affect reading performance. In order to gain insight as to which fea-
tures contribute to letter recognition, a comparison will be made between 
the reading rates of large-sized typefaces and their threshold viewing.

3
The effect of type design and typesetting on visually impaired readers
1.2.2   Leading and spacing
Leading (the gap between lines) and word and letter spacing are critical 
for the reading speed of the partially sighted. Larger than default leading is 
preferred [Paterson and Tinker, 1947], as it helps to identify the start of the 
next line. For sighted people, generous inter-letter spacing allows better 
letter recognition [Bouma, 1970]. This way, ‘crowding’ (the decrease in 
letter identification when surrounded by other letters [Cline et al., 1997]) 
is avoided. For the visually impaired, crowding seems worse when pe-
ripheral vision is used [Ciuffreda et al., 1991]. Therefore, wider spacing is 
essential [Levi et al., 2007]. However, so as to avoid reverse results, exten-
sive leading and spacing should not be exaggerated for all kind of readers 
[Yu et al., 2007; Al Otaibi and Dickinson, 2000]. Optimum figures have 
been sought and Prince [1967] demonstrated that when typesetting for vi-
sually impaired readers ‘inter-letter spacing should be 40% and inter-line 
spacing 140% of the letter ‘o’’. Researchers seem to agree more on this 
topic. However, they do not explain how letter spacing may be affected by 
the use of serifs. 
1.2.3   Serif and sans serif
There is no apparent preference between serif and sans serif [Minda et al., 
2007]. However, when examining the details, there seems to be a differen-
tiation depending on the intended use. Arditi and Cho [2000] discovered 
that serifs do make a minor positive difference regarding sizes close to 
the reading acuity limits of readers. Prince [1967] realised that sans serifs 
were more effective when used for single letters or syllables, but serifs 
were preferred for normal words. As Unger says: ‘Serifs seem to make 
words and lines hang together better’; their structure is more rigid. Serifs 
give a personal character to each letter that probably makes it distinguish-
able [Unger, 2007].
Nonetheless, these observations do not apply to every situation. As 
stated by Reece [2008]: ‘previous studies differed in methodology, fonts 
and participant characteristics, which makes comparisons difficult and 
may account for some variations in results’. Hence, it would be interesting 
to measure the effect of serifs on readability, when the tested typefaces 
have similar proportions and features.

4
Digital fonts and reading
1.2.4   Other typographic details
A limited set of research has tried to identify whether stroke thickness 
is another significant variable. Indeed, it was shown that people affected 
by glaucoma benefit from a bolder typeface [Shaw, 1969]. More specif-
ically, the ideal stroke thickness is thought to be equivalent to 17.5% of 
the height of an ‘o’ [Prince, 1967]. This research shows that smaller de-
tails could have a great impact; therefore modulation of the stroke and the 
counters could be a potential area for further exploration.
1.3   Testing each parameter
As a general conclusion, the preceding research seems to not communicate 
the same message. It was, thus, necessary to conduct an experiment that 
would clarify, validate and further research some untested — or vague-
ly — tested parameters (style, size, leading, spacing).
1.3.1   Testing method and possible risks to consider
The experiment consisted of a pack of six testing pages, one result sheet 
and two reading guides (Figure 1). The test was divided into three parts. 
Each part contained six paragraphs of eighty words varying from 2 to 8 
letters. To ensure that the reading speed was not accelerated due to the 
content of the text [Aitchison, 2003], the paragraphs were formed by 
placing words in random order [Wilkins, 2003]. The participants had to 
Figure 1: Example of a testing pack. Original size: 23x12cm.

5
The effect of type design and typesetting on visually impaired readers
read each paragraph aloud for twenty seconds, at their usual reading pace  
[Tinker, 1963]. The last word read was marked down.
Reading speed can be affected by factors like the reader’s experience, 
the content’s familiarity, the vocabulary used and the kind of document 
read [Smith, 1994]. As one reads and becomes more familiar with the 
process, the reading speed increases. If the same word order were kept 
throughout the paragraphs, the results would have been compromised. 
Therefore, the parts, sequences and paragraphs of the experiment had to 
be carefully ordered resulting in an experiment with six different packs. 
1.3.2   Selection of participants
Thirty-three adults took part in this experiment. Twenty-one were partially 
sighted people aged from 70 to 94 years old. Of these, ten had macular 
degeneration and eleven had various eye deficiencies. The rest were di-
vided into two categories: six with perfect vision and six with pronounced 
myopia. They constituted an element of comparison to the results of the 
partially sighted. Participants with normal visual acuity were tasked to 
simply read the paragraph. Participants with myopia were asked to remove 
their glasses and use spectacles simulating two different eye conditions: 
loss of central vision and loss of peripheral vision (Figure 2). Simulating 
Figure 2 (Left): Spectacles simulating loss of peripheral vision (N.1). Width 13cm. 
(Right): Spectacles simulating loss of central vision (N.7). Width 13cm. Both spectacles 
are from the Visual Impairment North East simulation package. 

6
Digital fonts and reading
the sight of the visually impaired would provide examples of how people 
unaccustomed to these conditions read.
1.3.3   Tested aspects and selection of typefaces
The testing material consisted of eighteen paragraphs typeset in ten dif-
ferent typefaces. All paragraphs used Latin lowercase letters, due to their 
common usage [Jones and Mewhort, 2004]. The first part looks at size and 
readability comparing serif and sans serif. It consists of six paragraphs, 
each typeset in a different size (Arial in 12, 16 and 20 points and Times 
New Roman, with its sizes adjusted to match the three x-heights of Arial). 
See Figure 3. 
The sizes were chosen in compliance with the recommendations of 
the Royal National Institute of the Blind (RNIB). Sizes 12 and 20 pts are 
the minimum and maximum sizes recommended for clear prints (docu-
ments for a wide audience) and 16 points, the ideal size for typesetting 
large prints [2007]. Therefore, for the second and third part, all fonts were 
scaled to fit the x-height of Arial, 16 pts (Figure 4).
Figure 3: Sample of the typefaces used for this experiment.

7
The effect of type design and typesetting on visually impaired readers
The second part investigates whether spacing affects legibility. Six 
paragraphs are typeset with varying leading and kerning using Freight 
Text and Freight Sans. The fonts were selected as they have the same pro-
portions, thus preventing the text’s tonality to affect the results.
The third part focuses on whether some typographical design details 
(thickness, strokes and counters) affect legibility. The selection of the 
fonts for this last category was less obvious. Minuscule 6, and Freight Mi-
cro Book are caption fonts and were chosen based on a hypothesis: if they 
work in small sizes for normal-sighted people, then they should have the 
same effect for partially sighted people when enlarged. Palatino, Century 
Gothic, and Optima, were chosen due to their large counters and their vari-
ety in construction (Serif and Sans). The last one was Tiresias, 15.5 points, 
a font specially designed for large printings, by the RNIB.
1.4   Results and discussion
The results of the three parts of the experiment are summarized in Table 1 
and then discussed in the following sections.
Figure 4 (Top): Two different typefaces displayed at the same font size. (Bottom): Two 
different typefaces displayed at a different point size but with matching x-heights.

8
Digital fonts and reading
1.4.1   Type size
Amongst the partially sighted, Times New Roman in its larger size (23 
pts), was the typeface with the most read words in the entire experiment, 
having a difference of 126 words from the same typeface in its smaller 
size (14 pts). Participants with normal sight and the ones using the sim-
ulating spectacles performed better with larger typefaces. However, the 
difference between the two extreme reading sizes in both Arial (12 and 
20 pts) and Times New Roman (14 and 23 pts) was less pronounced than 
for the partially sighted and differed only by a few words. Consequently, 
size enhances the reading rate of the visually impaired, as opposed to nor-
mal-sighted people.
Table 1: Results of the experiment.

9
The effect of type design and typesetting on visually impaired readers
With Arial, the largest number of words read was at 16 pts with an 
unnoticeable difference from the results of the same typeface at 20 pts. In-
terestingly, the difference in reading speed between the most and least read 
size of Arial (16 and 12 pts) was 64 words, almost half of the equivalent in 
Times New Roman. Hence, readers benefit from the size increase only in 
particular typefaces. Thus, additional parameters are contributing towards 
higher readability. 
Lastly, participants commented negatively on the paragraphs typeset in 
the smallest sizes when introduced at the beginning of the testing process, 
or after a break. This should be taken into account, as it might determine 
whether they would engage in reading.
1.4.2   Visual noise and type size: a complementary study
When conducting the experiment, one participant suffering from macular 
degeneration commented twice: ‘I’ve got black spots and they get in the 
way’. This comment led to an exploratory study based on Liang’s [2002] 
and Pelli’s [1994] research, showing that legibility is more affected by 
‘noise’ (any disrupting visual element that renders the recognition of a 
visual signal more difficult) than size. The aim was to understand which 
typographical details benefit from a size increase to a deficient eye.
The only noticeable difference after increasing the size of letters was 
that their thinner parts were more visible and the signal became stronger 
than the noise (Figure 5). 
When using Tiresias LP (bolder typeface with monolinear stems) the 
word ‘limited’, was comparably more distinguishable. Therefore, the solu-
tion for a legible font seems not to rely only on the size, but also on the 
thickness of the stroke. Hence, if the exact noise ratio of each deficiency 
is discovered, a potentially beneficial typeface with higher or lower fre-
quencies than the noise could be designed. Previous research has shown 
that ‘subjects with cloudy media read better when white letters appear on 
a black background’ [Legge et al., 1985]. This statement comes in agree-
ment with the illustration (Figure 6) and therefore the solution in legibility 
does not rely only on the typeface but also on the background against 
which it is used. 

10
Digital fonts and reading
1.4.3   Leading and spacing
The second part investigated how leading and spacing affect legibility for 
visually impaired people, in both serif and sans serif typefaces. Among 
the serif version of Freight, the results showed that the default spacing and 
leading of the font was the most beneficial. Second, yet close to the first, 
came the widest version of Freight. Wider spacing did not affect legibility 
contradicting the optimal calculations of Prince [1967]. This may be due 
to the fact that serifs add a distinguishable gap between letters, thus pre-
venting crowding. However, when reading Freight Text Book one partic-
ipant commented: ‘Big words are tricky, especially with a big magnifier’, 
indicating that results for leading and spacing might differ in larger sizes, 
as fewer letters will be seen per reading saccade.
In the sans serif sample, the most read words were noted when both 
spacing and leading were at their widest. Yet, this result fails to reach 
the lowest legibility rate of the serif one. The results contradict those of 
sighted people, who read better the samples with the default spacing, with 
a higher reading rate in the sans serif typeface.
Interestingly, one participant commented for Freight Text Book: ‘This 
is a funny one’. Despite this, his performance for this typeface was the 
highest among the entire second section. In fact, readers are accustomed 
Figure 5: Black letters on white paper, covered by a filter of noise. The typefaces used are 
Times New Roman and Tiresias.

11
The effect of type design and typesetting on visually impaired readers
and confident with certain styles of typeface. To change their reading hab-
its would be difficult, even if it could prove to be more beneficial [Unger, 
2007].
1.4.4   Serif and sans serif
The readability of serif and sans serif typefaces was tested mainly in the 
first part of the experiment. However, data from the second and third part 
which used both types of fonts were analyzed. In the two first parts, the 
typefaces with the overall higher reading rate were serif ones (Times New 
Roman, 23 pts, and Freight Text Book, 18 pts). It appears that the sans ser-
if typefaces with the most read words fail to reach the lowest legibility rate 
of the serif ones. In fact, in the top five most read typefaces of this experi-
ment four had serifs. The results contradicted Arditi’s comment: when size 
was reduced almost to the visual acuity limit, the difference in read words 
was hardly noticeable between serifs and sans. However, this applies only 
to the results of the visually impaired, as for the other tested groups distri-
bution varies among serif and sans serif. As stated earlier, it is possible that 
other parameters might be responsible for the efficacy of a typeface. Serifs 
could be either a positive or redundant feature, depending on the instance.
Figure 6: White letters on white paper, covered by a filter of noise. The typefaces used are 
Times New Roman and Tiresias.

12
Digital fonts and reading
1.4.5   Other typographic details
In the third part, three aspects were tested: the efficiency of a typeface 
specially designed for the visually impaired; the efficiency of caption de-
signed typefaces enlarged to the equivalent of Arial 16 pts; the efficiency 
of large counters. 
First came Tiresias LP in 15.5 pts, whose results were very close to 
Times New Roman 23 pts; the typeface with the most words read in the 
entire test. It also gathered various positive comments. As shown in the 
study regarding noise and letter recognition, this success may be due to the 
thickness of the font. Among the readers wearing simulating spectacles, 
this font had the highest performance but scored only a mediocre reading 
rate from the normal sighted. 
The hypothesis that an enlarged caption typeface would improve legi-
bility was invalid; it did not affect the results. Minuscule 6 was read better 
than Freight Micro Book probably because of its darker paragraph texture. 
The big counters of Optima, Palatino and Century Gothic did not handi-
cap nor facilitate the readers. Yet, in this part the least read typeface was 
Century Gothic, most likely due to the lack of feature diversity that would 
make a font more recognizable.
One participant commented that the text was getting blurry when read-
ing paragraphs set in bolder typefaces. His performance was not affected 
by it. However, the thick strokes of the letters reduced the space between 
details, rendering letter identification more difficult; the letters ultimate-
ly became blobs. Therefore, depending on the eye deficiencies, creating 
typefaces of different thickness and styles to cover different reading needs 
and limitations should be considered.
1.5   Towards a pattern identification
1.5.1   Common mistakes found
Regardless of each typeface’s reading rate, participants with low vision 
and with simulating spectacles made a substantial amount of mistakes 
compared to the ones without visual deficiencies. Looking for a pattern 
among these mistakes, they were grouped into three categories. 

13
The effect of type design and typesetting on visually impaired readers
The first was about words that took a lot of time to read. Consecutive 
letters with strong vertical stems as in the word ‘limited’ were the more 
problematic. Interestingly, most samples with mistaken words involve 
sans serif letters. 
The second one was omitted words. The reader’s eye impeded from 
having an entire view of the line, ‘jumped’ too far during a saccade and 
failed to identify small words. The same mistake was seen when short 
words would appear in the beginning of a line; the readers would pick 
the wrong starting point. This suggests that tighter word spacing would 
be beneficial. Also, wider leading should be carefully applied as to not 
obstruct the readers from finding the beginning of a line. 
The third and largest category was misread letters. However, this phe-
nomenon could be because no meaning was deduced from the paragraphs. 
Hence, the readers could easily proceed to a random false guess, which 
they would then repeat when the same word would appear again. Never-
theless, even after filtering these results, some ascenders were mistaken 
for x-height letters. For example: ‘t’, was confused for an ‘r’ or ‘l’ for an 
‘i’. Other x-height letters like ‘c’ were mistaken for an ‘e’, or vice versa. 
Another noticeable mistake was combining two letters, or separating one 
letter into two (e.g. ti=h, ch=d).
1.5.2   Eye filtering mechanism and the Fourier Method:  
a complementary study
1.5.2.1   Testing method and possible risks to consider
An exploratory study was created in order to locate whether misinterpre-
tation derived from hasty reading or was due to a malfunctioning filtering 
mechanism in the eye that altered the message. The process used was the 
Fourier Transform, which is a mathematical description of an image in 
terms of spatial frequencies. Seven of the participants of the first experi-
ment were selected to partake in this study, based on their previous results. 
They were presented with six symbols and were asked to reproduce them 
on a piece of paper. The participants were not informed about the nature 
of the shown shapes so as to avoid predisposing them. The first symbol 
was a square. This shape, easy to perceive and draw, would determine the 
drawing abilities of the participants. The four other symbols were letters, 

14
Digital fonts and reading
different for each participant based on their individual mistakes. Fifth was 
the letter ‘a’, chosen because it was never mistaken during the first exper-
iment. However, the representation of the symbols was often not what the 
reader had in mind. To control and correct this effect, participants were 
asked what they were about to draw.
1.5.2.2   Analyzing the material
To ensure accuracy of the Fourier Transform, certain adaptations to the 
drawings in terms of proportions and design were necessary. In order to 
discover a pattern responsible for the misinterpretation, the given shapes 
and their drawings were compared. Two symbols from each sample were 
chosen and input to a program that visualized their respective Fourier fre-
quencies. The next step was to find the filter that simulates the transforma-
tion as the deficient eye would. If the used filter was successful, we would 
be able to analyze which design features for all the letters are beneficial 
for each eye deficiency. Of the results obtained, only three were worth 
analyzing. The rest depicted the symbols without difficulty and provided 
accurate drawings of the shown shapes. Figure 7 illustrates the symbols, 
participants’ drawings, and the effects of the Fourier transform.
1.5.2.3   The outcomes
Participants, unaware of the given shape, misinterpreted letters that they 
were able to read before due to context absence. However, some partic-
ipants benefited from the letter isolation, probably due to the absence of 
‘crowding’. The results suggest that accentuating details beyond the nor-
mal rules of type design seems like a viable solution. Designing geometri-
cal, angular letters, or accentuating strokes when those form a curve could 
be some possible paths.
In conclusion, apart from accentuating the responsible features for the 
distinction of a letter and its counters, the creation of a ‘clever’ typeface 
with so-called OpenType alternations should be considered. Thus, when 
certain letter combinations appear, stylistic alternates of the same char-
acters would replace them, ensuring that they will not be misread. The 
optimum result will be achieved if inter-word and inter-letter spacing is 
adjusted according to the number of letters in a word. 

15
The effect of type design and typesetting on visually impaired readers
1.6   Conclusion
Visually impaired people are in need of a specially designed font to use 
in large print documents. In search of the parameters for such a typeface, 
this research managed to illustrate some of the reasons that make reading 
a difficult task for the visually impaired. In order to turn these results into 
reliable statements, a new, quantitative research should be initialized, with 
a wider selection of participants and more tested aspects. 
Generally, the rules that exist so far for readers with normal vision 
seem to also apply to the visually impaired. Still, these parameters need 
enhancement in order to achieve equal results to those of sighted people. 
From a typesetting scope, readability depends on a combination of several 
typographic features. It seems however that serif fonts in a bigger font size 
and wider leading are more beneficial. 
Regarding typographical details, the majority of visually impaired peo-
ple read better bolder fonts with large counters; letter and word spacing 
only needed a few adjustments. Additionally, in order to avoid confusion 
caused by crowding, adjustments must be made to specific letter combina-
tions. This means that probably two variations of the same letter should be 
designed, each used when surrounded by different letters. As each individ-
ual has different needs, each kind of eye deficiency would need a different 
solution. In order to provide suitable and customized fonts for each one of 
them, further research is imperative.
Figure 7 (Top): Initial shapes; Middle: Participant’s representation (after drawing 
adaptations); (Bottom): Initial shapes after applying Fourier Transform filter.

16
Digital fonts and reading
Acknowledgments
This paper could not have been possible without the help of Tom Conlin 
the chief executive of the Berkshire County Blind Society, Dawn Single-
ton, the Manager of the Reading Association for the Blind and each and 
every participant who embraced this project with so much enthusiasm.  
I would also like to thank Alexios Beveratos, for sharing his knowledge 
and time, regarding the Fourier transform methods and Mary Dyson, for 
guiding me through every step of this research. Lastly, I would like to 
thank Kleoniki Havaki for her immense support.
References
Aitchison, J. (2003) Words in the mind: an introduction to the mental lexicon. 
(Blackwell, Oxford) pp. 134-136.
Al Otaibi, A. Z. and Dickinson, C. M. (2000) The effect of some typograph-
ical factors on reading performance in visual impairment. (Swetz and 
Zeitlinger, NY) p. 309.
Arditi, A. and Cho, J. (2000). Do serifs enhance or diminish text legibility?, 
Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science, 41, p. 437.
Bailey, I. L., Clear, R. and Berman, S. M. (1993). Size as a determinant of  
reading speed, Journal of the Illuminating Engineering Society, 22(2), 
pp. 102-117.
Bouma, H. (1970). Interaction effects in parafoveal letter recognition, Nature, 
226, pp. 177–178, Proc. Yu, D., Cheung, S. H., Legge, G. E. and Chung, 
S. T. (2007). Effect of letter spacing on visual span and reading speed, 
Journal of Vision, 7(2), p.1.
Chung, S. T., Mansfield, J. S. and Legge, G. E. (1998). Psychophysics of read-
ing, XVIII: The effect of print size on reading speed in normal peripheral 
vision, Vision Research, 39, pp. 2949–2962.
Ciuffreda, K. J., Levi, D. M. and Selenow, A. (1991) Amblyopia: Basic and 
clinical aspects. (Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston).
Cline, D., Hofstetter, H. W. and Griffin, J. R. eds. (1997) Dictionary of visual 
science (Butterworth-Heinemann 4th ed., Boston) p. 521.
Jones, M. and Mewhort, D. (2004). Case-sensitive letter and bigram frequency 
counts from large-scale English corpora, Behavior Research Methods, 
Instruments, & Computers, 36, pp. 388–396.

17
The effect of type design and typesetting on visually impaired readers
Liang, Y. X. (2002). Readers beware! Effects of visual noise on the channel for 
reading. Intel Science Talent Search, pp. 1-18. 
Legge, G. E, Bigelow, C. A. (2011). Does print size matter for reading? A review 
of findings from vision science and typography, Journal of Vision, 11(5), 
pp. 1-22.
Legge, G. E., Rubin, G. S., Pelli, D. G. and Schleske, M. M. (1985). Psycho-
physics of reading, II: low vision, Vision Research, 25(2), pp.253–266.
Levi, D. M., Song, S. and Pelli, D. G. (2007). Amblyopic reading is crowding, 
Journal of Vision, 7(2), pp. 1-17.
Minda, E. R., Jeffrey, W., Jutai, J., Strong, G., Campbell, K. A., Gold, D., Pretty, 
L., and Wilmot, L. (2007). The legibility of typefaces for readers with low 
vision: a research review, Journal of Visual Impairment and Blindness, 
p.410.
Paterson, D. G and Tinker, M. A. (1947). Influence of leading upon newspaper 
type, Journal of Applied Psychology, 31, pp. 160-163.
Parish, D. H. and Sperling, G. (1991). Object spatial frequencies, retinal. Vision 
Research, 31, pp. 1399–1416.
Prince, J. H., (1967) Printing for the visually handicapped. The Australian  
Journal of Optometry, 50(6), pp 164-177.
Smith, F. (1994) Understanding reading: a psycholinguistic analysis of reading 
and learning to read. (Erlbaum, Hillsdale) pp. 21, 82.
Reece, G. A., Eubank, T., Rafieetary, M. and Lowther, D. L. (2008). Preferences 
of reduced vision readers for serif and italic presence on electronic dis-
plays, Association for Education and Rehabilitation Journal, 1(1), p. 5.
Royal National Institute of the Blind (2007) See it right: making information 
accessible for people with sight problems. (RNIB, London) p.33.
Rubin, G. S., Feely, M., Perera, S., Ekstrom, K. and Williamson, E. (2006). The 
effect of font and line width on reading speed in people with mild to mod-
erate vision loss, Ophthalmic and Physiological Optics, 6, pp. 545–554.
Rubin, G. S. and Turano, K. (1994). Low vision reading with sequential word 
presentations, Vision Research, 32, pp. 895-902.
Russell, E., Jutai, J. W., Strong, J. G., Campbell, K. A., Gold, D., Pretty, L. and 
Wilmot, L. (2007). The legibility of typefaces for readers with low vision: 
a research review, Journal of Visual Impairment & Blindness, 101(7),  
pp. 402-415.
Solomon, J., Pelli, D. G. (1994). The visual filter mediating letter identification, 
Nature, 369, pp.395-397.

18
Digital fonts and reading
Shaw, A. (1969). Print for Partial Sight (Library Association, London), Proc. 
Papadopoulos, K. S. and Goudiras, D .B. (2005). Accessibility assistance 
for visually impaired people in digital texts. The British Journal of Visual 
Impairment, 23(2).
Tinker, M. A. (1963) Legibility of print. (Iowa State University Press, Iowa) 
p. 22.
Tracy, W. (1986) Letters of credit: a view of type design. (Gordon Fraser Gallery 
Ltd., London) p. 31.
Unger, G. (2007). While you are Reading. (Mark Batty Publisher, New York) 
pp.77, 166.
Wilkins, A. (2003) Reading Through Colour: How coloured filters can reduce 
reading difficulty, eye strain, and headaches. (John Wiley, West Sussex) 
p. 40.
Yu, D., Cheung, S. H., Legge, G. E. and Chung S T. (2007). Effect of letter  
spacing on visual span and reading speed, Journal of Vision, 7(2), pp. 1-10.

19
Chapter 2
Matilda: a typeface for children 
with low vision
Ann Bessemans
Due to the low quality level of visual input they receive in the form of printed text, visually 
impaired beginning readers are at a disadvantage in comparison to their peers. In the past, 
typography has often been regarded as a useful instrument to improve the legibility of the 
printed reading material that is being offered to children with low vision. However, the 
legibility research that was at the base of this conception was not always of good quality. 
In cognitive science for example, many efforts were made that were methodologically 
correct, yet the test material (typefaces) was unrealistic. On the other hand, typographers 
themselves introduced many typefaces that were supposed to improve legibility, but the 
reasoning behind them was hardly ever sufficiently methodologically supported. More-
over, most legibility research focused on people with low vision in general, ignoring the 
fact that visually impaired children constitute a very particular group with specific issues. 
This PhD research project approached the issue of legibility for visually impaired begin-
ning readers from a design context. The research is an attempt at bridging the gap between 
the font designers and the cognitive scientists studying the legibility of letter characters. 
In the development of the test material, the focus was on parameter design. Parameters are 
shape characteristics that can be isolated within the same type. Starting from two existing 
types (one serif, one sans-serif), typefaces were designed based on five parameters that 
explored the balance between homogeneous and heterogeneous in both form and rhythm. 
Based on legibility research with test material that conforms to both the scientific and the 
typographic knowledge in this field, a typeface is proposed that provides support for the 
target group of visually impaired children in the first stages of the reading process.
1.1   Introduction
Reading is done without consciously recognizing letters [Warde, 1956; 
Unger, 2007]. Nevertheless letters constitute an important aspect of deter-
mining legibility [Rayner and Pollatsek, 1998]. Letters need to be decoded 
in order to obtain meaning. Reading is a complex, cognitive and fast pro-
cess. Children having serious problems with reading are at an increased 
risk to end up in a cycle of failure [Stanovich, 1986; Wolf, 2007]. When 
reading is a slow and cumbersome process, it will have consequences for 
cognitive behavior and motivation. A person whose reading process is im-

20
Digital fonts and reading
peded is less able to develop both intellectually and socially. Because most 
of the process of learning to read is finished after the age of nine it is im-
portant that children who encounter difficulties are supported in the initial 
stages of this process [Stanovich, 1986; Marquet et al., 2006].  
Visually impaired children with no additional disorders do not have 
problems with reading comprehension, spelling or accuracy. Therefore the 
reading problems of children with low vision are (initially) visual and not 
cognitive [Gompel et al., 2003; Gompel, 2005]. A visual impairment has a 
direct impact on technical reading skills. 
Due to the low quality of visual input they receive in the form of printed 
text, beginning visually impaired readers are at a disadvantage in compar-
ison to their (visually unimpaired) peers. The reading process is disturbed 
due to a reduction in visual input [Gompel et al., 2003; Gompel, 2005]. 
Children with a visual impairment have problems with the decoding of 
words, the deciphering of visual patterns, and the recognition of letters. 
Because their decoding is hampered, the reading speed is lower, which 
eventually can lead to cognitive problems necessitating a transfer from 
regular to special education. To improve visual input, a lot of attention is 
given to optical reading aids and the use of large print. Large print is often 
seen as a quick fix to show that efforts have been made for the visually 
impaired. Research has shown that large print books are not effective for 
the technical reading process for most children with low vision [Lovie-
Kitchin et al., 2001; Corn et al., 2002].
1.2   Typographic research and legibility research
In the past, typography has often been looked upon as a useful instrument 
to improve the legibility of printed reading material that is being offered 
to people with low vision. However, legibility research efforts are not al-
ways of good quality. In the case of cognitive scientists this is all too of-
ten caused by inadequate domain knowledge of typography, pointed out 
by Spencer [1969], Dyson [1999], Lund [1999] and Bessemans [2012]. 
This can lead to the use of incorrect terminology, poorly designed letters, 
poorly motivated and incorrect choice of text material. For the designers, 
this is due to an intuitive way of approaching legibility research [Dyson, 
1999; Lund, 1999; Bessemans, 2012]. Typographers rarely do empirical 
research. Very few attempts are made by typographers to test their de-

21
Matilda: a typeface for children with low vision
signed material on their target group. They portray their ‘findings’ as tru-
ism, but these lack any scientific validation.
Many legibility studies focusing on the influence of design, both within 
cognitive science and within the design world, lack internal and/or exter-
nal validity. Figure 1 shows test material illustrating a common external 
validity problem. The material is carefully constructed by manipulating 
isolated parameters (like heaviness of serifs, letter width, letter height). 
This results in high internal validity. But the external validity is very low. 
These letters are not considered real typefaces used in everyday life. Fig-
ure 2 shows test material illustrating a common internal validity problem. 
The test material could be present in real life, which means that the ex-
ternal validity is high. However, effects on legibility cannot be attributed 
to single design parameters. Several design parameters (or even a com-
bination) can influence the legibility effect. For example a difference in 
legibility between Helvetica and Times New Roman cannot be attributed 
solely to the serifs as there are other differences between the two types. 
Therefore the internal validity is rather low. Design parameters are design 
characteristics within the same font that can be isolated and can be manip-
ulated independently of each other. A design parameter can therefore be 
related to the internal and external validity.
               
Moreover, most legibility research has focused on adults with low vi-
sion, ignoring the fact that visually impaired children constitute a very 
particular group with specific issues. Both the fact that their reading pro-
Figure 1: (Left) An example of a common external validity problem. Examples of such 
material can be found in: [Liu and Arditi, 2000; Arditi, 2004].
Figure 2: (Right) An example of a common internal validity problem. Examples of such 
material where comparisons are made between typefaces can be found in: [Mansfield et al., 
1996; Woods et al., 2005].

22
Digital fonts and reading
cess has just started, as well as the fact that their visual impairment is not 
caused by ageing, makes it difficult or even impossible to simply transfer 
results. It makes sense to hypothesize that the elderly are more aided by 
a macro level of typography like the layout of a page or book or even 
a bigger type size which slows down reading but is more comfortable  
[Bouwhuis, 1993].
1.3   The term legibility
Another problem within the existing legibility research is confusion re-
garding the term legibility. Many different groups of people (e.g. typogra-
phers, linguists, educationalists, ergonomists, psychologists, etc.) use the 
term and give it a personal related meaning without explicitly explaining 
it. This explanation is of importance in order to make legibility studies 
comparable. Within this research legibility is the ease with which visual 
symbols are decoded [Bessemans, 2012]. This definition arose from dic-
tionary descriptions of reading. Reading means: transposing visual sym-
bols and converting them into linguistic meanings. To concisely define 
the term legibility, attention goes to the two global and successive steps 
that occur when reading: decoding and the acquisition of meaning, or the 
sensoric and the cognitive aspects of reading (see Figure 3). Decoding 
or the sensoric aspect in reading is the conversion of the purely visual 
representation of words (which may not yet relate to the meaning of these 
words in beginner readers). The definition of legibility used in this study is 
clearly related to this first sensoric aspect of reading and thus to decoding 
problems of children with low vision.
1.4   Design methodology applied
Comprehensive legibility research within my own study takes into ac-
count a clear definition of legibility and a combination of both scientific 
methods and typographic practice. A designer-researcher is able to com-
bine these two and thus guarantee the internal and external validity of 
the test material. The materials of the design research are systematically 
constructed. The design is the point of focus throughout the research. The 
methodology starts with the context that is shaped by theoretical research 
(consisting both of scientific and typographic matter) and practical work 

23
Matilda: a typeface for children with low vision
from other designers (mainly typefaces). This context will lead to an initial 
design that ultimately results in test fonts. These test fonts are used with-
in legibility studies (see 1.5). In turn, the results of the legibility studies 
provide motivation for a second type design that will eventually lead to 
the development of a special font for children with low vision. Using this 
global framework, this study starts with an explicit definition of legibility, 
and uses methods of measuring that have both internal and external validi-
ty. The output is an improved insight into the nature of legibility and some 
practical guidelines in the realm of type design. 
During the process of designing the test typefaces the focus was on 
parameter designs. Departing from two existing typefaces (serif DTL 
Documenta and sans-serif Frutiger) a number of derived typefaces were 
designed with five different parameters: (1) variable x-height; (2) conven-
tional contrast; (3) unconventional contrast; (4) direction; (5) letter width 
(see Figure 4). 
Figure 3: An onion model explaining the sensoric and cognitive aspects within reading.               

24
Digital fonts and reading
1. 
Variable x-height: By changing the x-height and the ascender and descender 
height of the letters, this design parameter induced a lot of heterogeneity, 
both rhythmically and in terms of letter form. 
2. 
Conventional contrast: This parameter adds contrast to the letter in a conven-
tional way. Certain letter parts were emphasized in a conventional manner. 
This parameter mainly induced heterogeneity in terms of letter forms. 
3. 
Unconventional contrast: This design parameter emphasized the most dis-
tinctive character parts within the letters. This induced in particular the het-
erogeneity of letter forms (because of less symmetry). 
4. 
Direction: Within this parameter, more heterogeneity was induced within 
rhythm by playing with the directions of the letter strokes. 
5. 
Letter width: Within this parameter, more heterogeneity was induced within 
rhythm and letter form by varying the letter widths. 
Figure 4: The test fonts (sans serif and serif) with their illustrated rhythm. From top to 
bottom: the basic fonts Frutiger and DTL Documenta; parameter conventional contrast; 
parameter unconventional contrast; parameter direction; parameter letter width; parameter 
variable x-heights.

25
Matilda: a typeface for children with low vision
The five parameters were used to examine the balance between homo-
geneous and heterogeneous in both form and rhythm. The heterogeneity 
with regard to the letter shape can be illustrated by making related letters 
less similar (see Figure 5). The heterogeneity with regard to the rhythm 
of the font can be illustrated by a more irregular stripe pattern which is 
formed by the vertical letter strokes. 
Using the concepts of homogeneity and heterogeneity we can say that 
in general sans serif typefaces are homogeneous within their letter forms 
(because of possible mirroring) and heterogeneous within their rhythm 
(see Figure 6). With serif typefaces it is the other way around (certainly for 
serif typefaces based on the 20th century model): they are heterogeneous 
within their letter forms (the serifs and contrasts make mirroring impos-
sible) and homogeneous within their rhythm. Theoretical and practical 
insights concerning legibility of material for low vision children pointed 
in the direction of more heterogeneity. Notice that we never tested very 
extreme forms of heterogeneity.
1.5   Quantitative and qualitative legibility research
The typefaces were tested by means of experimental (quantitative evalua-
tion) and subjective (qualitative evaluation) legibility research. Both chil-
dren with good eyesight and low eyesight were selected in order to study 
the reading skills and reading experiences in visually impaired children. 
In the study 110 visually impaired children with no additional disorders 
participated. They were recruited thanks to the cooperation of centers for 
Figure 5: Illustrating the heterogeneity within letter shape. Top: a geometrical sans serif. 
Bottom: a humanistic sans serif.

26
Digital fonts and reading
the visually impaired in Belgium and the Netherlands. Also 54 normally 
sighted children participated in the study and were recruited by regular 
schools. All readers were five to ten years old.
A psychophysical method was used in the test. Children were present-
ed pseudowordsa,b in the test typefaces on a computer screen for a short 
period of time and asked to read aloud the word seen (see Figure 7). The 
read words were typed and the number of word (letter) reading errors was 
counted using the software Affect [Spruyt et al., 2010]. 
In order to allow for differences in error rates between different type 
faces, the words were followed by a mask and the time in between the 
word and the mask and/or the word exposure time was adjusted for each 
child in order to obtain a 50% chance of recognition. This was done in 
an initial testing phase. Hence, every child had an individual duration at 
which words were presented. The children who were better at recognizing 
words were presented with words for a shorter duration. Then, in the main 
a	 Pseudowords were used because phonological rules and conventions within the  
letterforms remain, while semantic knowledge and the influence of context are excluded.
b	 100 pseudowords were created with an equal amount of letters. These pseudowords were 
used within each parameter and the basic fonts. The software controlling the experiment 
selected and mixed at random an equal amount of words within the design parameters. Si-
multaneously the fonts (basic and derived) were chosen at random by the software (Affect).  
Figure 6: Illustrating letter and rhythm heterogeneity. The heterogeneity within the 
letter shape lies in the serifs and the contrast of the serif typefaces. The heterogeneity 
within the rhythm lies within the rhythmical pattern formed by sans serifs. 

27
Matilda: a typeface for children with low vision
test, 6 sessions of 60 pseudowords were presented to each child with the 
child’s specific word-duration. Within each session there were 3 breaks 
to ensure concentration. The statistical analyses were performed on these 
data. 
The effects of the design parameters were measured using statistical 
analyses based on a General Linear Model (GLM) with repeated measures. 
The GLM calculates the extent of the connections between a dependent 
variable (e.g. percentage of words read correctly) and some independent 
variables (e.g. the different design parameters). Repeated measurements 
allow you to take multiple observations within a subject (the various ses-
sions of each child can be included within the analysis, taking into account 
between-subject variability). The GLM identifies those variables that are 
reliably influencing legibility. Several analyses with percentage correctly 
read pseudowords as the dependent variable were done: 1) global analy-
ses; 2) analyses within each group of children (low vision and normal); 3) 
analyses limited to words where at least one letter was correct; 4) analyses 
in relation to reading level; 5) analyses contrasting Documenta vs Fruti-
ger; 6) analyses for different types of visual problems. 
In the subjective part of the study, reading experiences of children who 
read the test typefaces were examined. The children were (individually) 
asked to rank the test material, 12 fonts, by the legibilityc of the fonts (see 
Figure 8). The children were interviewed about which factors played a 
role in their subjective judgement by means of dialogue. The feedback and 
the interaction with the children were of great importance for the design 
of the final typeface. In contrast with this way of working, a type designer 
very rarely gets immediate feedback from his readers. Type designers have 
always been very far behind the frontline when it comes to contact with 
the readers. In this case there was direct feedback between the readers and 
the type designer.
The effect of the design parameters on legibility using the subjective 
method was measured using Kendall’s concordance coefficient W. When 
this coefficient is high, this means that the ranking as observed is a reliable 
one, i.e. children agreed on the ranking. 
c	 The children were asked which fonts read the best for them. 

28
Digital fonts and reading
Figure 7: Experimental legibility research (quantitative).
Figure 8: Subjective legibility research (qualitative).

29
Matilda: a typeface for children with low vision
1.6   Results
A remarkable finding from the objective legibility research is that children 
with normal vision read with reliably fewer errors when the serif typeface 
DTL Documenta was used, rather than the sans serif Frutiger. This result 
is somewhat surprising because children (especially beginning readers) 
mainly read with a sans serif in primary school. Zuzano Licko’s [1990] 
well-known quote: ‘…the readers read best what they read most’ is thus 
jeopardized, certainly for beginning readers in the age group of five to ten 
years old. The teachers’ belief that letters for beginning readers should 
look as simple as possible and should reflect handwriting is falsified by 
this study. In visually impaired children the difference in reading accuracy 
of the two typefaces is less pronounced. During the reading (decoding) 
process non-visually impaired children appear not to be hampered by a 
homogeneous rhythm, but rather by a homogeneous form. The children 
with low vision however, seemed to be hampered more, and in particular, 
by a homogeneous rhythm. Within the DTL Documenta font set (the basic 
font with a homogeneous rhythm) the design parameters – rhythmd and di-
rection – that made the rhythm the most heterogeneous, had the most pos-
itive effect on legibility (in terms of decoding). It appears that for visually 
impaired children a more irregular rhythm is beneficial for their reading. 
Also it may be that a certain degree of formal heterogeneity offers support 
(as we saw with the normally sighted children).
Within the subjective legibility research, the analysis of the rankings 
showed no significant results. However, the dialogue with the children 
contained a lot of relevant information. The subjective legibility research 
results showed a rather early conditioning with daily reading material in 
beginning readers. Children associated sans serifs with school and con-
sidered them to be writable; serifs they associated with literature (e.g. 
books and newspapers) and they considered them to be difficult to repro-
duce themselves. The non-visually impaired children generally perceived 
the most conventional typeface as being the most legible one. Amongst 
the visually impaired children this was not always the case. Some of the 
d	 It became clear that the difference with respect to the design parameter rhythm and the 
basic font is not seen by most of the beginning readers. This parameter can therefore be 
useful for practical use because it induces legibility while remaining invisible. 

30
Digital fonts and reading
children appeared to experience social pressure to choose a normal letter. 
They were reporting that classmates would laugh at them if they chose a 
strange looking font to read. 
1.7   Matilda
Starting from the results, together with my own understanding, knowl-
edge, intuition and ideas as a design researcher, a typeface called Matildae 
was designed that is able to provide support for the target group of visually 
impaired children in the first stages of the reading process. Matilda should 
be seen as a tool for supporting reading, not as the solution to reading 
problems. 
The new typeface is similar to the basic fonts DTL Documenta and 
Frutiger in terms of letter width and text color (see Figure 9). Matilda is 
based on a serif typeface, in order to reduce the gap between the read-
ing material for non-visually impaired children and those with low vision. 
Furthermore compared to the sans serif font Frutiger, the design parame-
ters within the DTL Documenta font set had the most positive effect on the 
decoding skills for children with low vision. 
The main characteristics of Matilda are wide, open and round letters 
which are intended to have a friendly feeling (see Figure 10). The letters 
are dynamic and solid, constructed and organic. The letters are built on a 
rather stable and vertical axis. The curves are open, the serifs are asym-
metric, convex and concave. There are ball terminals to emphasize the 
letter terminations to augment its individuality and distinctiveness. The 
low contrast in the letters is necessary to easily enlarge or reduce text. If 
children with low vision are reading in different contrasts/colors (which 
they often do on computers) the letters need to remain very clear. Matilda 
does not have a very large x-height. The ascenders and descenders provide 
enough room for diacritics.
e	 Named after the book ‘Matilda’ from Roald Dahl (1988).

Matilda: a typeface for children with low vision 
'Zit j e goed, Sofie? Voor de rest van de curs us is het van belang dat 
je inziet dat sofisten echte filosofen waren, die hun plaats verdienen 
in de geschiedenis van het menselijk denken. De sofisten lieten zich 
voor hun werk betalen, omdat ze niet zoals Plato konden rekenen 
op een rijkelijk inkomen. Het waren mensen met een ruime belang-
stelling voor intellectuele en ethische problemen, die hun kunde in 
dienst stelden van hun studenten. Dergelijke sofisten zijn de hele 
geschiedenis door gekomen en gegaan. In zekere zin war en zij de 
eerste humanist en en onafhankelijke onderzoekers. Met leraren en 
betweters, die ofwel dik tevreden zijn met het weinige dat ze we ten 
of opscheppen dat ze van een heleboel dingen verstand hebben, 
waar ze in werkelijkheid geen snars van begrijpen, hebben ze dus 
niks van doen .. .' !, ?. 
'Zit je goed, Sofie? Voor de rest van de curs us is het van belang dat 
je inziet dat sofisten echte filosofen waren, die hun plaats verdienen 
in de geschiedenis van het menselijk den ken. De sofisten lieten zich 
voor hun werk beta len, omdat ze niet zoals Plato konden rekenen 
op een rijkelijk inkomen. Het waren mens en met een ruime belang-
stelling voor intellectuele en ethische problem en, die hun kunde in 
dienst stelden van hun studenten. Dergelijke sofisten zijn de hele 
geschiedenis door gekomen en gegaan. In zekere zin waren zij de 
eerste humanisten en onafhankelijke onderzoekers. Met leraren en 
betweters, die ofwel dik tevreden zijn met het weinige dat ze weten 
of opscheppen dat ze van een heleboel ding en verstand hebben, 
waar zein werkelijkheid geen snars van begrijpen, hebben ze dus 
niks van doen .. .' !,?. 
'Zit je goed, Sofie? Voor de rest van de cursus is het van belang dat 
je inziet dat sofisten echte filosofen waren, die hun plaats verdienen 
in de geschiedenis van het menselijk denken. De sofisten lieten zich 
voor hun werk betalen, omdat ze niet zoals Plato konden rekenen 
op een rijkelijk inkomen. Het waren mensen met een ruime belang-
stelling voor intellectuele en ethische problemen, die hun kunde in 
dienst stelden van hun studenten. Dergelijke sofisten zijn de hele 
geschiedenis door gekomen en gegaan. In zekere zin waren zij de 
eerste humanisten en onafhankelijke onderzoekers. Met leraren en 
betweters, die ofwel dik tevreden zijn met het weinige dat ze weten 
of opscheppen dat ze van een heleboel dingen verstand hebben, 
waar ze in werkelijkheid geen snars van begrijpen, hebben ze dus 
niks van doen .. .' !,?. 
31 
Figure 9: 
Comparison of the text color and letter width between Matilda (top), DTL 
Documenta (middle) and Frutiger (bottom). 

32
Digital fonts and reading
Matilda is in full development and a growing type family (also ready to 
test within new legibility research). The typeface includes a serif, an italic, 
and a bold (see Figure 11). Matilda is also extended by the design param-
eters that were most helpful to improve the decoding process of children 
with low vision. These are the parameters rhythm (see Figure 12) and 
direction (see Figure 13)f. More research will be done because it would 
be interesting to know how the degree of rhythmic heterogeneity affects 
legibility. Also the outcome of interaction effects such as the combination 
between the parameter letter width and direction would give more insight 
into legible fonts for children with low vision (and human perception as 
more information is revealed about the sensoric aspect when reading). 
f	 Emphasizing letter parts seems to be helpful for visually impaired children at the lowest 
reading level. 
Figure 10: Design features of Matilda. 

33
Matilda: a typeface for children with low vision
1.8   Conclusion
When legibility is explicitly defined and linked to the reading problems 
of the target group, methods of measuring legibility become clear while 
maintaining internal and external validity. It becomes clear that letters in-
fluence legibility and that results can be translated into a type design. A 
design researcher plays an important role in such legibility research. 
This research highlights the importance of exploring the balance be-
tween homogeneity and heterogeneity. The design research gave clues to 
design parameters that can successfully improve legibility for low vision 
children by inducing rhythm heterogeneity. My future aim is to gain more 
insight into the legibility of printed matter by studying stripe patterns 
within words during reading, link these to spatial frequencies when read-
ing and translate this information into practical designs. The new envis-
aged research wants to investigate to what extent the rhythm and spatial 
Figure 11: Matilda Regular, Bold & Italic.

34
Digital fonts and reading
frequencies within a typeface can affect legibility for normal and poor 
readers (e.g. low vision readers). This is in line with the findings of my 
doctoral dissertation where disturbed stripe patterns within words resulted 
in better decoding skills (and thus legibility) for those with a less devel-
oped perceptual system.
References
Arditi, A. 2004. Adjustable Typography: An Approach to Enhancing Low Vision 
Test Accessibility. Ergonomics, 47 (5) pp. 469-482.
Bessemans, A. (2012). Letterontwerp voor kinderen met een visuele functiebep-
erking. (Dissertation, Leiden University & Hasselt University). 
Bessemans, A. (2012). Research in Typography, Typo, 47, pp. 60-63.Bouwhuis, G. D. 
1993. Reading rate and letter size, IPO Annual Progress Report, 28, pp. 30-36.
Figure 12: Matilda Rhythm.
Figure 13: Matilda Direction.

35
Matilda: a typeface for children with low vision
Corn, A. L., Wall, R. S., Jose, R. T., Bell, J. K., Wilcox, K. and Perez, A. (2002).  
An Initial Study of Reading and Comprehension Rates for Students Who 
Received Optical Devices, Journal of Visual Impairment & Blindness, 
May, pp. 322-334.
Dyson, M. C. (1999). Typography through the eyes of a psychologist. Hyphen,  
2 (1), pp. 5-13.
Gompel, M. (2005). Literacy Skills of Children with Low Vision. (Dissertation, 
Radboud University Nijmegen).
Gompel, M. , Janssen, N. M., van Bon, W. H.J. and Schreuder, R.  (2003).  
Visual input and Orhtographic Knowledge in Word Reading of Children 
with Low Vision, Journal of Visual impairment and Blindness, May, 
pp. 273-284. 
Licko, Z. (1990). Do you read me? Emigre, 15, pp. 1-36.
Liu, L. and Arditi, A. 2000. Apparent string shortening concomitant with letter 
crowding. Vision Research 40, pp. 1059-1067.
Lovie-Kitchin, J., Bevan, J. D. and Brown, H. (2001). Reading performance in 
children with low vision, Clinical and Experimental Optometry, 84(3), 
pp. 148-154.
Lund, O. (1999). Knowledge construction in typography: the case of legibility 
research and the legibility of sans serif  typefaces. (Dissertation, The Uni-
versity of Reading).
Mansfield, J. S., Legge, G. E. and Bane, M. C. (1996). Psychofysics of reading 
XV: font effects in normal and low vision. Investigative Ophthalmology & 
Visual Science, 37 (8), pp 1492-1501.
Marquet, R., Smits, D. and Naegels, G. (2006). Slecht leren begint met slecht 
zien, Klasse, 163, pp. 10-13.
Rayner, K., and Pollatsek, A. (1989). The Psychology of Reading. (New Jersey: 
Prentice Hall).
Spencer, H. 1969. The visible word. (Lund Humphries, London).
Spruyt, A., Clarysse, J., Vansteenwegen, D., Baeyens, F.  and Hermans, D. 
(2010).  Affect 4.0: A free software package for implementing psycholog-
ical and psychophysiological experiments. Experimental Psychology, 57, 
pp. 36-45.
Stanovich, K. (1986). Matthew effects in reading: Some consequences of indi-
vidual differences in the acquisition of literacy. Reading Research Quar-
terly, XXI/4, pp. 360-407. 

36
Digital fonts and reading
Unger, G. (2007). Typografie als voertuig van de wetenschap. (De Buitenkant, 
Amsterdam).
Warde, B. (1956). The Crystal Goblet. Sixteen Essays on Typography. (The 
world publishing company, Cleveland).
Wolf, M. (2007). Proust and the Squid. The Story and Science of the Reading 
Brain. (HarperCollins: New York).
Woods, R. J., Davis, K., Scharff, L. F. V. and Austin, S. F. (2005). Effects of 
typeface and font size on legibility for children. American Journal of Psy-
chological Research, 1, pp. 86-102.

37
Chapter 3
Sitka: a collaboration between 
type design and science
Kevin Larson and Matthew Carter
We recognize words by ﬁrst recognizing individual letters, then using the letters to build 
a word [Larson, 2004; Rayner et al. 2012]. Words become more readable by making each 
of the individual letters more recognizable. This chapter is about the development process 
for a new typeface named Sitka. During the typeface’s development, we tested how well 
peo-ple could read each of the letters in the typeface, and used the test results to inform 
design decisions. While the test results needed to be applied conscientiously, we 
discovered that typeface design could be successfully integrated with scientiﬁc legibility 
testing.
1.1   The design brief 
A number of requirements for this new typeface were established at the 
outset. The design was to be a general-purpose typeface primarily for use 
on screen, a serif design with a family of Roman, Italic and Bold (Bold 
Italic was added later). Wide Latin language support was essential, with 
Greek and Cyrillic included. Figure 1 shows a sample of the lowercase 
Latin letters.
The typeface had to be optically scaled, in other words it would have 
different versions, each one optimized for setting at a speciﬁed output size 
or narrow range of sizes. Most of the attention would go into the extremes, 
particularly the smallest size. The number of intermediate masters required 
to cover the entire range of sizes, from 6 point to 36 point and above, was 
not decided until late in the development.
One aspect that was fundamental to the design process, and highly un-
usual in the practice of type design, was the decision to test the legibility 
Figure 1: The famous pangram set in the typeface Sitka.

38
Digital fonts and reading
of the design as it progressed. The design was tested at each stage, the 
results analyzed, and used to improve the next stage. This iterative process 
was a collaboration between designers and scientists. The aim was to de-
sign a typeface as legible as we could make it, and in the course of doing 
that, to learn more about legibility and the testing of legibility in general. 
We hoped that what we learned would be helpful beyond this particular 
exercise.
1.2   The design process 
Thirteen tests during the development of Sitka examined many aspects 
of the typeface: there were tests focused on the lowercase Roman, upper-
case Roman, lowercase italic, lowercase Greek, lowercase Cyrillic, and 
the lowercase large optical size. The studies used a time threshold letter 
recognition measure to compare the current version of the font to either an 
earlier version of the font or to a close comparison font. 
A massive amount of data was collected over the course of this de-
sign process, too much to discuss here. Instead we will discuss some of 
the more interesting ﬁndings and how we came to our design decisions. 
The ﬁndings include: it’s not possible to test everything; a large x-height 
comes with a cost; a large x-height harms Greek letters; letter width and 
letter frequency impact letter recognition; it’s harder to recognize a letter 
when next to other letters; large size designs are optimized for elegance 
not legibility; a typeface is a beautiful collection of letters not a collection 
of beautiful letters; and sometimes it’s necessary to ignore the test results 
entirely.
1.3   It’s not possible to test everything 
A goal of this project was to run the studies quickly so design iterations 
could happen quickly. Each study looked for improvements between sub-
tly different letterforms with a minimal number of study participants (usu-
ally 10-12) in order to get results as quickly as possible. We could have 
tested more people to be more conﬁdent of the results, but we decided that 
it would be better to run more tests with fewer people. As a trade-off we 
decided it was ok to make decisions with imperfect data. In order to get 
the most consistent data from each reader we chose to include only people 

39
Sitka: a collaboration between type design and science
who were 18-38 years old, native readers of English (native Greek and 
Russian readers for the Greek and Cyrillic studies), and had either normal 
or corrected-to-normal vision.
Readers were placed 150cm from the high DPI screen (144 DPI), and 
the letters were 36 points tall. This is three times further than normal read-
ing distance and three times larger than typical text size. This kept the 
visual angle typical for reading, while allowing us to use large sized letters 
to test the design without any of the artifacts that can occur when there are 
too few pixels to represent the design properly.
The reader starts a single trial by looking at a mark on screen, followed 
by the test material that appeared for only part of a second. The test mate-
rial was either a single letter displayed at the location of the mark, or was 
a sequence of three letters with the middle letter centered at the location 
of the mark. We called the three-letter sequence the context condition as 
each letter was placed between the letters that it most commonly appears 
between in written English, though we ensured that the three letters was 
never a word. In either case, the reader only needed to recognize the letter 
that appeared at the mark. After the test letters appeared brieﬂy, they were 
replaced by a letter mask that limited any further processing of the test. 
When the trial was over, the reader was asked to identify the letter at the 
mark by pressing that letter on the keyboard. After each trial the reader 
was told if they identiﬁed the letter correctly.
At the beginning of each session a staircase procedure was used to ﬁnd 
the fastest presentation time at which a reader could achieve a 50% accu-
racy rate. It was important for readers to make some errors to detect accu-
racy differences between letters. If the presentation times are long, even a 
poor typeface could have an accuracy rate of 100%. The presentation time 
was decreased by 17ms with each correct response and increased by 17ms 
with each incorrect response until a stable 50% accuracy was reached over 
156 trials. 
The testing method was reﬁned over the ﬁrst couple of studies. As an 
example, in the ﬁrst study we compared two designs of the 26 Roman 
lowercase letters that differed in the openness of some of the letterforms. 
Under our initial context condition and kind of mask, we found an anom-
alous number of misrecognitions of the letter n. This didn’t make sense; 
we feared that either ﬂanking every test letter with n, o, or x or the mask 
was causing this effect. After changing our ﬂanking letters to frequently 

40
Digital fonts and reading
occurring letter combinations and changing our mask to random letters, 
we no longer found surprising numbers of misrecognitions for any partic-
ular letter.
Another reﬁnement we made during the earliest studies was to change 
the number of letters we investigated per study. The results from the ﬁrst 
study of only 52 letters (26 lowercase letters in two different fonts) were 
very stable. Letters that were clearly different in design between the two 
fonts showed differences of only a few percent when tested. For the second 
study we tried testing many more conditions at once. We investigated the 
lowercase, uppercase and numbers in three different fonts. The increase 
from 52 letters to 186 letters led to very unstable results. In some cases 
there were improbable 20% accuracy differences between letters that were 
nearly identical. 
The method was stable after ﬁxing some of these early problems 
through trial and error. A tradeoff that we made was to not test every letter; 
we carefully choose only the most important letters to test. This left many 
omissions in the testing including extended character sets, uppercase italic 
letters, and the entire bold weight.
1.4   A large x-height comes with a cost 
A commonly held truth among type designers is that legibility is improved 
by a large x-height [Beier and Dyson, 2014]. The term x-height is com-
monly used to mean the ratio between the neutral-height letters (e.g. low-
ercase x) and the overall vertical dimension of the typeface measured from 
the top of ascending strokes to the bottom of descending strokes. Verdana 
(Figure 2) is an example of a typeface that has a large x-height and is 
recognized as being very legible because of it. Sheedy, Tai, Hayes, and 
Preston [2006] found that Verdana was more legible than an entire suite of 
highly-touted brand new type designs.

41
Sitka: a collaboration between type design and science
We found that a large x-height comes with a trade-off. While the large 
size helps neutral height letters, it hurts the ascending and descending let-
ters. Table 1 shows the accuracies for the lowercase letters in the fourth 
round (labeled before) of testing. The neutral height letters (acemrorsu-
vwxz) are recognized 48% correctly while the ascending (bdfhiklt) and 
descending (gjpqy) letters are recognized 38% and 33% correctly respec-
tively.
After discovering the trade-off, we tried slightly increasing the length 
of the descenders without changing the height of the neutral or ascending 
letters (Figure 3). This had the effect of slightly increasing the accuracy of 
the neutral-height letters from 48% to 50%, and the ascending letters from 
38% to 39%. The descending letters showed the largest increase from 33% 
to 37% accuracy (Table 1).
In order to accommodate the longer descenders we planned at ﬁrst 
to increase the overall height of the face with the effect of reducing the 
amount of vertical clearance between successive lines of text. At a later 
stage we decided instead to retain the overall size of the face which meant 
a proportional reduction in the height of both neutral and ascending let-
ters. Because lengthening the descenders had proved to beneﬁt not only 
Figure 2: A comparison of x-height proportions of Futura, Times New Roman, Verdana, 
and Sitka. All have been scaled to the same ascender height. Futura on the left has small 
x-height while Verdana and Sitka on the right have large x-heights.
Figure 3: The descending features are longer in the after (right) version of Sitka.

42
Digital fonts and reading
the descenders but, unexpectedly, the neutral and ascending letters as well 
we considered extending the ascenders and descenders still further, but 
we feared this would have come at a cost to the x-height. In the end we 
abandoned this idea because the neutral height letters contain the most 
frequently occurring letters in English.
Table 1: Letter recognition accuracies for two versions of the Sitka typeface.  
The largest change from before to after was a lengthening of the descenders.
Before
After
Before
After
Before
After
a
56%
54%
j
26%
28%
s
56%
59%
b
35%
33%
k
43%
40%
t
38%
39%
c
30%
34%
l
39%
41%
u
54%
51%
d
26%
33%
m
63%
64%
v
35%
36%
e
71%
75%
n
36%
31%
w
53%
54%
f
43%
46%
o
62%
59%
x
36%
46%
g
35%
41%
p
41%
43%
y
33%
41%
h
40%
41%
q
31%
32%
z
34%
38%
i
40%
38%
r
44%
45%
total
42%
44%
1.5   A large x-height harms Greek letters 
The x-height decision for Latin letters determined the x-height for the 
Greek and Cyrillic scripts. While it is possible to choose different x-heights 
for different writing systems, having consistent x-heights improves the 
harmony when scripts are combined in the same document, such as Greek 
with German, or Russian with English. 
When testing the Greek lowercase, we closely followed the procedure 
that we established for the English tests. While the tests took place in the 
United States, all of the readers were both native speakers and readers of 
Greek. We compared letter recognition of the Greek letters in Sitka to the 
Greek letters in Georgia (Figure 4), the most similar typeface for a com-
parison in a ﬁrst study. As with English, the three-letter sequences were 
chosen for being the most common in Greek, without being a word.
While the neutral height letters in both typefaces were recognized 
correctly 45% of the time, Table 2 shows that Georgia performed better 
for both the ascending and descending letters. The ascending letters (δθλ) 
were recognized 52% correctly in Sitka to 62% in Georgia, and the de-

43
Sitka: a collaboration between type design and science
scending letters (γημρχ) were recognized 40% correctly in Sitka to 44% 
in Georgia. Despite the advantages of the Georgia x-height for the Greek 
letters (Figure 4), we choose to retain the Latin x-height in order to better 
harmonize across different scripts. If Sitka was designed for Greek only, 
or for Greek ﬁrst (with harmonizing Latin and Cyrillic scripts to follow), 
we would have designed a smaller x-height ratio.
Table 2: Letter recognition accuracies for each Greek letter in the typefaces Georgia and 
Sitka. The descending letters (γημρχ) perform relatively poorer in Sitka than in Georgia.
Georgia
Sitka
Georgia
Sitka
Georgia
Sitka
α
51%
48%
ι
41%
41%
ρ
43%
41%
ά
40%
35%
ί
38%
31%
σ
42%
40%
β
67%
61%
κ
52%
49%
τ
45%
41%
γ
41%
37%
λ
57%
50%
υ
32%
32%
δ
66%
60%
μ
42%
37%
ύ
29%
31%
ε
53%
49%
ν
37%
33%
φ
53%
57%
έ
52%
36%
ξ
53%
47%
χ
56%
46%
ζ
58%
49%
ο
46%
44%
ψ
46%
41%
η
40%
37%
ό
41%
34%
ω
49%
55%
ή
29%
28%
π
53%
59%
ώ
40%
35%
θ
62%
47%
1.6   The entire alphabet should be made of the letter m 
There are aspects of letter design which have a big impact, but we cannot 
control. The ﬁrst should be obvious, though we haven’t found any explicit 
references to it in the literature. Letters that occur more frequently are 
Figure 4: Georgia Greek (left) and Sitka Greek (right). The x-heights have been scaled to 
be the same, to show the relatively taller proportions of the ascending letter in Georgia.

44
Digital fonts and reading
more likely to be recognized correctly than letters that are less frequent. 
This kind of frequency effect in words is perhaps the most robust ﬁnding 
in all of reading psychology. Frequently occurring words are recognized 
faster than less frequently occurring words. The same appears to be true 
for letters. There is a very strong correlation (r =.58) between the frequen-
cy of letters in English and the accuracy that we recorded in our studies 
(Table 3). The letter best recognized in Sitka was the letter e, and it is by 
far the most frequent letter in English.
Table 3: English letter frequency correlates with Sitka letter recognition accuracy. 
Frequency
Accuracy
Frequency
Accuracy
Frequency
Accuracy
e
12.7%
74%
d
4.3%
42%
p
1.9%
49%
t
9.1%
46%
l
4.0%
48%
b
1.5%
49%
a
8.2%
59%
c
2.8%
42%
v
1.0%
41%
o
7.5%
66%
u
2.8%
61%
k
0.8%
44%
i
7.0%
46%
m
2.4%
70%
j
0.2%
30%
n
6.7%
44%
w
2.4%
59%
x
0.2%
43%
s
6.3%
62%
f
2.2%
47%
q
0.1%
36%
h
6.1%
52%
g
2.0%
40%
z
0.1%
44%
r
6.0%
50%
y
2.0%
37%
Another aspect of letter design with a big impact is the width of a letter. 
Wide letters tend to perform better than narrow letters. Beier and Larson 
[2010] investigated the well-known issue that certain narrow letters (ijlt) 
are very difﬁcult to distinguish. They found that designing these letters to 
be wider helped to improve their recognition performance. This research 
inﬂuenced the Sitka design: the narrow letters were made as wide as fea-
sible. Even with this design inﬂuence, there is a very strong correlation (r 
=.42) between the width of a letter and its recognition accuracy (Table 4). 
We’re certainly not the ﬁrst to recognize that narrow letters are difﬁcult to 
recognize. The letter m is the second best recognized letter in Sitka, and it 
is the widest lowercase letter.
To examine the problem of narrow letters we looked not only at ac-
curacy rates, but also at speciﬁc misrecognitions. Figure 5 is a complex 
visualization, but full of interesting data. The ﬁrst four columns show 
the mis-recognitions for the letter f. The ﬁrst column is the letter f when 
shown in isolation, the second, third, and fourth columns for the letter f 

45
Sitka: a collaboration between type design and science
when ﬂanked by aft, efo, and ife. There were no misrecognitions for the 
letter f when it was presented in isolation or when it was ﬂanked with efo. 
When f was ﬂanked with aft it was frequently misrecognized as the letter 
k, (visualized as a ¾ full circle). When f was ﬂanked by ife it was very 
frequently (full circle) misrecognized as the letter k, and sometimes (1/4 
circle) as the letter h. The next 16 columns show the same kind of visual-
izations for the letters i, j, l, and t.
Table 4: The width of each Sitka letter in design units correlates with 
letter recognition accuracy.
Width
Accuracy
Width
Accuracy
Width
Accuracy
m
1737
70%
k
1034
44%
c
854
42%
w
1542
59%
o
1030
66%
s
831
62%
n
1149
44%
g
1020
40%
r
830
50%
h
1128
52%
x
998
43%
t
659
46%
u
1120
61%
v
993
41%
f
623
47%
p
1096
49%
y
971
37%
i
537
46%
d
1085
42%
a
964
59%
j
524
30%
b
1065
49%
e
924
74%
l
520
48%
q
1065
36%
z
883
44%
The letter f is most likely to be misrecognized for the letter k, but only 
when ﬂanked by other letters. The letter i is likely to be misrecognized 
for l and j, but only when in isolation. The letter j is more likely to be 
misrecognized when ﬂanked by other letters, and is misrecognized for f 
and t as well as for the more surprising g and h. The letter l is more likely 
to be misrecognized for other ascending letters h and k when ﬂanked by 
other letters. The letter t is strongly misrecognized for the letter k when 
ﬂanked by other letters. The fact that narrow letters are often misrecog-
nized as wider letters when ﬂanked is a very interesting ﬁnding. It shows 
that neighboring letters interact with each other and that those interactions 
need to be considered in more detail.

46
Digital fonts and reading
1.7   It’s harder to recognize a letter when next to other letters 
Most words have more than one letter. This greatly complicates the mea-
surement of letter recognition accuracy. It was discovered more than 100 
years ago that letters are recognized more accurately when quickly pre-
sented as part of a word than when presented in isolation. The Word Supe-
riority Effect comes from our top-down knowledge of language and tells 
us little about the bottom-up qualities of type design [Larson, 2004]. This 
effect is contrasted with the more recently discovered Letter Superiority 
Effect. When letter recognition is size constrained rather than time con-
strained, letters contained within words needed to be 10-20% larger in 
order to reach the same level of accuracy as letters in isolation [Sheedy et. 
al., 2005].
We avoided the Word Superiority Effect by testing each letter in the 
context of common letter sequences that weren’t complete words, in addi-
tion to testing each letter in isolation. Without words, our data was more 
similar to the Letter Superiority Effect. On average letters presented in 
isolation were recognized 58% correctly compared to 45% correctly for 
letters in the context of letter sequences. 
While letters in isolation were recognized more accurately, most of-
ten a letter design that performed better in isolation also performed better 
when there were ﬂanking letters. In one study where we compared a more 
open design to a more closed design there were differences between which 
Figure 5: Misrecognitions for the narrow letters in study 4.

Sitka: a collaboration between type design and science 
aacceess3399 
Figure 6: The more open letters (left) performed better when flanked by other letters, 
while the more closed letters (right) performed better in isolation. 
47 
design performed best in isolation and when there were flanking letters. 
Figure 6 shows the more open design on the left, where the aperture be-
tween the inside and outside of each letter is larger, and the more closed 
design on the right, where the aperture between the inside and outside of 
each letter is smaller. The more closed design performed better with the 
letters in isolation while the more open design performed better when the 
letters were flanked. Because it is far more common to recognize letters 
within a word, we choose to move towards the more open design than the 
more closed design. 
When a misrecognition occurred for a letter with flanking letters, more 
than 26% of the misrecognition were for the flanking letter to the left while 
only 10% were for the flanking letter to the right. We speculate that the 
left flanking letter was more likely to be reported because of the left-to-
right reading direction in the orthographies that we tested, but we would 
need to confirm that the opposite happens in a right-to-left language to be 
confident in that conclusion. 
Because of the frequent misrecognitions with flanking letters, we con-
sidered what we could do to reduce these confusions. Perea and Gomez 
[2012] showed that word fixation times in continuous reading are faster 
when there is more space between letters. In more than one iteration of 
the design we increased the inter-letter spacing to reduce flanking letter 
confusions with only modest success. We went only so far with this idea 
because if the space between letters becomes too big the word falls apart. 
1.8 The large size-specific designs are optimized for elegance 
(The Berlow-Hudson Hypothesis) 
Historically, typefaces were designed differently for large sizes than for 
small sizes. This is sometimes called optical scaling or size-specific de-
sign. A typeface designed for small size will have a taller x-height, wider 
letters, less difference between thick and thin strokes, and wider spacing 

48
Digital fonts and reading
than a typeface designed for larger sizes. In metal type each size had to 
be made separately. In digital type the same letter can be displayed at any 
size. The advantage to digital type production is the ease and speed of de-
signing a single version of each letter, but what is lost is the size-speciﬁc 
tuning. Sitka is one of several dozen digital typefaces that have different 
outlines optimized for different output sizes [Ahrens and Mugikura, 2013].
For the legibility testing aspects of this project we focused our atten-
tion on the Sitka Small size because we saw its optimization as having the 
greatest effect on legibility. In agreement with Harry Carter [1937/1984], 
we felt that the larger sizes were optimized for elegance and visual in-
terest: ‘Shortened descending and ascending strokes are unforgivable on 
bodies over 18-point. It is quite legitimate to shorten the tails of the small 
founts to increase legibility and to lengthen them in the display sizes of 
the same face for the sake of elegance.’ An alternative hypothesis that was 
disputably proposed by David Berlow (personal conversation), and later 
taken up by John Hudson (personal conversation), claimed that the size-
speciﬁc adjustments for larger sizes are in fact legibility optimizations for 
larger text.
To test which hypothesis is correct we used the same letter recogni-
tion method, but because typical reading situations were important to the 
hypothesis we shortened the testing distance in the study to a very typical 
50cm distance. We tested a small and large size-speciﬁc adjustment, Sit-
ka Small and Sitka Banner respectively (Figure 7), each at two physical 
sizes, 9 point and 36 point. We did not control for x-height as the x-height 
difference is one of the key variables that we tested, an element that is 
fundamental to size-speciﬁc adjustments. During piloting of the test we 
discovered that we could not use the same presentation time for both sizes. 
36 point letters are easier to recognize than 9 point letters, so two different 
calibration times were used. If larger size-speciﬁc designs are optimized 
for legibility than we would expect Sitka Small to perform better at 9 
point and expect Sitka Banner to perform better at 36 point. If larger size-
speciﬁc designs are optimized for elegance than we would expect Sitka 
Small to perform better both at 9 point and 36 point.
Sitka Small performed better than Sitka Banner at both 9 point and at 
36 point. Accuracy at 9 point was 48% for Sitka Small to 39% for Sitka 
Banner. Accuracy at 36 point was 56% for Sitka Small to 49% for Sitka 
Banner. The advantage for Sitka Small was statistically reliable, F=29.3, 

49
Sitka: a collaboration between type design and science
p=.0001, and seen for every study participant, and for 25 of 26 letters. The 
difference between sizes is unfair to compare because we recalibrated the 
presentation time to present the 36 point size faster. Even with the faster 
speeds, both Sitka Small and Sitka Banner had higher accuracy rates at 36 
point. If we ignore the recalibration and run the statistical test anyway, we 
ﬁnd that the size difference is reliable, F=7.0, p=.02, and that there is no 
interaction between size and font, F=.2, p=.66.
This strongly indicates that the size-speciﬁc adjustments made for large 
sizes do not increase legibility for large sized text. If we want increased 
legibility at large sizes, we are better served using a small size-speciﬁc 
design. If our goal is instead some level of elegance or personality, then a 
large size-speciﬁc design is appropriate.
1.9   A typeface is a beautiful collection of letters, not a collection of 
beautiful letters 
At the start of the project we analyzed a wide variety of existing research 
into making legible letters. We were strongly inﬂuenced by Sheedy, Tai, 
Hayes, and Preston’s [2006] research on the legibility of individual letters 
in a dozen top typefaces. Each letter’s distance threshold was measured 
which gave us information about the relative legibility of very different 
styles of typefaces. One ﬁnding of this research was that the best perform-
ing typeface for one letter wasn’t necessarily the best performing typeface 
for another letter. Each letter is a unique design. For example the typeface 
Centaur had the top performing letter s, while Verdana had the top per-
forming letter a, and DIN had the top performing letter m (Figure 8).
Figure 7: Size-speciﬁc adjustments in Sitka: Sitka Banner, Sitka Display, Sitka Heading, 
Sitka Subheading, Sitka Text, and Sitka Small.

50
Digital fonts and reading
An extreme argument could be made that we could create a new type-
face by combining the top performing letters into a new Frankenfont. 
Throughout the project we were cognizant that we wanted to create a type-
face and not a collection of letters. We used the earlier studies and our own 
tests as inspiration for characteristics for each letter that could improve 
their legibility within a coherently designed typeface.
One example of considered design came from a study of terminals. We 
measured the performance of the typeface with both teardrop and ﬂared 
terminals and found that the letters c, f, and j performed 6% better on av-
erage with the ﬂared terminal, while the letter a performed slightly better 
with the teardrop terminal (Figure 9). We could have made the decision to 
use the ﬂared terminal with c, f, and j, while using the teardrop terminal 
with a. This inconsistency would have favored the parts over the whole, 
and resulted in a collection of letters rather than a typeface. We decided to 
use the ﬂared terminal throughout the design.
1.10   There can be considerations other than test results 
The goal of the legibility research was to provide useful data to inﬂuence 
the design, not to mindlessly determine the design. One example came 
from the Greek study mentioned earlier in which native Greek readers 
compared letter recognition between Georgia and Sitka. We tested all of 
the base letters as well as the seven vowels that can have tonos marks in 
modern monotonic Greek. Prior to the study we had heard feedback from 
Figure 8: Frankenfont of the Centaur s, Verdana a, and DIN m.
Figure 9: Letter recognition accuracy for four letters with teardrop terminals (left) and 
with ﬂared terminals (right).

51
Sitka: a collaboration between type design and science
Greek type design experts and from Greek readers that the tonos marks in 
Georgia are a particularly terrible design. For Sitka we designed a tonos 
mark that experts said was a better and more traditional angled form. We 
expected the angled design to perform better than the upright tonos mark.
The letter recognition for the unmarked vowels were pretty similar 
between Georgia and Sitka. 45% of the trials were recognized correctly 
with Georgia and 44% were recognized correctly with Sitka. The interest-
ing comparison though was how the accuracy changed with the addition 
of the tonos mark. When the upright tonos mark is added to the Georgia 
vowels, the recognition accuracy decreased slightly from 45% to 44%. 
But when the angled tonos mark was added to the Sitka vowels, the rec-
ognition accuracy decreased dramatically from 44% correct down to 33% 
correct (Figure 10).
The results are compelling that Greek readers are more successful at 
recognizing the upright Georgia tonos marks than the angled tonos mark 
in Sitka. This left us with the decision between changing the Sitka tonos 
mark to a more-legible, upright design or staying with the less-legible, 
angled tonos mark in deference to the advice of experts in contemporary 
Greek orthography. In this case we decided that it was more important to 
go with the opinions of experts and readers.
1.11   Conclusions
The novel collaborative process that was used in the development of the 
Sitka typeface family worked well in the sense that the participants, de-
signers on the one side, scientists on the other, saw very much eye to eye. 
It never happened that designers produced something that the scientists 
said was untestable, or the scientists produced results that the designers 
said were unusable. The process was always a matter of discussion and 
interpretation between participants who had great conﬁdence in one an-
other’s abilities.
Some of the test results were anticipated, such as the problems inherent 
in narrow letters. In such a case our ﬁndings tended to reinforce the con-
clusions, or suggestions, of earlier researchers. The corollary, that lower-
case m is an excellent letter, had perhaps not been so well established, and 
the superior legibility of the most frequent letters in the language seemed 
to be a discovery, if not a very surprising one. Despite our best efforts cer-

52
Digital fonts and reading
tain problems with the Latin alphabet remain intractable; there are practi-
cal limits to how wide an f can be stretched, or how long a descender can 
extend, and it’s a hopeless task to try to persuade languages to dispense 
altogether with diacritics. 
Although the type designer will never solve these problems, it is very 
important to understand the reasons behind them and to mitigate them to 
the extent that it’s possible. 
All of us who took part in this project felt that Sitka as it was complet-
ed and released was a signiﬁcant improvement in legibility. We also felt 
that the design improved dramatically over the course of the development 
effort. Tantalizingly, we did not demonstrate statistically reliable reading 
speed beneﬁts as a result of the improvements. We learned a great deal 
from this project, but it must be said that there is much about the legibility 
of type and its measurement that is not yet fully understood. 
Acknowledgements
The design and development of Sitka was a team effort. It could not have 
been completed without Geraldine Wade and Michael Duggan, the invalu-
able project leaders at the beginning and end of the project respectively. 
We would like to thank the other members of Microsoft’s Advanced Read-
ing Technologies, Greg Hitchcock, Paul Linnerud, Tanya Matskewich, and 
Rob McKaughan for analyzing the study results and so much more, Simon 
Daniels and Ali Basit our partners on the Microsoft Typography team, Kris 
Keeker and Libby Hanna for help in conducting the studies, John Hudson 
and Ross Mills for help on mastering the typeface, Gerry Leonidas for 
Figure 10: Letter recognition accuracy for vowels with (right) and without (left) tonos 
marks for both Georgia (top) and Sitka (bottom). 

53
Sitka: a collaboration between type design and science
consulting on the Greek design and Greek studies, and Steven Sinofsky 
for funding the project. The Sitka typeface is dedicated to the memory of 
Bill Hill. Bill’s passion and vision for Reading 2.0 live on in this typeface. 
References
Ahrens, T. and Mugikura, S. (2013). Size speciﬁc adjustments to type designs. 
(Just Another Foundry).
Beier, S. (2012). Reading letters: designing for legibility. (BIS Publishers).
Beier, S. and Dyson, M.C. (2014). The inﬂuence of serifs on ‘h’ and ‘i’: Useful 
knowledge from design-led scientiﬁc research. Visible Language, 47(3), 
pp. 74-95.
Beier, S. and Larson, K. (2010). Design improvements for frequently misrecog-
nized letters. Information Design Journal, 18(2), pp. 118-137.
Carter, H, (1984). Optical scale in type founding. Printing Historical Society 
Bulletin, 13, 144-148. Reprinted from Carter, H. (1937). Optical scale in 
type founding. Typog-raphy, 4.
Legge, G.E. and Bigelow, C.A. (2011). Does print size matter for reading?  A 
review of ﬁndings from vision science and typography. Journal of Vision, 
11(5), pp. 1-22.
Larson, K. (2004). The science of word recognition or how I learned to stop 
worrying and love the bouma. http://microsoft.com/typography/ctfonts/
wordrecognition.aspx
Perea, M. and Gomez, P. (2012). Subtle increases in interletter spacing facilitate 
the encoding of words during normal reading. PLoS ONE 7(10): e47568.
Rayner, K., Pollatsek, A., Ashby, J. and Clifton, C. (2012). Psychology of Read-
ing, Second Edition, (Psychology Press).
Roethlein, B.E. (1912). The relative legibility of different faces of printing types. 
American Journal of Psychology, 23(1), pp. 1-36.
Sheedy, J.E., Subbaram, M.V., Zimmerman, A.B., and Hayes, J.R. (2005). Text 
legibility and the letter superiority effect. Human Factors, 47(4),  
pp. 797-815.
Sheedy, J.E., Tai, Y-C., and Hayes, J.R. (2006). Individual character legibility. 
http://www.pacificu.edu/sites/default/files/documents/Individualcharacter-
legibility.pdf

54
Chapter 4
Eye movements: from  
psycholinguistics to font design
Timothy J. Slattery
The study of reading has been greatly advanced in the past 40 years by the examination of 
eye movements recorded during the reading process. Despite the advances made by read-
ing researchers using eye movement recording as a methodology, this research has resulted 
in relatively few advances in the way text is displayed to readers. That is not to say that 
textual displays have not undergone significant improvements over this time, only that the 
improvements were not driven by eye movement research. This disconnect is of particular 
interest given the applicability that eye movements offer for understanding all aspects of 
the reading process. The possible reasons for this disconnect between psycholinguistic 
research and font design will be discussed. Additionally, current psycholinguistic research 
trends that overlap with potential font design issues will be explored during a review of the 
eye movement findings. 
1.1   Introduction
Perhaps no experimental methodology has shed more light on the reading 
process – or offers more promise for continued gains – than eye track-
ing.  This chapter is devoted to the use of eye tracking as a methodology 
for studying reading, focusing on how this methodology may be useful in 
guiding decisions on aspects of font design. 
Eye movements are a necessary product of the physiology of the retina. 
The ability to discern fine detail is limited to a small central region of the 
retina – the fovea. Roughly speaking, the fovea occupies the central two 
degrees of our vision. At normal reading distances, only 6 or 7 letters will 
fall inside the fovea. This means that for particularly long words at least 
some of the letters will fall into a region adjacent to the fovea referred to as 
the parafovea. Our visual acuity, and therefore our ability to discern letter 
identities, decreases with increasing eccentricity from the fovea [Bouma, 
1970; Klein, Berry, Briand, D’Entremont and Farmer, 1990]. Therefore, 
we must move our eyes when we read in order to place the image of the 
word we want to identify onto or near to the fovea for efficient processing.

55
Eye movements: from psycholinguistics to font design
1.2   Characteristics of reading eye movements
Despite the illusion that our gaze shifts smoothly across the page while we 
read, reading eye movements consist of a sequence of saccades separated 
by brief stops (fixations). This jerky appearance of the eyes can be easily 
seen by anyone with a page of text and a hole punch. Simply punch a hole 
in the page and find a willing friend to read the text while you peer through 
the hole to observe their eyes. In fact, recent research confirms that our 
eyes make saccades between words even in situations in which the text is 
moving – or scrolling [Valsecchi, Gegenfurtner, and Schütz, 2013]. 
The size of a typical saccade in English is about 7-9 characters [Ray-
ner, 2009]. However, there is a high degree of variability in the length 
of reading saccades. Also, the length of reading saccades is determined 
more by the constraints of the linguistic input (number of letters) than by 
constraints of the visual system (degree of visual angle) [Morrison and 
Rayner, 1981]. For instance, readers of Chinese will move their eyes in 
much smaller saccades (2-3 characters) than readers of English. However, 
in Chinese, 2 character words are the norm and it’s rare to have words 
composed of 4 characters or more. Therefore, the smaller saccades are 
required in Chinese reading to prevent the eye from outpacing the mind’s 
language comprehension systems. Saccade lengths are also highly sensi-
tive to the spatial extent of text and the oculomotor system is capable of 
quickly adapting to the typographical environment [Slattery and Rayner, 
2010]. So, a wider font that requires longer saccades, in order to move 
from word to word, will yield longer average saccade lengths than a nar-
rower font, when measured by visual angle, even though the number of 
letters traversed may be roughly the same.
Saccades are considered ballistic eye movements that ‘fire’ from one 
location to the next. The targeting procedure for saccades a) takes time, 
and b) is error prone. Estimates on the time to plan and initiate a saccade to 
a new location are approximately 150-200 ms [Becker and Jürgens, 1979; 
Rayner, Slowiaczek, Clifton, and Bertera, 1983]. The error involved in 
saccades is assumed to be composed of two components: saccadic range 
error, and random error [McConkie, Kerr, Reddix, and Zola, 1988]. Sac-
cadic range error refers to the finding that long saccades tend to undershoot 
their intended targets while short saccades tend to overshoot their intended 
targets, with saccadic range error being zero for some idealized saccade 

56
Digital fonts and reading
length (e.g. 6-7 characters). The random component of saccadic error is 
assumed to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation that is a function 
of saccade length being larger for longer than for shorter saccades. 
The initial saccade to a word tends to place the eyes in a location just 
left of word center – the preferred viewing location [Rayner, 1979]. How-
ever, there is considerable variability within word fixation locations. In 
fact, the distributions of within word fixation locations overlap at word 
boundaries. Therefore, some of the fixations at the beginning of a word 
(n) were in fact likely intended for the prior word (n-1) and some of the 
fixations at the end of word n were in fact intended for word n+1. These 
errant fixations are referred to as mislocated fixations [Nuthmann, Eng-
bert, and Kliegl, 2005; Drieghe, Rayner, and Pollatsek, 2008; Engbert and 
Nuthmann, 2008].
Another important property of saccades is that new visual information 
is not typically encoded during them. Therefore, during saccades we are 
effectively blind – an effect referred to as saccadic suppression [Matin, 
1974]. That our minds would suppress the visual information impeding on 
the retina during a saccade makes intuitive sense, since this information 
would be little more than a blur. In fact, saccadic suppression extends be-
yond the end of the saccade as vision remains somewhat suppressed at the 
very beginning of fixations [Bremmer, Kubischik, Hoffmann, and Krekel-
berg, 2009; Slattery, Angele and Rayner, 2011]. 
For English, reading saccades that travel from left to right are classified 
as ‘forward saccades’, while those that move from right to left are usually 
called ‘regressive saccades’. It is estimated that ~10-15% of eye move-
ments are regressive during normal reading though this number can be 
higher in difficult reading situations or with novice readers [Rayner, 1998, 
2009]. Saccades that move the eye from one line of text to another are 
referred to as return sweeps and are not considered regressive saccades. 
Return sweeps are an important part of normal reading and one where  
saccadic error can lead to momentary reading difficulties. No doubt you 
have occasionally made a return sweep to the wrong line of text while 
reading. Recovering from such oculomotor errors can be time consuming.  
Based on this, it seems appropriate to follow the basic recommendations 
of Bouma [1980] that line spacing be adjusted relative to line length so as 
to keep the angle of the correct return sweep from being too small. 

57
Eye movements: from psycholinguistics to font design
1.3   Eye movement measures of processing
The chief measures of processing time are the fixation durations. While 
legibility effects, or how easy the letters in a word are to encode, should 
influence the duration of eye fixations, it is quite clear that these dura-
tions are largely influenced by the difficulty associated with the lexical 
processing of the fixated word [Rayner, 1998, 2009]. For example, readers 
spend less time fixating high frequency words than low frequency words 
[Rayner, 1998, 2009]. The word frequency effect is particularly well es-
tablished having been replicated more times than Earl Grey tea aboard the 
Starship Enterprise. 
One obvious measure of processing time is the average fixation du-
ration on a passage of text. While this can be informative, it can also be 
misleading if presented alone because passage reading is composed of a 
highly variable number of fixations. So, when comparing two fonts, a de-
crease in average fixation duration could be offset by an increased number 
of fixations. In such offsetting cases, the relative size of each effect would 
determine the effect on measures of overall processing like total reading 
time or reading rate. 
Recording eye movements has an advantage over just measuring read-
ing time as researchers can examine oculomotor behavior for specific re-
gions of interest (ROI) within a passage. For reading, the ROI are typi-
cally individual word units which are standardly defined as the word and 
the space prior to it [Rayner, 1998].  This standard has made comparison 
of word processing measures between studies far easier. However, larger 
ROIs can be useful. For instance, phrases with particular typographical 
elements (e.g. italics) may be used to examine how changes in these el-
ements influence the natural movement of the eyes. Or, with web page 
development, the ROIs could be particular advertisements or hyperlinks 
[Fitzsimmons, Weal and Drieghe, 2014].
Another benefit of eye tracking is that it provides a continuum of 
processing time measures [Rayner, 1998] For instance, word frequency  
effects occur very early in word processing with low frequency words elic-
iting longer first fixation durations than high frequency words. However, 
alternating case effects first appear in gaze duration [Reingold, Yang, and 
Rayner, 2010] which adds the duration of the first fixation with the dura-
tion of all immediate refixations. First fixation and gaze duration are both 

58
Digital fonts and reading
considered measures of early word processing, while measures like second 
pass time (the sum of all rereading fixations) reflect late processes related 
to comprehension difficulty, such as word mis-readings [Slattery, 2009] 
and ambiguity resolution [Frazier and Rayner, 1982; Ferreira and Hender-
son, 1991; Slattery, Sturt, Christianson, Yosida, and Ferreira, 2013].
Blinks are often viewed as a nuisance variable as they represent a ma-
jor source of data loss. When the eye is shut we do not know how it is 
behaving. For this reason, participants in eye movement studies are rou-
tinely instructed to minimize their blinking during passage reading and to 
instead blink just prior to and following each reading trial. This strategy 
is highly effective when the reading passages are only a sentence long. 
However, with paragraphs, blinks will be an inevitable part of the data re-
cord. For typographical research this might not be a big problem. That is, 
blinks are also a potentially useful measure of eye fatigue [Stern, Boyer, 
and Schroeder, 1994]. As the total number of blinks will increase with the 
length of time it takes someone to read a passage, the appropriate mea-
sure for examining typographic effects would be blink rate (blinks per 
minute). Slattery and Rayner [2010] included an analysis of blink rate in 
their examination of the ClearType anti-aliasing used by Microsoft. They 
showed that the benefits of anti-aliasing, in terms of reading rate, were not 
accompanied by any increase in eye fatigue, as measured by blink rate. As 
reading from screen increases, the need to assess changes in screen tech-
nology may make blink rate an even more important measure.
1.4   Gaze-contingent eye movement methods
We have learned a considerable amount about the processes involved in 
reading by monitoring eye movements while people read static passages 
of text. In such studies, the texts are carefully constructed ahead of time 
in order to examine how a variable (e.g. word frequency, syntactic struc-
ture, contextual constraint) influences eye movements. However, with eye 
tracking researchers can do so much more. For instance, it is possible to 
change what is presented on the screen based on where the reader is look-
ing. While the range of manipulations available with gaze contingent dis-
play changes is seemingly endless, I will be discussing three techniques 
that may be valuable in the study of typography. 

59
Eye movements: from psycholinguistics to font design
1.4.1   Moving window
The moving window paradigm [McConkie and Rayner, 1975; Rayner and 
Bertera, 1979] presents text to readers in a manner in which the letters 
outside of a readable ‘window’ are replaced with masking letters. This 
readable window is tethered to the fixation and therefore moves through 
the text with the eyes (see Figure 1). In studies using the moving win-
dow paradigm, researchers manipulate the size of the window as well as 
the types of information maintained outside the window. For instance, in 
the example shown in Figure 1, information about word boundaries (in-
ter-word spaces) are still present outside the readable window but letter 
identities have been masked with the letter ‘x’.a Using the moving win-
dow technique researchers have explored the perceptual span (i.e. the 
area around fixation from which useful information for reading can be 
obtained). These studies have found that the perceptual span for reading 
English is asymmetric, extending 3-4 letter spaces to the left of fixation 
and 14-15 letter spaces to the right [McConkie and Rayner, 1975; Mc-
Conkie and Rayner, 1976; Rayner and Bertera, 1979; Rayner, Well, and 
Pollatsek, 1980; Rayner, Well, Pollatsek, and Bertera, 1982; Underwood 
and McConkie, 1985; Underwood and Zola, 1986]. The size and asymme-
try of the perceptual span depends on language characteristics. It is smaller 
in Chinese [Chen and Tang, 1998; Inhoff and Lui, 1998] and the asymme-
try is reversed for Hebrew [Pollatsek, Bolozky, Well, and Rayner, 1981]. 
Additionally, the perceptual span does not extend to upcoming lines of 
text [Inhoff and Briihl, 1991; Inhoff and Topolski, 1992; Pollatsek, Raney, 
LaGasse, and Rayner, 1993]. Finally, the perceptual span is not a fixed 
property; it is smaller for beginning readers compared to skilled readers 
[Rayner, 1986], for older readers compared to younger readers [Rayner, 
Castelhano, and Yang, 2009], and for slower readers compared to faster 
readers [Rayner, Slattery, and Bélanger, 2010]. With the moving window 
technique, researchers could explore the extent to which a typographical 
element was useful by varying the size of the window around which this 
element was available. For instance, would the presence of serifs within 
the moving window increase or decrease the perceptual span?
a	 Note that the letter ‘x’ in the word ‘fox’ is not actually masked in this particular  
manipulation.

60
Digital fonts and reading
1.4.2   Boundary change
The boundary change paradigm initiates a change to the text only after 
the eyes cross an invisible boundary (see Figure 2). This boundary is rou-
tinely placed just prior to the inter-word space preceding some word of 
interest. The text in the region prior to the change is referred to as the pre-
view and the text after the change is referred to as the target. Researchers 
then compare reading time measures on the word of interest for differ-
ent preview conditions. In Figure 2, the preview and target have different 
letters but maintain the same vowel consonant structure and basic word 
shape.  The benefit of having an identical preview compared to various 
non-identical preview conditions is usually in the order of 30-50 ms [Ray-
ner, 1998, 2009].
Most research utilizing boundary changes seeks to uncover the repre-
sentational structure of words that can be processed in the parafovea [for a 
review see Schotter, Angele, and Rayner, 2012] and it may be difficult to 
see how it relates to typography. However, there is one boundary change 
effect with special significance for font design as it relates to word shape. 
A recent eye movement study has shown that the upper half of words is 
more important for reading than the bottom half [Perea, 2012] which may 
Figure 1: Moving window illustration.

61
Eye movements: from psycholinguistics to font design
Figure 2: Boundary change illustration. The vertical lines in the figure are shown only for 
description and aren’t viewable by readers in such studies.
be the result of word shape information. However, transposed letter effects 
provide strong evidence against the notion that words are recognized by 
their outline shape alone rather than by their constituent letters [see also 
Perea and Rosa, 2002]. Single word priming studies have also shown that 
transposed letter non-words are better primes for words than substitution 
non-words. So, ‘jugde’ is a better prime for the word ‘judge’ than ‘judpe’ 
[Perea and Lupker, 2003]. Recent boundary change experiments confirm 
that transposed letter non-words provide greater preview benefit effects 
during normal reading than substitution letter non-words [Johnson, Perea, 
and Rayner, 2007] and the effect is the same whether the transpositions 
maintain word shape (crown, corwn) or not (clerk, celrk). This would not 
be the case if word shape was more important than letter identities. Other 
research has shown that reading requires the individual letters in words be 
individually discriminable [Pelli, Farell, and Moore, 2003; Pelli, Tillman, 
Freeman, Su, Berger, and Majad, 2007]. 
Another important effect revealed by boundary change experiments, 
that is relevant for the more general use of the technique, relates to ‘fo-
veal load’. The amount of parafoveal preprocessing a reader can accom-
plish is inversely related to the difficulty associated with foveal processing 
[Henderson and Ferreira, 1990]. That is, difficulty processing the currently 
fixated word results in the focusing of attentional resources on the fovea 
and away from the parafovea – shrinking the perceptual span. So, when 
the text is especially difficult due to low frequency words or difficult se-
mantic integration, readers will not get as much useful information from 
upcoming words. An open question is whether difficult fonts would result 
in increased foveal load.

62
Digital fonts and reading
1.4.3   Disappearing text
Both the moving window and boundary change techniques attempt to im-
plement display changes during saccades so as to take advantage of sac-
cadic suppression. When executed well, subjects are hardly, if ever, aware 
that something has happened [but see Slattery, Angele, and Rayner 2011]. 
However, other display change techniques make no attempt to hide their 
existence and initiate changes during a fixation. The disappearing text 
method [Rayner, Liversedge, White, and Vergilino-Perez, 2003] falls into 
this category of display changes. It involves removing words from view at 
varying times after they are fixated. The words reappear only after the eyes 
move on to another word. What is surprising is that, compared to normal 
reading, text can be read without much disruption when the words dis-
appear just 60 milliseconds after fixation. Additionally, reader’s fixation 
durations on words are still influenced by word frequency. That is, read-
ers continue fixating the blank region left by the disappearance of a low 
frequency word for a longer amount of time than they spend fixating the 
blank region left by the disappearance of a high frequency word [Blythe, 
Liversedge, Joseph, White, and Rayner, 2009; Rayner et al., 2003; Rayner, 
Liversedge, and White, 2006]. While Rayner et al. [2003] only used a 60 
millisecond timing for the disappearance, more recent research examining 
the influence of disappearing text on children [Blythe et al., 2009], and 
on older readers [Rayner, Yang, Castelhano, and Liversedge, 2011] used 
a range of timings. Blythe et al. [2009] revealed that children were only 
somewhat disrupted by text that disappeared after even the shortest timing 
tested – 40 milliseconds. In stark contrast, Rayner et al. [2011] reported 
that older readers (65+ years of age) were disrupted significantly more 
by the disappearing text manipulation than college age readers. However, 
timings tested included only 60, 50, and 40 milliseconds. It is possible 
that at longer delays the disruption experienced by older readers may have 
been significantly minimized. 
There are a few aspects of the disappearing text technique that might 
make it suitable for investigating typographical factors related to font de-
sign. The first is that the timing of the disappearance is assumed to influ-
ence the initial visual encoding of words. As long as the text is presented 
for a duration sufficient for visual encoding, reading can progress normal-
ly. If fonts differ in the ease with which they can be encoded then research-
ers should be able to adjust the duration in order to determine the timing 

63
Eye movements: from psycholinguistics to font design
profile of different fonts. Additionally, the disappearing text manipulation 
has been shown to be sensitive to reader’s individual differences (i.e. age) 
and thus may be useful in determining what font related factors are most 
important to maximize readability at different ages.  
These three gaze contingent display change methods are only the tip 
of the iceberg. There are many other examples of the general method that 
have yielded great insight [e.g. fast priming: Sereno and Rayner, 1992] 
and new uses occur on a regular basis.  These techniques offer creative 
typographical researchers a wealth of options that remain largely untapped 
for investigations into font characteristics and page layouts. 
1.5   Eye movement studies of typography
Given the great success that eye tracking has had for illuminating the cog-
nitive processes related to reading [Rayner, 1998, 2009], it may come as 
some surprise that there are very few studies of eye movements designed 
to examine aspects of typography. A Google scholar search, at the time 
of this writing, using the terms ‘eye movements’ and ‘reading’, yielded 
approximately 124,000 hits. Adding the search term ‘typography’ reduced 
that number to 964 hits – less than 1% of the total.b
With so much research into the way readers move their eyes, why are 
so few studies concerned about the influence of typography? Surely there 
are many factors responsible for the dearth of eye movement studies of 
typography, such as the cost of eye trackers and the expertise required to 
collect and analyze eye movement data. Additionally, the relevant vari-
ables in the design of a font are likely to be strongly interdependent. For 
instance, when typesetting text, Bouma [1980] argued that longer line 
lengths require additional interlinear spacing to avoid problems with shal-
low angled return sweeps. This does not preclude the scientific study of 
these variables [Tinker, 1963] and their potential interactions but it does 
make it more complicated and laborious. Given this added level of diffi-
culty, it is unsurprising that many early typographical researchers did not 
tackle the additional challenge of acquiring the expertise needed to collect 
expensive eye movement data. 
b	 If instead of adding the search term ‘typography’ we add the term ‘font legibility’ or ‘font 
readability’ the situation is far worse with only 9 and 23 hits respectively.

64
Digital fonts and reading
So why weren’t the psycholinguists who studied eye movements 
during reading more interested in the influence of typography? When I 
was a graduate student in the early 2000s, there seemed to be a common 
belief that as long as the text was presented in a reasonable manner, a 
reader’s eye movements would be determined more by the characteristics 
of the language than by differences in the typographic presentation. Along 
with this belief was the tacit assumption that any difference related to ty-
pography would represent a main effect only and would not interact with 
language variables. So, Times New Roman might be read faster than Old 
English but this difference would be the same for all words and sentences. 
Since psycholinguists were concerned with the processing of the words 
and sentences, it seemed a safe and simplifying assumption to ignore ty-
pography so long as it was held constant within a study. This assumption 
also had empirical support from an early study utilizing display changes. 
McConkie and Zola [1979] presented passages of text in aLtErNaTiNg 
CaSe then on specific saccades the case alternation was switched (AlTeR-
nAtInG cAsE). The astonishing finding was that fixations following a case 
switch were no longer than fixations that did not follow a switch. The 
authors conclude that readers integrate abstract letter identities (where ‘A’ 
and ‘a’ are the same) from one fixation to the next. If a change in a let-
ter’s case did not increase fixation durations, it is difficult to imagine that 
a relatively small change in font would influence such durations. How-
ever, as you might guess, reading alternating case is more effortful than 
reading all lower case or all uppercase text [Rayner, McConkie, and Zola, 
1980; Juhasz, Liversedge, White, and Rayner, 2006; Reingold, Yang, and 
Rayner, 2010].  It may be that alternating case disrupts normal word iden-
tification processes [Coltheart and Freeman, 1974] and that under more 
normal circumstances changes in fonts would influence fixation durations. 
Additionally, the foveal load hypothesis predicts that the additional fove-
al difficulty associated with processing a word written in aLtErNaTiNg 
CaSe would result in reduced parafoveal processing of upcoming words. 
This could explain why McConkie and Zola [1979] were unable to find a 
significant difference between their case switch and no-switch conditions. 
Still, few psycholinguists have seemed interested in examining the role of 
typography.

65
Eye movements: from psycholinguistics to font design
1.6   Fonts
It may be surprising to learn that the most prevalent font family used in 
eye movement studies of reading is Courier. This has far less to do 
with Courier’s legibility, and far more to do with its fixed width char-
acteristic. In a fixed width font, every letter occupies the same amount 
of horizontal space. This property has a number of benefits in the eyes 
of psycholinguists. First, with a fixed width font controlling the number 
of letters in target words also controls their physical size. Additionally, 
fixed width fonts make it easy to implement display changes in moving 
window and boundary change studies. These experiments would be far 
more complicated if the letters in the mask or preview were a different 
size than those in the target. Initiating such changes is possible but would 
result in perceived changes in the length of the line of text unless the size 
of the mask or preview letters were made to fit those of the target letters. 
Rayner, Slattery, and Belanger [2010] conducted such a moving window 
experiment using both the fixed width font Consolas and the proportion-
al width font Georgia for texts. In order to create the masks needed for the 
moving window with Georgia, the space between the letters of the mask 
were adjusted so that the size of the mask would exactly equal the size of 
the target word that would replace it. They found no significant differences 
in the size of the perceptual span for the different fonts. Despite similar 
reading rates for the two fonts across the different window size conditions, 
there were significant differences in fixation durations and the number of 
fixations required for reading. The average fixation duration was longer 
for Georgia, while Consolas required more forward and regressive fixa-
tions for reading. The forward saccade differences were due to shorter sac-
cades (measured in characters) for Consolas than for Georgia. In inter-
preting these differences it is important to note that Georgia has a higher 
character density than Consolas. So in this study, the higher density font 
led to longer fixation durations but fewer fixations overall compared to the 
lower density font. The same pattern of effects with respect to density was 
reported by Kolers, Duchnicky, and Ferguson [1981] – higher density text 
led to fewer but longer fixations. 
While fixed width fonts like Courier  and Consolas are preferred 
by psycholinguists, there are plenty of eye movement studies that use pro-
portional width fonts like Arial and Times New Roman. However, few eye 

66
Digital fonts and reading
movement experiments have designs that allow for direct font compar-
isons. One recent study examined how younger and older (65+) readers 
handle the task of reading a difficult font compared to an easy one [Ray-
ner, Reichle, Stroud, Williams, and Pollatsek, 2006]. They chose Times 
New Roman as their easy font and Old English as their difficult font. 
One benefit of using these fonts was that they had nearly identical char-
acter densities. As predicted, Old English texts took longer to read than 
Times New Roman ones. This effect was due to an increase in both the 
average fixation duration and number of fixations for Old English com-
pared to Times New Roman. Moreover, the increased reading time asso-
ciated with the difficult font was considerably larger for the older readers 
than for the younger ones. Rayner et al. [2006] also examined the effects 
of target word frequency and predictability.  An analysis of the specific 
predictability of manipulated target words found that when these words 
were of high (86% cloze completion) predictability, based on prior sen-
tence context, they were fixated for less time than when they were of low 
(4% cloze completion) predictability. More interesting was the fact that 
words presented in a difficult font benefitted more from high predictable 
contexts than words presented in an easy font – font difficulty and word 
predictability interacted. An analysis of the gaze durations on specific fre-
quency manipulated target words replicated the standard frequency effect. 
Additionally, the word frequency did not interact with the difficulty of 
the font. That is, low frequency words were fixated for longer amounts of 
time than high frequency words but the difference between low and high 
frequency words was similar for both fonts. However, other research uti-
lizing distorted fonts to produce perceptual difficulty found interactions in 
gaze durations between font distortions and word frequency [Sheridan and 
Reingold, 2012]. The interactions between lexical and typographical vari-
ables are important because they illustrate that typography can influence 
certain words more than others.
While the font comparisons in Rayner et al. [2006] and Sheridan and 
Reingold [2012] examined what happens when fonts are made more dif-
ficult, other studies have examined the influence of variables designed 
to make fonts more legible. Slattery and Rayner [2010] conducted a pair 
of eye movement studies examining Microsoft’s ClearType anti-aliasing 
technique which involves sub-pixel rendering to smooth the outline of let-
ters [see Larson, 2007]. Examining ClearType scientifically was aided by 

67
Eye movements: from psycholinguistics to font design
clear theoretical predictions. For instance, ClearType should have a larger 
impact for fonts with more curved or slanted features since these suffer 
most from aliasing. Consistent with this prediction, they found benefits 
for ClearType in total time and average fixation duration that interacted 
with font; effects were larger for Harrington, and Script MT than for 
Times New Roman. So ClearType anti-aliasing improved legibility more 
for fonts that suffer more aliasing. Based on the shorter fixation duration 
measures for Times New Roman compared to the other two fonts we could 
also conclude that it was the more legible font. Additionally, in total time 
there was an interaction between word frequency and font as Times New 
Roman had smaller frequency effects than the Harrington, or Script MT. 
Moreover, in gaze duration there was a significant interaction between 
ClearType and word frequency. A second experiment, compared regular, 
italic, and bold text for two fixed width fonts – Consolas and Andale 
Mono. Andale Mono was more legible than Consolas as evidenced 
by shorter gaze durations and total time on target words. Additionally, the 
italic style was more legible in Andale Mono than Consolas as indi-
cated by interactions in gaze duration and total time. The word frequency 
effect interacted with style being larger for the italic than for regular or 
bold text. ClearType also improved the legibility of italic text more than 
regular or bold text. And there were again indications that word frequen-
cy effects were smaller with ClearType anti-aliasing than without it. This 
complex pattern of effects and interactions is in direct opposition with the 
tacit psycholinguistic assumption that font differences will have the same 
influence on all words. 
1.6.1   Serif vs. sans serif
There has also been a renewed interest in using eye movements to explore 
font characteristics such as the presence or absence of serifs. However, all 
of these studies have at least one serious flaw that leaves unresolved the 
question of whether serif or sans serif fonts are more legible in general. 
For instance, Josephson [2008] reported a study that examined two serif 
fonts (Times New Roman and Georgia) and two sans serif fonts (Arial 
and Verdana). Choosing multiple fonts to estimate the influence of serifs 
is a plus for this study. Additionally, the study used a within subjects de-
sign which is crucial for detecting effects when subject variability is high. 

68
Digital fonts and reading
However, passages were not counterbalanced across font conditions. So 
the language variables known to influence fixation durations were differ-
ent for each font. Additionally, only six participants were included in the 
study and no inferential statistics were reported – only condition means. 
A somewhat improved study was reported by Beymer, Russell, and Orton 
[2008]. They collected eye movements from 82 adult readers using Geor-
gia and Helvetica. However, they failed to find any significant differences 
in the eye movement records for the two fonts. They did however report 
many significant differences between groups of readers. For instance, 
readers in their 30s spent more time rereading words than readers in their 
50s. Additionally, they found large significant differences between native 
English readers and readers for whom English was a second language. The 
flaw in the design of the study was that they manipulated font as a between 
subject variable. So, 41 subjects read in Georgia and a different 41 read in  
Helvetica. With large differences between readers, such a design will 
be severely underpowered to find font differences. More recently, Perea 
[2013] conducted a much improved study using Lucida and Lucida 
Sans to address the serif question. The only significant difference be-
tween the two fonts was that the serif font received slightly more fixations 
during reading. However, all other measures were equivalent between the 
two fonts – including total reading time. The only drawback to the Perea 
[2013] study was that only one serif and one sans serif font were used. 
Perhaps with a different selection of fonts, serif effects would have been 
found. 
1.6.2   Inter-letter and inter-word spacing
Recently there has been an increased interest in exploring the effects of 
horizontal text spacing. Moreover, this interest spans a number of different 
subfields within reading research: vision scientists [Chung, 2002, 2004; 
Arditi, 2004; Arditi and Cho 2005; Blackmore-Wright, Georgeson, and 
Anderson, 2013;], psycholinguists [Perea, Moret-Tatay, and Gomez, 2011; 
Risko, Lanthier, and Besner, 2011; Slattery and Rayner, 2013] and typo-
graphical researchers [Reynolds and Walker, 2004]. 
The spacing between letters influences our ability to discern them 
[Bouma, 1970; Erikson and Erikson, 1974; Chung, Levi, and Legge, 2001; 
Marzouki, and Grainger, 2014]. As letters are pushed closer together their 

69
Eye movements: from psycholinguistics to font design
identification becomes less accurate. However, identifying a word is dif-
ferent from identifying a letter. With word identification tasks like lexical 
decision, increases to inter-letter spacing can result in faster reaction times 
[Perea, and Gomez 2012], but beyond a critical point additional space 
slows performance [Chung, 2002; Pelli, Tillman, Freeman, Su, Berger, 
and Majad, 2007; Paterson and Jordan 2010; Risko, Lanthier, and Besner, 
2011; Vinckier, Qiao, Pallier, Dehaene, and Cohen, 2011]. This suggests 
an optimal inter-letter spacing value at which any change would cause in-
hibition. This optimal value may differ across readers. When Arditi [2004] 
allowed low vision readers to make real time adjustments to various font 
variables, the largest adjustments were made to inter-letter spacing.  Ad-
ditionally, fonts differ widely in their amount of inter-letter space.  Perea, 
Moret-Tatay, and Gomez [2011] noted that the results of studies of spac-
ing are somewhat inconsistent due in part to the use of different fonts. 
For instance, Perea et al. [2011] manipulated the spacing of Times New 
Roman and found facilitation for increased inter-letter space while Cohen, 
Dehaene, Vinckier, Jobert, and Montavont, [2008] found  inhibition for 
increased inter-letter space using Courier. 
In English and other alphabetic languages, word boundaries are signi-
fied by an inter-word space. These spaces benefit reading and reading rate 
drops when they are removed [Pollatsek and Rayner, 1982; Rayner, Fisch-
er, and Pollatsek, 1998; Perea and Acha, 2009; Rayner, Yang, Schuett, 
and Slattery, 2013; Sheridan, Rayner, and Reingold, 2013]. The size of 
inter-word spaces varies across font, just as inter-letter space does. There-
fore, the benefits of inter-word spaces should differ between fonts based 
on the size of their inter-word space. 
There are now a number of studies which have explored horizontal 
text spacing on eye movements [Drieghe, Brysbaert, and Desmet, 2005; 
Paterson and Jordan, 2010; Perea, and Gomez 2012; Perea, Panadero, 
Moret-Tatay, and Gomez, 2012; Zorzi, et al. 2012; Slattery and Rayner, 
2013; Blackmore-Wright, Georgeson, and Anderson, 2014]. Most of these 
studies report benefits to reading from increased spacing. For instance, 
Perea et al. [2012] found faster reading rates with small increases in in-
ter-letter spacing with Times New Roman. Additionally, these benefits 
were greater for readers with developmental dyslexia [see also Zorzi et 
al., 2012]. However, in these studies inter-letter spacing was confounded 
with inter-word spacing. That is, these studies added or removed space 

70
Digital fonts and reading
between all characters including the inter-word space character. Therefore, 
they can’t separate the influence of one type of spacing from the other.
Another study found detrimental effects of increased spacing on eye 
movements [Paterson and Jordan, 2010] when using the fixed width font 
Courier. However, the smallest addition to inter-letter spacing in their 
experiment added an extra space b e t w e e n   e a c h   l e t t e r (as in the 
prior three words) which likely disrupted the overall integrity of the words 
in the sentences. Paterson and Jordan also reported larger word frequency 
effects for all increased spacing conditions relative to standard spacing. 
Their study also manipulated both inter-letter and inter-word spacing but 
not in a fully factorial manner. Therefore, the individual contributions of 
each type of space could not be assessed.
Slattery and Rayner [2013] also manipulated inter-letter and inter-word 
spacing in two eye movement studies. Their first experiment manipulated 
spacing between all characters for Cambria and Times New Roman fonts. 
They found that changing the space between the characters of these fonts 
increased total reading times. In a follow up study they used a novel ma-
nipulation which reduced inter-letter spacing within words then added the 
saved space to the end of the word thereby increasing inter-word spacing. 
This condition was then compared to a normal spaced condition for Geor-
gia and Consolas. The adjusted spacing condition yielded shorter gaze 
durations than standard spacing and this benefit was largely limited to the 
Georgia font. Blackmore-Wright, Georgeson, and Anderson [2014] also 
report benefits to reading rate with increased inter-word spaces for readers 
with macular disease.
More research is needed to explore inter-letter and inter-word spacing. 
This research should focus on potential interactions between these spacing 
variables as well as differences in optimal use of space for proportional 
versus fixed width fonts. 
1.7   Concluding remarks
In recent years, eye movement recording, in conjunction with appropriate 
experimental design, has helped dispel the assumption that typographical 
variables can only have a main effect on reading performance. These stud-
ies have not only found reliable typographic effects, they have also shown 
that these effects differ for different words and different readers. The field 

71
Eye movements: from psycholinguistics to font design
now seems primed to explore reading from the viewpoint that it represents 
a complex interplay between language, typographic display, and reader 
ability. The outcome of such future explorations has the potential to un-
cover the ways in which font and language variables combine to influence 
legibility.
References
Arditi, A. (2004). Adjustable typography: an approach to enhancing low vision 
text accessibility. Ergonomics, 47(5), pp. 469-482.
Arditi, A., and Cho, J. (2005). Serifs and font legibility. Vision research, 45(23), 
pp. 2926-2933.
Becker, W. W., and Jürgens, R. R. (1979). An analysis of the saccadic system 
by means of double step stimuli. Vision Research, 19(9), pp. 967-983. 
doi:10.1016/0042-6989(79)90222-0
Beymer, D., Russell, D., and Orton, P. (2008, September). An eye tracking study 
of how font size and type influence online reading. In Proceedings of the 
22nd British HCI Group Annual Conference on People and Computers: 
Culture, Creativity, Interaction-Volume 2 (pp. 15-18). British Computer 
Society.
Blackmore-Wright, S., Georgeson, M.A., and Anderson, S.J. (2013). Enhanced 
text spacing improves reading performance in individuals with macular 
disease. PLoS ONE 8(11): e80325. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0080325
Blythe, H. I., Liversedge, S. P., Joseph, H. L., White, S. J., and Rayner, K. 
(2009). Visual information capture during fixations in reading for chil-
dren and adults. Vision Research, 49(12), pp. 1583-1591. doi:10.1016/j.
visres.2009.03.015 
Bouma, H. (1970). Interaction effects in parafoveal letter recognition. Nature, 
226, pp.  177-178.
Bouma, H. (1980). Visual reading processes and the quality of text displays. IPO 
Annual Progress Report, 15, pp. 83-90.
Bremmer, F., Kubischik, M., Hoffmann, K., and Krekelberg, B. (2009). Neural 
dynamics of saccadic suppression. The Journal Of Neuroscience, 29(40), 
pp. 12374-12383. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2908-09.2009
Chen, H., and Tang, C. (1998). The effective visual field in reading Chinese. 
Reading and Writing, 10(3-5), pp. 245-254. doi:10.1023/A:1008043900392
Chung, S. T. L. (2002). The effect of letter spacing on reading speed in central 

72
Digital fonts and reading
and peripheral vision.  Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science, 
43, pp. 1270-1276. 
Chung, S. T. L. (2004). Reading speed benefits from increased vertical word 
spacing in normal peripheral vision. Optometry and Vision Science, 81, 
pp. 525-535.
Chung, S. L., Levi, D. M., and Legge, G. E. (2001). Spatial-frequency and 
contrast properties of crowding. Vision Research, 41(14), pp. 1833-1850. 
doi:10.1016/S0042-6989(01)00071-2
Cohen, L., Dehaene, S., Vinckier, F., Jobert, A., andMontavont, A. (2008). Read-
ing normal and degraded words: Contributions of the dorsal and ventral 
visual pathways. NeuroImage, 40, pp. 353-366.
Coltheart, M., and Freeman, R. (1974). Case alternation impairs word identifica-
tion. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 3(2), pp. 102-104. 
Drieghe, D., Brysbaert, M., and Desmet, T. (2005). Parafoveal-on-foveal effects 
on eye movements in text reading: Does an extra space make a difference? 
Vision Research, 45, pp. 1693–1706.
Drieghe, D., Rayner, K., and Pollatsek, A. (2008). Mislocated fixations can 
account for parafoveal-on-foveal effects in eye movements during read-
ing. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 61(8),  
pp. 1239-1249.
Engbert, R., and Nuthmann, A. (2008). Self consistent estimation of mislocat-
ed fixations during reading. PLoS One, 3(2), e1534. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0001534
Eriksen, B. A., and Eriksen, C.W., (1974). Effects of noise letters upon the 
identification of a target letter in a nonsearch task. Perception and Psycho-
physics, 16, pp. 143–149.
Fitzsimmons, G., Weal, M. J. and Drieghe, D. (2014) Skim Reading: An Adap-
tive Strategy for Reading on the Web. In proceedings, of the 6th Annual 
ACM Web Science Conference held in Bloomington, IN, 23-26 June, 
(pp. 211-219).
Ferreira, F., and Henderson, J. M. (1991). Recovery from misanalyses of gar-
den-path sentences. Journal of Memory and Language, 30(6), pp. 725-745. 
doi:10.1016/0749-596X(91)90034-H
Frazier, L., and Rayner, K. (1982). Making and correcting errors during sentence 
comprehension: Eye movements in the analysis of structurally ambiguous 
sentences. Cognitive Psychology, 14(2), pp. 178-210. doi:10.1016/0010-
0285(82)90008-1

73
Eye movements: from psycholinguistics to font design
Henderson, J. M., and Ferreira, F. (1990). Effects of foveal processing difficulty 
on the perceptual span in reading: Implications for attention and eye move-
ment control. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, 
and Cognition, 16(3), pp. 417-429. doi:10.1037/0278-7393.16.3.417
Inhoff, A. W. and Liu, W. (1998). The perceptual span and oculomotor activity 
during the reading of Chinese sentences. Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy: Human Perception and Performance, 24, pp. 20-34. 
Inhoff, A. W., and Briihl, D. (1991). Semantic processing of unattended text 
during selective reading: How the eyes see it. Perception and Psychophys-
ics, 49(3), pp. 289-294. doi:10.3758/BF03214312 
Inhoff, A. W., and Topolski, R. (1992). Lack of semantic activation from un-
attended text during passage reading. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Soci-
ety, 30(5), pp. 365-366. 
Johnson, R. L., Perea, M., and Rayner, K. (2007). Transposed-letter effects in 
reading: Evidence from eye movements and parafoveal preview. Journal 
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 33(1), 
pp. 209-229. doi:10.1037/0096-1523.33.1.209
Josephson, S. (2008). Keeping your readers’ eyes on the screen: An eye-tracking 
study comparing sans serif and serif typefaces. Visual Communication 
Quarterly, 15(1-2), pp. 67-79.
Juhasz, B. J., Liversedge, S. P., White, S. J., and Rayner, K. (2006). Binocular 
coordination of the eyes during reading: Word frequency and case alter-
nation affect fixation duration but not fixation disparity. The Quarterly 
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 59(9), pp. 1614-1625. 
Klein, R., Berry, G., Briand, K., D’Entremont, B., and Farmer, M. (1990). Letter 
identification declines with increasing retinal eccentricity at the same rate 
for normal and dyslexic readers. Perception and Psychophysics, 47(6), 
pp. 601-606. doi:10.3758/BF03203112
Kolers, P. A., Duchnicky, R. L., and Ferguson, D. C. (1981). Eye movement 
measurement of readability of CRT displays. Human Factors, 23(5),  
pp. 517-527. 
Larson, K. (2007). The technology of text. IEEE Spectrum, 44, pp. 26–31.
Marzouki, Y., Grainger, J. (2014). Effects of stimulus duration and inter-letter 
spacing on letter-in-string identification. Acta Psychologica, 148,  
pp. 49-55.
Matin, E. (1974). Saccadic suppression: A review and an analysis. Psychological 
Bulletin, Vol 81(12), pp. 899-917. 

74
Digital fonts and reading
McConkie, G. W., Kerr, P. W., Reddix, M. D., and Zola, D. (1988). Eye move-
ment control during reading: I. The location of initial fixations on words. 
Vision Research, 28, pp. 1107–1118.
McConkie, G. W., and Rayner, K. (1975). The span of the effective stimulus 
during a fixation in reading. Perception and Psychophysics, 17(6),  
pp. 578-586. doi:10.3758/BF03203972
McConkie, G. W., and Rayner, K. (1976). Asymmetry of the perceptual span in 
reading. Bulletin of The Psychonomic Society, 8(5), pp. 365-368.
McConkie, G. W., and Zola, D. (1979). Is visual information integrated across 
successive fixations in reading? Perception and Psychophysics, 25(3),  
pp. 221-224.
Morrison, R. E., and Rayner, K. (1981). Saccade size in reading depends upon 
character spaces and not visual angle. Perception and Psychophysics, 30, 
pp. 395-396.
Nuthmann, A., Engbert, R., and Kliegl, R. (2005). Mislocated fixations during 
reading and the inverted optimal viewing position effect. Vision Research, 
45(17), pp. 2201-2217. doi:10.1016/j.visres.2005.02.014
Paterson, K. B., and Jordan, T. R. (2010). Effects of increased letter spacing on 
word identification and eye guidance during reading. Memory and Cogni-
tion, 38, pp. 502-512. 
Pelli, D. G., Farell, B., Moore, D. C. (2003). The remarkable inefficiency of 
word recognition. Nature, 423, pp. 752–756.
Pelli, D. G., Tillman, K. A., Freeman, J., Su, M., Berger, T. D. and Majad, N. 
J. (2007). Crowding and eccentricity determine reading rate. Journal of 
Vision, 7(2):20, pp. 1–36
Perea, M. (2012). Revisiting Huey: On the importance of the upper part of words 
during reading. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 19(6), pp. 1148-1153. 
doi:10.3758/s13423-012-0304-0
Perea, M. (2013). Why does the APA recommend the use of serif fonts? Psico-
thema, 25(1), pp. 13-17.
Perea, M., and Acha, J. (2009).  Space information is important for reading.  
Vision Research, 49, pp. 1994-2000.
Perea, M., and Gomez, P., (2012). Increasing interletter spacing facilitates en-
coding of words. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, online DOI 10.3758/
s13423-011-0214-6
Perea, M., and Lupker, S. J. (2003a). Does jugde activate COURT? Trans-
posed-letter similarity effects in masked associative priming. Memory and 
Cognition, 31, pp. 829-841.

75
Eye movements: from psycholinguistics to font design
Perea, M., Moret-Tatay, C., and Gomez, P. (2011). The effects of interletter spac-
ing in visual-word recognition. Acta Psychologica, 13, pp. 345-351.
Perea, M., Panadero, V., Moret-Tatay, C., and Gómez, P. (2012). The effects of 
inter-letter spacing in visual-word recognition: Evidence with young nor-
mal readers and developmental dyslexics. Learning and Instruction, 22(6), 
pp. 420-430. doi:10.1016/j.learninstruc.2012.04.001
Perea, M., and Rosa, E. (2002). Does ‘whole-word shape’ play a role in visual 
word recognition? Perception and Psychophysics, 64(5), pp. 785-794. 
doi:10.3758/BF03194745
Pollatsek, A., Bolozky, S., Well, A. D., and Rayner, K. (1981). Asymmetries in 
the perceptual span for Israeli readers. Brain and Language, 14(1),  
pp. 174-180. doi:10.1016/0093-934X(81)90073-0
Pollatsek, A., Raney, G. E., Lagasse, L., and Rayner, K. (1993). The use of infor-
mation below fixation in reading and in visual search. Canadian Journal of 
Experimental Psychology/Revue Canadienne De Psychologie Expérimen-
tale, 47(2), pp. 179-200. doi:10.1037/h0078824
Pollatsek, A., and Rayner, K. (1982). Eye movement control in reading: The role 
of word boundaries. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Percep-
tion and Performance, 8(6), pp. 817-833. doi:10.1037/0096-1523.8.6.817
Rayner, K. (1979). Eye guidance in reading: Fixation locations within words. 
Perception, 8(1), pp. 21-30.
Rayner, K. (1986). Eye movements and the perceptual span in beginning and 
skilled readers. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 41(2),  
pp. 211-236. doi:10.1016/0022-0965(86)90037-8
Rayner, K. (1998). Eye movements in reading and information processing: 20 
years of research. Psychological Bulletin, 124, pp. 372-422.
Rayner, K. (2009). The Thirty-fifth Sir Frederick Bartlett lecture: Eye move-
ments and attention in reading, scene perception, and visual search. The 
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 68, pp. 1457-1506.
Rayner, K., and Bertera, J. H. (1979). Reading without a fovea. Sci-
ence, 206(4417), pp. 468-469. doi:10.1126/science.504987
Rayner, K., Castelhano, M. S., and Yang, J. (2009). Eye movements and the per-
ceptual span in older and younger readers. Psychology and Aging, 24(3), 
pp. 755-760. doi:10.1037/a0014300
Rayner, K., Fischer, M.H.., and Pollatsek, A. (1998). Unspaced text interferes 
with both word identification and eye movement control. Vision Research, 
38, pp. 1129-1144.

76
Digital fonts and reading
Rayner, K., Liversedge, S. P., and White, S. J. (2006). Eye movements when 
reading disappearing text: The importance of the word to the right of fixa-
tion. Vision Research, 46(3), pp. 310-323. doi:10.1016/j.visres.2005.06.018
Rayner, K., Liversedge, S. P., White, S. J., and Vergilino-Perez, D. (2003). Read-
ing disappearing text: Cognitive control of eye movements. Psychological 
Science, 14(4), pp. 385-388. doi:10.1111/1467-9280.24483 
Rayner, K., McConkie, G. W., and Zola, D. (1980). Integrating informa-
tion across eye movements. Cognitive Psychology, 12(2), pp. 206-226. 
doi:10.1016/0010-0285(80)90009-2
Rayner, K., Pollatsek, A., Ashby, J., and Clifton, C.  (2012). The Psychology of 
Reading.  New York: Psychology Press.
Rayner, K., Reichle, E. D., Stroud, M. J., Williams, C. C., and Pollatsek, A. 
(2006). The effect of word frequency, word predictability, and font diffi-
culty on the eye movements of young and older readers. Psychology and 
Aging, 21(3), pp. 448-465. doi:10.1037/0882-7974.21.3.448
Rayner, K., Slattery, T. J., and Bélanger, N. N. (2010). Eye movements, the per-
ceptual span, and reading speed. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 17(6), 
pp. 834-839.
Rayner, K., Slowiaczek, M.L., Clifton, C., and Bertera, J.H. (1983). Latency of 
sequential eye movements: Implications for reading. Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 9, pp. 912-922.
Rayner, K., Well, A. D., and Pollatsek, A. (1980). Asymmetry of the effective 
visual field in reading. Perception and Psychophysics, 27(6), pp. 537-544. 
doi:10.3758/BF03198682
Rayner, K., Well, A. D., Pollatsek, A., and Bertera, J. H. (1982). The availability 
of useful information to the right of fixation in reading. Perception and 
Psychophysics,31(6), pp. 537-550. doi:10.3758/BF03204186
Rayner, K., Yang, J., Castelhano, M. S., and Liversedge, S. P. (2011). Eye 
movements of older and younger readers when reading disappearing text.
Psychology and Aging, 26(1), pp. 214-223. doi:10.1037/a0021279 
Rayner, K., Yang, J., Schuett, S., and Slattery, T. J. (2014). The effect of foveal 
and parafoveal masks on the eye movements of older and younger read-
ers. Psychology and Aging, 29(2), pp. 205-212. doi:10.1037/a0036015
Reingold, E.M., Yang, J., Rayner, K. (2010). The time course of word frequen-
cy and case alternation effects on fixation times in reading: Evidence for 
lexical control of eye movements. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Human Perception and Performance, 36(6), pp. 1677-1683.

77
Eye movements: from psycholinguistics to font design
Reynolds, L., and Walker, S. (2004). ‘You can’t see what the words say’: Word 
spacing and letter spacing in children’s reading books. Journal of Research 
in Reading, 27(1), pp. 87-98. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9817.2004.00216.x
Risko, E. F., Lanthier, S. N., and Besner, D. (2011). Basic processes in reading: 
The effect of interletter spacing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 37(6), pp. 1449-1457. doi:10.1037/
a0024332
Schotter, E. R., Angele, B., and Rayner, K. (2012). Parafoveal processing in 
reading. Attention, Perception, and Psychophysics, 74(1), pp. 5-35.
Sereno, S. C., and Rayner, K. (1992). Fast priming during eye fixations in read-
ing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Perfor-
mance, 18(1), pp. 173-184. doi:10.1037/0096-1523.18.1.173
Sheridan, H., Rayner, K., and Reingold, E. M. (2013). Unsegmented text delays 
word identification: evidence from a survival analysis of fixation dura-
tions. Visual Cognition, 21(1), pp. 38-60.
Sheridan, H., and Reingold, E. M. (2012). Perceptually specific and perceptually 
non-specific influences on rereading benefits for spatially transformed text: 
Evidence from eye movements. Consciousness And Cognition: An Interna-
tional Journal, 21(4), pp. 1739-1747. doi:10.1016/j.concog.2012.10.002 
Slattery, T.J., (2009). Word misperception, the neighbor frequency effect, and 
the role of sentence context: Evidence from eye movements. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 35(6), 
pp. 1969-1975.
Slattery, T.J., Angele, B., Rayner, K., (2011). Eye movements and display 
change detection during reading. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Hu-
man Perception and Performance, 37, pp. 1924-1938.
Slattery, T. J., and Rayner, K. (2010). The influence of text legibility on eye 
movements during reading. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 24(8), 
pp. 1129-1148.
Slattery, T. J., and Rayner, K. (2013). Effects of intraword and interword spacing 
on eye movements during reading: Exploring the optimal use of space in a 
line of text. Attention, Perception, and Psychophysics, 75(6),  
pp. 1275-1292.
Slattery, T.J., Sturt, P., Christianson, K., Yoshida, M., Ferreira, F. (2013). Lin-
gering misinterpretations of garden path sentences arise from competing 
syntactic representations processing. Journal of Memory and Language, 
69(2), pp. 104-120.

78
Digital fonts and reading
Stern, J. A., Boyer, D., and Schroeder, D. (1994). Blink rate: a possible measure 
of fatigue. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergo-
nomics Society, 36(2), pp. 285-297.
Tinker, M. A. (1963). Legibility of print. Ames, Iowa: University of Iowa Press.
Underwood, N. R., and McConkie, G. W. (1985). Perceptual span for letter dis-
tinctions during reading. Reading Research Quarterly, 20(2), pp. 153-162. 
doi:10.2307/747752
Underwood, N. R., and Zola, D. (1986). The span of letter recognition of 
good and poor readers. Reading Research Quarterly, 21(1), pp. 6-19. 
doi:10.2307/747956
Valsecchi, M., Gegenfurtner, K. R., and Schütz, A. C. (2013). Saccadic and 
smooth-pursuit eye movements during reading of drifting texts. Journal of 
Vision, 13(10), doi:10.1167/13.10.8
Vinckier, F., Qiao, E., Pallier, C., Dehaene, S., and Cohen, L. (2011). The impact 
of letter spacing on reading: A test of the bigram coding hypothesis.  
Journal of Vision, 11(6), doi:10.1167/11.6.8 
Zorzi, M., Barbiero, C., Facoetti, A., Lonciari, I., Carrozzi, M., Montico, M., 
and ... Ziegler, J. C. (2012). Extra-large letter spacing improves reading 
in dyslexia. PNAS Proceedings Of The National Academy Of Sciences Of 
The United States Of America, 109(28), pp. 11455-11459. doi:10.1073/
pnas.1205566109

79
Chapter 5
Designing legible fonts for  
distance reading
Sofie Beier
This chapter reviews existing knowledge on distance legibility of fonts, and finds that for 
optimal distance reading, letters and numbers benefit from relative wide shapes, open inner 
counters and a large x-height; fonts should further be widely spaced, and the weight should 
not be too heavy or too light (Figure 1). Research also indicates that serifs on the vertical 
extremes improve legibility under such reading conditions.
1.1   Introduction
The further away we can read the text on a sign, the longer we have to 
make the right navigational decision or the sooner we know if we are 
moving in the right direction. This question of performance is particularly 
important in road signage, where the added time in extreme cases, may 
help to prevent accidents. In airports or in dense urban areas, legible signs 
contribute to smoother traffic patterns and less frustrated users. Optimiz-
ing the distance legibility of signage fonts can therefore have a significant 
impact on people’s everyday lives. 
Figure 1: Matters to consider when choosing and designing type for distance reading:  
the placement of serifs; the size of the x-height; the horizontal width of letters;  
the spacing between letters; the stroke contrast; the letter counters and the weight of  
the typeface.

80
Digital fonts and reading
Drawing on both scientific findings, and on designer’s experiences, 
this chapter will present the different factors that influence the legibility of 
fonts when read from a distance. 
1.2   Disappearing details
A significant effect of distance is the loss of information in the smaller 
features and details. This can have a range of effects on reading perfor-
mance. It appears that the information loss can partly be worked around 
if we understand how to compensate for this loss. When Jock Kinneir and 
Margaret Calvert created the British traffic sign system from 1957 to 1963, 
their font development resulted in a public debate on letterform legibility. 
Their chief critic was rival type designer, stone carver and lettering artist 
David Kindersley [for a detailed description see Lund, 2003]. Like others, 
Kindersley had observed that: ‘In very small type, or in larger letters to be 
read at a great distance – in fact, wherever there is a question of distance 
in relation to size – there is always a loss of definition’ [Kindersley 1960, 
p. 465]. To compensate for this loss in the corners of letters, Kindersley 
argued for the importance of the serif as it ‘reinforces the individual char-
acter of the letter exactly where this loss is greatest’ [p. 465]. This notion 
has partly been confirmed by researchers Beier and Dyson [2014] who 
found no difference in the overall distance legibility between sans serif 
and serif fonts, yet when looking at the group of letters with serifs at the 
vertical extremes (Figure 2), the data showed higher distance legibility. 
Kindersley’s proposal emphasized these corners. 
Figure 2: Beier and Dyson [2014] found that serifs on the vertical extremes improve  
distance legibility.

81
Designing legible fonts for distance reading
In contrast other designers have chosen to create stroke endings that 
accept and integrate the loss of detail that can be expected. This has led to 
round sans serif corners. When type designer Gerard Unger [2014]  was 
working on the font for the Amsterdam Metro early in his career (1974) , 
many of the signs were illuminated from within. Unger observed that when 
light shines through a hole of any shape or form, the light tends to soften 
the form and this softening appears circular. He decided to integrate this 
observation in the final design of the font, and consequently created round 
corners on the letters. A similar solution was applied in the more recent 
typeface family FF Info by Erik Spiekermann and Ole Schäfer (Figure 3).
1.3   Open inner counters
It may seem logical to assume that the larger the letter size, the greater the 
distance at which a text can be read. We might therefore think that because 
signs often have to fit within a limited horizontal surface area that narrow 
letters will be more legible because they will be able to fit in the surface 
area, while having a larger point size (Figure 4). 
This objective, that a font for signage should be economic in the use of 
horizontal space, was part of the brief given to Gerard Unger, when he de-
signed the font for the Dutch small signposts (ANWB-U) in 1996. During 
the development process the font was exposed to empirical distance test-
ing [Walraven et al., 1996]. The study compared the new font with two 
versions of the font it was replacing; one of these was both narrower and 
lighter in weight (ANWB-C) than the Unger font, and one was slightly 
wider than the Unger font with similar weight (ANWB-E). 
Both fonts were altered variations of fonts found in the American road 
signage typeface family FHWA Series (often referred to as Highway Goth-
ic) (Figure 5). The experiment found the performance of the new font ex-
Figure 3: The intention with the round corners of the typeface FF Info was to create  
an even appearance of the letter stroke on backlit signs (by Erik Spiekermann and  
Ole Schäfer). 

82
Digital fonts and reading
ceeded that of the narrow version by 13%. It was, however, slightly inferi-
or to the wider version by 3%. Ungera has said that the results confirmed to 
him that large inner letter counters improve distance legibility, a feature he 
emphasized as much as possible within the limited horizontal width that 
he had to work with (Figure 6). 
Quite a few other designers of traffic typefaces have spoken in favor 
of large counters. On several occasions, Jock Kinneir [1978, p. 344; 1980, 
p. 66] noted the significance of having clear and open counters, to avoid 
clogged counters and therefore more ambiguous letter shapes when the 
letters and numbers are viewed through the glare of headlights. He also 
a	 Personal communication (December 2012)
Figure 4: The two fonts at the top are set in the same point size, yet take up very different 
horizontal space. The two fonts at the bottom, take up the same amount of horizontal 
space, yet the condensed version is in 47 point size while the expanded version is in 25 
point size.
Figure 5: The Highway Gothic Series was originally developed for the American road 
system. This example shows ANWB-C or Series C with narrow letter shapes (left) and 
ANWB-E or Series E, which has wider letter shapes (right) (MUTCD 2000).

83
Designing legible fonts for distance reading
emphasized that even while narrow glyphs can be set larger and taller, this 
will not improve on the legibility if the two opposite sides of the counters 
are too close and begin to seem to merge [Kinneir 1980, p. 66]. More 
recently, type designer James Montalbano collaborated with Meeker & 
Associates on the design of the typeface ClearviewHwy that is intended 
to eventually replace Highway Gothic on American roads. In an interview 
with the New York Times, Montalbano voiced his opinion of the letter 
counters of Highway Gothic, finding them too small. He too refers to the 
problem of headlights’ illumination causing problems with recognizing 
letters and numbers. In the case of the letters ‘o’ and ‘e’ Montalbano de-
scribes them as appearing like ‘bullets that you couldn’t put a pin through’ 
[Yaffa 2007, p. 4] meaning that the counters seem to disappear. A similar 
observation has been made by type designer Adrian Frutiger in relation to 
his traffic sign typeface Frutiger Astra, where he enlarged the counters as a 
way of ensuring that letters like ‘e’ and ‘a’ can be easily distinguished and 
do not appear like dots from a distance [Linotype, 2009]. 
These designers all realized the significance of opening up the counters 
for distance legibility and found that it is essential to produce fonts where 
the inner white area is as big as possible. 
Large counters can be created in several ways. One way is related to 
the x-height, and another way is related to the width of the glyph. 
1.3.1	 The x-height
In many of the lowercase letters, the majority of the details are found with-
in the x-height. Hence it is the x-height and not the point size that defines 
the perceptual size of the font, a fact that has been overlooked in the his-
tory of legibility research too often (Figure 7). Therefore the larger the 
x-height the larger the font is perceived to be.
Figure 6: In the font ANWB-U, Gerard Unger aimed at creating large inner counters, 
while working on saving horizontal space as well.

84
Digital fonts and reading
An early legibility study by Elisabeth Roethlein [1912] confirms this. 
Roethlein tested the distance legibility of the individual letter in a series of 
different fonts, and as shown in Figure 8, the fonts of the larger x-height 
were also the fonts that were legible from the greatest distance. 
There is, however, a limit to how big the x-height can be. In his pub-
lication ‘Letters of Credit’ from 1986, typography writer Walter Tracy ar-
Figure 7: The font Ovink has a larger x-height than the font Pyke; when set in the same 
point size Ovink will appear larger than Pyke while working on saving horizontal space  
as well.
Figure 8: A selection of the fonts tested by Elisabeth Roethlein [1912] with their distance 
thresholds (right column). This table demonstrates that large x-heights tend to be read at 
greater distances than small x-heights.

85
Designing legible fonts for distance reading
gued that, although short descenders on letters such as g, j, p, q and y may 
be ‘displeasing to the eye’ [p. 50], this is not as problematic as too short 
ascenders on letters such as b, d, h, k and l, which can result in the letters 
losing their individuality. A classic example of this problem is the confus-
ability between h and n (Figure 9). 
There is consequently a limit to how big the x-height can be before it 
starts to interfere with the parts that differentiate one letter from the other.
1.3.2	 Letter width
In order to inform the choice of typeface for signs at London’s Heath-
row Airport, Robert Waller [2007] compared the fonts BA Signs, Frutiger 
Bold, Frutiger Roman, Vialog, and Garamond Italic. He gradually en-
larged the test material until the participant was able to identify the word. 
The data showed that the narrow Vialog was less legible than the two Fru-
tiger weights and the BA Sign fonts, all of which were wider in horizontal 
proportions than Vialog (Figure 10). 
In another investigation, researchers [Beier and Larson, 2010] mea-
sured the number of errors made by participants while identifying letters 
at a short exposure and at a distance, and found that at distance reading, 
narrow designed characters tended to produce more errors than wider de-
signed characters (Figure 11); this was most evident in fonts of low stroke 
contrast. 
Over the years, several studies have looked into the legibility of the 
Highway Gothic family. In 1939, Forbes and Holmes compared the leg-
ibility distances of the narrow series B with the wider series D (Figure 
12), and found that both at day and night time conditions, the wider ver-
sions delivered the best performance. Another researcher, Thomas Schnell 
Figure 9: If the x-height is too big, it can result in misreading of certain letters.

86
Digital fonts and reading
[1998] also looked into different aspects of the distance legibility of the 
Highway Gothic family. As part of his PhD studies, Schnell investigated 
the contrast threshold on a computer screen, starting out with the same 
luminance between stimulus and background, and then gradually adding 
visual contrast until participants could identify the test material built out of 
uppercase letters and numerals. Under these conditions, Schnell found that 
the wider fonts resulted in better performances than the narrow. 
Figure 10: The fonts BA Signs, Frutiger Bold, Frutiger Roman (left), Vialog, and 
Garamond Italic (right), tested by Robert Waller [2007].
Figure 11: At distance reading and at short exposure, wider letters (top) produced a  
higher identification rate than did narrow letters [Beier and Larson, 2010].

87
Designing legible fonts for distance reading
Applying two methods, one based on luminance, and one based on 
distance threshold, Curt Berger [1948] studied different variations of the 
digits 5 and 0, all of same height, stroke weight, and contrast, but varying 
in horizontal size. The findings demonstrated that the wider the digits the 
more legible they became. Elisabeth Roethlein [1912] further reported a 
distance legibility investigation of a number of fonts within the family 
Cheltenham Oldstyle, which found the Wide and the Bold versions to be 
legible at a greater distance than the Bold Condensed, the Ordinary, and 
the Italic versions (Figure 13).
A font of wider proportions would need to be scaled down in size to fit 
a limited surface area; which then will result in a smaller point size (Figure 
4). The challenge is to identify the optimal height-width ratio that enables 
open inner counters without having to scale down the letter size too much. 
1.4   Letter weight
Defining the optimal letter weight is a difficult matter. If the stroke is too 
light, the characters might become invisible when viewed from a distance. 
The opposite is also a problem. If the stroke is too heavy, the counters will 
become too small and result in illegible letter shapes.
When white text is placed on a dark background; when light is project-
ed through the glyphs; or when a sign is made out of reflective material, 
the phenomenon known as halation or irradiation can cause problems for 
readers (Figure 14). The blurring of light around the bright area of the 
Figure 12: Highway Gothic series B (top) and series D (bottom).

88
Digital fonts and reading
sign results in a ‘halo’, which makes it visually bleed into the surrounding 
areas. The effect of halation appears to vary depending on the nature of 
the ‘halo’. In an extended review of relevant legibility research Helmut 
T. Zwahlen and his colleagues [1995] found that white text on dark back-
ground, generally requires a lighter stroke weight than dark text on white 
background. In some situations this will be solely an aesthetic adjustment, 
while in others the ‘halo’ surrounding the glyphs will cause significant 
reductions of legibility. This phenomenon is further evident in the data 
of the test studies carried out in connection with the ClearviewHwy type-
face family [Garvey et. al, 1997; Holick et. al, 2006]. These studies found 
that in nighttime conditions the Clearview font could be read from far-
ther away than the slightly heavier Highway Gothic series E. The same 
difference was not seen in daytime conditions, where the two were read  
equally well.
1.5   Inter-letter spacing
‘Inter-letter spacing’ (also called fitting or metrics) is the amount of space 
between all characters in a font, this being in contrast to ‘kerning’, which 
is the adjusted amount of space between two specific characters. In a 
Figure 13: The different styles of the Cheltenham Old Style font family tested by 
Roethlein [1912]. The fonts in the left column of fonts were read at a greater distance 
than those in the right column.
Figure 14: A simulation of halation.

89
Designing legible fonts for distance reading
design guide for the implementation of the Highway Gothic Series, the 
Federal Highway Administration stated that: ‘…tests have shown that, for 
any given legend, better legibility can be obtained by using a relatively 
wide spacing between letters than by using wider and taller letters with 
a cramped space’ [MUTCD, 2000, p. 8-1]. The statement suggests that 
inter letter spacing is one of the most central parameters when creating 
type for distance reading, however, the Highway Administration does not 
provide any references to their sources. In an investigation into distance 
legibility of night-time guide signs, Holick and Carlson [2003] set out to 
study the effect of four different spacing settings: one in Highway Gothic 
Series E, and three in the sans serif typeface family ClearviewHwy 5W. 
One of the ClearviewHwy fonts had a 3% reduction of the default spacing 
value, and another had a 6% reduction of the default spacing value. All 
fonts were tested with white text on green background. The experiment 
found no statistically significant difference between the three spacing val-
ues of the ClearviewHwy font, suggesting that for a significant difference 
to be found, the difference between spacing values may need to be greater 
than 6%.
Several renowned type designers have emphasized the importance of 
large inter-letter spacing in fonts designed for distance reading. One of 
these, designer Erik Spiekermann, has pointed out that too narrow letter 
spacing is a common flaw in signage systems [Spiekermann, 2006]. He 
further puts the argument forward that when reading a sign we do not read 
it in the same way as we do in continuous text, but instead decipher each 
letter of the text. As signs often contain single words with no additional 
context, Spiekermann finds that all characters under these circumstances 
need to be more clearly separated from each other. 
Jock Kinneir [1978] made a similar observation. He referred to the 
phenomenon shown by pointillist painters that forms tend to merge when 
viewed from afar. These designers have observed a phenomenon identi-
fied by researchers as the ‘crowding effect’ or ‘contour interaction’, where 
neighboring letters within a word interfere with each other. This interfer-
ence makes it harder to identify the individual letters. The phenomenon is 
most evident under perceptual conditions of low resolution, which occur 
when reading at a distance [Hess et al., 2000; Liu et al., 2001]. 
A couple of field experiments in the 1950s looked into the inter-letter 
spacing of the Highway Gothic Series. One of these, carried out by Harry 

90
Digital fonts and reading
W. Case and his colleagues [1952] was concerned with the distance legi-
bility of individual uppercase letters of the Highway Gothic Series E font 
(Figure 5). The study showed a difference in legibility depending on the 
type being set in positive or negative contrast, and found that black type 
on a white background was slightly more legible under a narrower spacing 
setting, and that white type on a black background was most legible under 
a wider spacing setting (Figure 15). 
In another experiment from the same period, David Soloman [1956] 
looked into the influence different spacing values have on words set in the 
three Highway Gothic Series fonts E, C, and ED (the latter being similar in 
width but slightly thinner than series E) (Figure 5). The study was carried 
out in a dark parking lot using dipped headlights, with test material made 
out of white reflectorized material mounted on a black non-reflectorized 
panel. The findings confirmed the earlier results of Case and his colleagues 
by showing that distance legibility of white type on a black background 
increases as the spacing value increases. It appears that to reach a high lev-
el of legibility, the irradiation that affects the type under these conditions 
calls for a larger amount of space between the glyphs, and this effect is not 
as strong when dark text is set on light background. 
1.6   Summary and conclusion
To meet the problem of lost details at great distances, serifs on the vertical 
stems improve distance legibility, yet when the type is influenced by hala-
tion, or in situations where light is projected from the back of the sign, the 
Figure 15: Due to the bleeding of white into the dark background, Harry W. Case and his 
colleagues [1952] found that light text on black is more legible with a larger amount  
of inter-letter spacing (here illustrated with the typeface Interstate designed by Tobias 
Frere-Jones).

91
Designing legible fonts for distance reading
letters might benefit from being designed as low contrast sans serif fonts 
instead.
Open inner counters generally tend to improve distance legibility; 
this can be achieved by making the x-height relatively large and the letter 
shapes relatively wide. That being said, there is a limit to the size of the 
x-height if certain glyphs are not to be misread for others, and there is a 
limit to the letter width, if the text is to fit horizontally on a specified sur-
face area without having a point size that is too small. 
Due to the effect of crowding, it further appears that large inter letter 
spacing – in general – benefits distance reading, and that this is most ev-
ident when light text is placed on a dark background. Furthermore, since 
the color white tends to bleed into a darker surface, text set white on a dark 
background should be lighter in weight than the corresponding dark text 
on a light background. 
A practicing designer’s knowledge and understanding of the craft is 
often attained through trial and error, or through experimentation with 
the material, while scientific findings often stem from controlled investi-
gations that aim to either confirm or disconfirm a predefined hypothesis.  
By combining these distinct approaches, and by considering them as 
equally valid in the search for answers, it is possible to gather information 
that can help us better understand the field of type design.
References
Beier. S., and Dyson, M. (2014) The influence of serifs on ‘h’ and ‘i’: useful 
knowledge from design-led scientific research, Visible Language, 47(3), 
pp. 74-95.
Beier, S. and Larson, K. (2010) Design improvements for frequently misrecog-
nized letters, Information Design Journal, 18(2), pp. 118-137.
Berger, C. (1948) Some experiments on the width of symbols as determinant of 
legibility, Acta Ophthalmologica, 26(4), pp. 517-55.
Case, H.W., Michael, J.L., Mount, G.E., and Brenner, R., (1952) Analysis of 
certain variables related to sign legibility, Hway. Res. Bd. Bull, 60,  
pp. 44-54. Abstract and short summary reported in: A study of Traffic Sign 
Requirements, T.W. Forbes, Snyder, T.E., and R.F. Pain (eds.), Department 
of Psychology Division of Engineering Research, Michigan State Univer-
sity, pp. 53-54.

92
Digital fonts and reading
Forbes, T.W. and Holmes, R.S., (1939) Legibility distances of highway desti-
nation signs in relation to letter height, letter width and reflectorization’, 
Proceedings of the Highway Research Board, 19, pp. 321-355.
Garvey, P.M., Pietrucha, M.T., and Meeker, D.T. (1997) Effects of font and 
capitalization on legibility of guide signs’, Research on Traffic Control 
Devices, 1605.
Hess, R.F., Dakin, S.C. and Kapoor, N. (2000) The foveal ‘crowding’ effect: 
physics or physiology?, Vision Research, 40, pp. 365-370.
Holick, A.J. and Carlson J. (2003) Nighttime Guide Sign Legibility for Mi-
croprismatic Clearview legend on High Intensity Background, [online], 
available from: http://d2dtl5nnlpfr0r.cloudfront.net/tti.tamu.edu/docu-
ments/0-1796-4.pdf [accessed 5. August 2014].
Holick, A.J., Chrysler, S.T., Park, E.S., and Carlson, P.J. (2006) Evaluation of 
the Clearview font for negative contrast traffic signs, Texas Transportation 
Institute.
Kindersley, D. (1960) Motorway sign lettering, Traffic Engineering and Control, 
2(8), pp. 463-465.
Kinneir, J. (1978) The practical and graphic problems of road sign design, in:  
R. Easterby and H. Zwaga, (eds), Information design: the design and 
evaluation of signs and technical information, Chichester: John Wiley and 
Sons Ltd., pp. 341-58.
Kinneir, J. (1980) Words and buildings: the art and practice of public letterings, 
London: The Architectural Press.
Linotype (2009) Typography as the highest form of visual communication:  
A talk with Adrian Frutiger, [online] available from: http://www.linotype.com/
de/2316-17757/servingapurpose.html?lang=de [accessed 5. August 2014].
Liu, L. & Arditi, A. (2001) How crowding affects letter confusion’, Optometry 
and Vision Science, 78(1), pp. 50-55.
Lund, O. (2003) The public debate on Jock Kinneir’s road sign alphabet, Typog-
raphy Papers, 5, pp. 103-126.
MUTCD (2000) Design Guidelines Manual on Uniform Traffic Control, avail-
able online: http://mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov/SHSe/Design.pdf [accessed 5. 
August 2014]
Roethlein, B.E. (1912) ‘The relative legibility of different faces of printed types, 
American Journal of Psychology, 23(1), pp. 1-36.

93
Designing legible fonts for distance reading
Schnell, T. (1998) Legibility optimization of uppercase alphanumeric text for 
display messages in traffic applications, PhD Thesis (unpublished), Col-
lege of Engineering and Technology, Ohio University.
Soloman, D., (1956) The Effect of letter width and spacing on night legibility 
of highway signs, Proc.Hway, Res. Bd. 35, 600-617, Abstract and short 
summary in: A Study of Traffic sign requirements, T.W. Forbes, T.E. Sny-
der, R.F. Pain (eds.), Department of Psychology Division of Engineering 
Research, Michigan State university, pp. 67-68.
Spiekermann, E. (2006) Infography: On FF Info, in: J. Middendorp & E. 
Spiekermann, (eds), Made with FontFont: Type for independent minds, 
Amsterdam: BIS Publishers, pp. 54-57.
Tracy, W. (1986) Letters of Credit: a view of type Design, London: Gordon 
Fraser.
Unger, G. (2014) M.O.L. (1974), available online: http://www.gerardunger.com/
allmytypedesigns/allmytypedesigns03.html [accessed 5. August 2014].
Waller, R. (2007) Comparing typefaces for airport signs, Information Design 
Journal, 15(1), pp. 1-15.
Walraven, J., Varkevisser, J. & But, P. (1996) Evaluatie van de leesbaarheid van 
een nieuw ANWB-alfabet voor, TNO Technische Menskunde bewegwijze-
ring.
Yaffa, J. (2007) The Road to Clarity, The New York Times, Aug. 12, available 
online: http://www.nytimes.com/2007/08/12/magazine/12fonts-t.html?pag-
ewanted=4&_r=3 [accessed 5. August 2014].
Zwahlen, H.T., Sunkara, M. and Schnell, T. (1995) A review of legibility rela-
tionships within the context of textual information presentation’, Transpor-
tation Research Board, 1485, pp. 61-70.

94
Chapter 6
Effects of interword spacing  
on Chinese children’s  
reading abilities
Hsiu-Feng Wang
This experiment investigated whether different interword spacing arrangements in Chinese 
text affected the reading speed and comprehension of Taiwanese children. The text was 
shown on a tablet computer. The experiment used standard interword spacing (i.e. that typ-
ically used in Chinese text) and three arrangements with larger sized gaps. It also used two 
groups of children. One group comprised 7 to 8 year-olds and the other comprised 10 to 11 
year-olds. In the experiment the children read text that had different sized spacing arrange-
ments; their reading speeds were recorded and they completed a series of tests in which 
they had to identify substituted words that were incongruous to the rest of the text. The 
results showed that those different interword spacing arrangements and age groups affected 
children’s reading times and their reading performance. It also found that the younger chil-
dren benefited significantly from interword spacing that was larger than that typically used 
in Chinese. These findings are likely to be of interest to people designing reading materials, 
learning resources and text messaging systems for children who read Chinese.
1.1   Introduction
Interword spacing is the act of leaving gap between words to enable read-
ers to easily and quickly identify where one word ends and another begins. 
Many languages use interword spacing. Chinese, however, does not. In 
Chinese, gaps exist after each character, regardless of whether a character 
forms an entire word or part of a word. Instead of relying on visual cues, 
Chinese readers determine where one word ends and another begins exclu-
sively through reading experience.
Over 70% of Chinese words are made up of two or more characters [Yu 
et al., 1985]. This method of forming words, while immensely flexible, 
can lead to confusion as it is possible for a reader to erroneously combine 
characters that belong to one word with characters that belong to another. 
An example of this is given in Figure 1. Either the first two characters in 

95
Effects of interword spacing on Chinese children’s reading abilities
the sentence can be combined to form the word ‘pencil’ and the sentence 
reads: ‘It is important to use a pencil to take notes’ or the first three char-
acters in the sentence can be combined to form the word ‘sketch’ and the 
sentence reads: ‘It is important to make notes on how to sketch’. In other 
words, the meaning of the sentence depends entirely on how the read-
er mentally groups the characters. Other examples of sentences that have 
more than one meaning when the characters are grouped differently are 
given by Hsu and Huang [2000a, 2000b].  
‘It is important to use a pencil to take notes’
‘It is important to make notes on how to sketch’
Figure 1: Different interpretations of the same sentence.
Students of Chinese often find it difficult to determine which charac-
ters in a sentence should be grouped together to form the words the author 
intended [Bassetti, 2009; Yao, 2011; Bai et al., 2013]. Unfortunately, this 
problem often persists throughout many students’ entire schooling as the 
more vocabulary they learn, the more word permutations exist.
In order to help children identify and learn correct character groupings, 
teachers in Taiwanese primary schools typically circle characters that form 
common words. This technique differs from that used in books directed at 
foreigners learning Chinese. In these books interword spacing is typically 
used. This raises the question of whether interword spacing would assist 
Taiwanese children learning Chinese. Interword spacing has the advantage 
over character circling in that it can be incorporated into an electronic text 
speedily without the use of special graphic tools. Furthermore, it does not 
add aesthetic clutter to the page. This is particularly helpful if the text has 
annotation or uses highlighting techniques, such as italic or underline.
This study explores the relationship between interword spacing and 
age with respect to Taiwanese children reading Chinese text. It is envis-
aged that the findings of the study may promote the development of better 

96
Digital fonts and reading
reading materials for Taiwanese children. The study addresses the follow-
ing research questions: Do different levels of interword spacing have an 
impact on Taiwanese children’s reading speeds and their ability to recog-
nize text correctly? Does age have an impact upon Taiwanese children’s 
reading speeds and their ability to recognize text correctly? Is there any 
interaction between different levels of interword spacing and age in rela-
tion to Chinese text with respect to Taiwanese children?  
1.2   Background to the study 
1.2.1   Interword spacing and the reading of Chinese text 
A number of researchers have investigated the effects of interword spac-
ing on Chinese text. Some of these studies have involved native speakers 
while others have involved foreign language learners.
One study that involved native speakers was conducted by Hsu and 
Huang [2000b]. In this study Taiwanese adults were shown several arti-
cles on a computer screen. These articles were presented in three different 
interword spacing formats: conventional no spacing, half-character spac-
ing and whole-character spacing. The articles that had conventional no 
spacing used the same spacing as that used traditionally in Chinese (i.e. 
all the characters were equally spaced); the articles that had half-character 
spacing used an additional half-character space between words; and the 
articles that had whole-character spacing used an additional whole-char-
acter space between words. The researchers found that the articles that had 
half-character spacing were understood better and read more quickly than 
the articles that had either conventional no spacing or whole-character 
spacing. However, other researchers have obtained different results. For 
example, Liu et al. [1974] found that interword spacing did not improve 
the reading speed of Chinese readers reading Chinese; Inhoff et al. [1997] 
also found this to be the case.
More recently, Bai et al. [2013] investigated whether interword spac-
ing could help foreigners learning Chinese to acquire new vocabulary.  
The study, which involved language learners from the University of Wis-
consin-Madison, had two parts: a learning session, in which participants 
read sentences that contained new words, and a testing session. In the 
learning session, half of the participants read conventionally unspaced 

97
Effects of interword spacing on Chinese children’s reading abilities
text and half read interword spaced text. In the testing session, all the 
participants read conventionally unspaced text. The researchers found that 
the participants who initially read the new words in the interword spaced 
sentences read them most speedily in the testing session. 
However, research by Yao [2011] suggested that interword spacing 
may not assist all non-native Chinese readers. In an experiment that in-
volved participants from different orthographic backgrounds, Yao found 
that participants whose first language did not use interword spacing slowed 
down when they read interword spaced text, while participants whose first 
language did use interword spacing were unaffected by the gaps between 
words.
Although a number of researchers have conducted experiments that 
investigate interword spacing with respect to Chinese text, most of these 
experiments have been conducted with adults. Still little is known about 
how interword spacing affects the reading speeds of different aged chil-
dren and how it affects their ability to find typographic errors.
1.2.2   Theory related to reading
Gestaltists argue that the mind has a tendency to organise individual ele-
ments into groups; they assert that the whole is other than the sum of its 
parts [Wertheimer, 1923; Koffka, 1935]. Arguably, the Gestalt principle 
that is most pertinent to this study is that of proximity. According to this 
principle, people perceive entities that are close to each other as a group. 
One study that investigated the principle of proximity was conducted 
by Hsu and Huang [2000b]. The researchers investigated whether splitting 
two-character Chinese words across lines, so that one character was at the 
end of one line and one was at the beginning of the next, reduced reading 
speed. The researchers found that it did. They argued that this was because 
readers did not see the two characters as related: the characters were not 
next to each other and thus were not perceived to be a single entity.
Li et al. [2009] offered a model that explained how people segment 
Chinese text into words as they are reading. The model displayed a pro-
cess of both top-down and bottom-up information processing. It had three 
interactive levels: visual perception, character recognition and word rec-
ognition. The researchers explained that the first layer, visual perception, 
was where the features that make up characters were recognized. They 

98
Digital fonts and reading
stated that information from this level was then combined in the second 
level, character recognition, with feedback from the third level, word rec-
ognition. The researchers added that the third level received information 
from the lexicon and from the character recognizers in the second level.
However, whilst Li et al.’s [2009] model is helpful in explaining how 
Chinese words are recognized, it assumes that a reader is familiar with 
Chinese characters and words. Early learners are not. While some may 
recognize specific characters, they often do not know how these characters 
are combined to form words. As such, they can look at the last character of 
a word and incorrectly assume it belongs to the next word.
1.2.3   Age difference
A number of studies have looked at differences between adults and chil-
dren with respect to reading text on screen [e.g. Bernard et al., 2002]. 
However, in the majority of these studies children are not divided into age 
groups. It is thus possible that certain age related issues in the design of 
text on screen have been overlooked.
One study that divided children into age groups was conducted by 
Hughes and Wilkins [2000]. In this study, children aged 5 to 7 years 
(younger) and children aged 8 to 11 years (older) were shown four pas-
sages of text that employed different font sizes and spacing arrangements. 
The researchers found that the reading speeds of the younger children de-
creased as font size decreased. This was unlike the reading speeds of the 
older children which remained the same. Wilkins later conducted a set of 
similar studies with other colleagues [see Wilkins et al., 2009]. In these 
studies, which involved children aged 7 to 9, comprehension and reading 
age were investigated with respect to font size. The studies revealed that 
children comprehended sentences more quickly and had a higher reading 
age when the text was printed in a large font rather than a small font.
Another study that divided children by age was conducted by Wang et 
al. [2013]. In this study the researchers investigated whether there was an 
interaction between age and e-book adaptive design with respect to learn-
ing achievements and motivation. The children involved in the study were 
10 year-olds and 11 year-olds. The researchers found that the 10 year-olds 
had better recall, transfer and attention scores when their e-books were set 
to the adaptive setting rather than any other setting. The performance of 11 
year-olds was the same for all the settings. 

99
Effects of interword spacing on Chinese children’s reading abilities
With respect to studies involving websites, Nielsen [2010] found that 
children of different ages preferred different sized text. He also discovered 
that if a website’s content was presented for a school grade other than that 
of the viewer it was often disliked. 
Considering that variation has been found in the way different aged 
children react to font size and typeface design and respond to age-related 
reading with adaptive design e-books, it seems reasonable to assume that 
they might have preferences and perform differently when it comes to 
reading on screen.
1.3   Methods
1.3.1   Participants
Thirty-two 1st grade students (15 male and 17 female) and thirty-two 4th 
grade students (14 male and 18 female) were randomly selected from an 
urban primary school in the south of Taiwan. The 1st grade students were 
aged between 7 and 8 years old (M=7.61, SD=.590) and the 4th grade stu-
dents were aged between 10 and 11 years old (M=10.23, SD=.423). The 
students in each grade had a similar reading standard to each other; this 
was confirmed by looking at their examination results. All the students 
were regular tablet computer users, went online at least three times a week. 
On completing the experiment each received a small toy as a gift.
1.3.2   Experimental design
To test the effects of interword spacing and age on reading time and read-
ing performance a 2 x 3 mixed design was used. The two independent 
variables were: interword spacing and age. Interword spacing used a with-
in-subjects factorial design and had three levels: unspaced, semi-spaced 
and fully-spaced. Age used a between-subjects factorial design and had 
two levels: younger (this level consisted of participants who were 7-8 
years old) and older (this level consisted of participants who were 10-11 
years old).
The two dependent variables were reading time (the time it took a partic-
ipant to read an article) and reading performance (the accuracy with which 
a participant found incongruous Chinese characters placed in an article).

100
Digital fonts and reading
1.3.3   Materials
Three primary school teachers were asked to jointly select the reading ma-
terials used in the study. First they selected three articles for the 1st year 
students. They were chosen from a collection of twelve articles accredited 
by the Ministry of Culture in Taiwan as being suitable for 1st grade prima-
ry school students. Each article contained between 450 and 480 characters. 
The teachers then selected three articles for the 4th grade students. These 
were chosen from a collection of twelve articles accredited by the Min-
istry of Culture in Taiwan as being suitable for 4th grade primary school 
students. Each article contained between 520 and 550 characters. All the 
articles used in the study were about aboriginal tribes that lived in Taiwan.
Once the articles had been selected, fifteen Chinese characters in each 
were substituted. These characters were chosen randomly and replaced 
with characters that looked similar. For example, in one article the char-
acter ‘日 (sun) was replaced with the character ‘目’(eye): A character that 
would be viewed as being out of place if it were read carefully. The altered 
articles were shown to students from another class prior to the test. All the 
students agreed that the substituted characters used in the articles did not 
make sense in the context in which they were found. 
Each article contained three pages. Each page contained between 11 
and 13 lines of text (between 165 and 186 characters per page). The text 
filled the entire screen of the tablet computer. The text was displayed at 
14 point font size, with 28 point line spacing and in the Ming typeface, a 
typeface found to be highly legible on a computer screen [Chi et al., 2003]. 
The text was written horizontally. This alignment is used in science text-
books in Taiwanese school.  
The text was shown to the participants in three formats (see Figure  2). 
The first format was unspaced. This format reflected the spacing tradition-
ally used in written Chinese: it used spaces of approximately one fifth of 
the width of a character between each and every character. The second 
format was semi-spaced; it employed spaces of approximately one third 
of the width of a character between words and one fifth the width of a 
character between characters that formed words. The third format was ful-
ly-spaced; it employed spaces of approximately the width of a character 
between words and one fifth the width of a character between characters 
that formed words. The three formats conformed to guidelines developed 
by Liu et al. [1987]. 

101
Effects of interword spacing on Chinese children’s reading abilities
The study used an Asus Eee Pad tablet computer with a 10.1 inch IPS 
multi-touch screen. The screen had a resolution of 1280 × 800 pixels; it 
was used in a landscape orientation. 
Unspaced 
Semi-spaced
Fully-spaced
Translation
Once upon a time, there were two intelligent men who lived in an aboriginal tribe; 
both were highly skilled hunters, singers and dancers
Figure 2:  Examples of the test pages with interword spacing used in the experiment.
1.3.4   Procedure
The experiment was conducted in a number of computer laboratories at 
the participants’ school. The participants were split into two groups ac-
cording to their grade level. These groups were then subdivided to form 
six groups: three 1st grade groups and three 4th grade groups. The partici-
pants were placed into these groups randomly. In total there were 10 to 13 
participants in each group. Each group was assigned two assistants. These 
assistants answered any procedural questions and helped the participants 
complete their paperwork. Each participant was given his/her own tablet 
computer.
Before the experiment commenced, the participants undertook a set 
of familiarisation exercises using onscreen materials similar to those used 
in the experiment. In these exercises they touched an onscreen button to 
make an article appear/disappear. This button also controlled the timing 
clock, and selected Chinese characters that they thought were out of place 
in the text by touching them (touching them made the characters change 
colour).
Once all the participants understood what to do, the experiment began. 
The participants were informed that they would see three articles in suc-
cession. They were told that they should read the articles as quickly and 
as accurately as possible and select any characters that they thought were 

102
Digital fonts and reading
incongruous with respect to the text. They were told that they should work 
alone. Each participant saw one unspaced article, one semi-spaced article 
and one fully-spaced article. The articles were shown in a random order 
for each participant. Reading times and characters selected were logged 
automatically by each participant’s tablet computer.
The participants took around 20 minutes to perform the reading tasks. 
On leaving, they completed a short form that collected their demographic 
details. 
1.4   Results
As the articles used for 1st and 4th grade students differed in length, each 
participant’s reading times were transformed into seconds per 100 charac-
ters. The performance scores were taken as the percentage of substituted 
characters found.
Analysis of variance was carried out on participants’ reading times and 
the percentage of substituted words found. All data undergoing analysis of 
variance (ANOVA) were tested for the assumption of sphericity. The mean 
reading times and the percentage of substituted words found for each ex-
perimental condition are shown in Table 1.
1.4.1   Reading time
A significant difference was observed between the effects of interword 
spacings on reading time, F (2, 124) = 4.87, p =.009. The reading times of 
the effects of interword spacing were fully-spaced interword text, followed 
by semi-spaced interword text, and last, the unspaced interword text. Fur-
ther multiple comparisons using the Scheffé statistical test showed that 
the text reading time for fully-spaced text was significantly shorter than 
that for unspaced text (p=.004); and times for semi-spaced text were sig-
nificantly shorter than those for unspaced text (p=.038). However, when 
examining the difference between fully-spaced and semi-spaced text, no 
significant difference was found. It seems that interword spacing was help-
ful for a child’s speed of reading at age 7 years and age 10 years. 
Analyses identified a main effect for children’s age. Older children 
read text faster than younger children, F (1, 62) = 13.40, p =.001.

103
Effects of interword spacing on Chinese children’s reading abilities
1.4.2   Reading performance
Examining reading performance for different age groups in relation to the 
percentage of detected substituted words revealed a main effect for chil-
dren’s age. Older children’s achievement was better than that of younger 
children in relation to their reading performance, F (1, 62) = 7.39, p =.009. 
However, analyzing the percentage of detected substituted words for the 
effect of interword spacing showed no significant difference with regard 
to reading performance.
The results revealed an interaction between the three different inter-
word spacing arrangements and the two different age groups in relation to 
children’s reading performance, F (2, 124) = 4.78, p =.010; this is illus-
trated in Figure 3. Children’s reading performances for fully-spaced text 
were better than those for unspaced text, regardless of the children’s age.
Children’s reading performances for the three different interword spac-
ing arrangements showed a significant difference for younger children, 
F  (2, 62) = 6.692, p =.002, but there was no significant difference for old-
er children, F (2, 62) = .844, p = .435. Looking at age groups separately, 
multiple comparisons with the Scheffé test showed that younger children 
read fully-spaced text significantly better than unspaced text. They also 
read semi-spaced text better than unspaced text. However, the difference 
between semi-spaced and fully-spaced text was not significant. For older 
  Word arrangement 
Unspaced
Semi-spaced
Fully-spaced
  Age
Younger
Older
Reading time
M
237.19
219.61
216.48
240.19
208.67
56.61
50.54
41.58
49.69
44.33
63.87
69.53
72.26
62.89
74.21
21.38
28.68
23.61
24.56
22.16
M
SD
SD
Reading performance
Table 1:  Means and standard deviations of reading times (sec.) and reading  
performance (%) under different experimental conditions.

104
Digital fonts and reading
children, there was no significant difference between interword spacing. In 
other words, interword spacing significantly affected younger children’s 
reading performance, but had no effect on older children.
The results also revealed that older children’s reading performance 
with unspaced text was significantly better than younger children’s read-
ing performance, F (5, 64) = 5.909 p = .035. However, no significant dif-
ference was found between semi-spaced and fully-spaced text layouts in 
relation to age groups. This suggests that unspaced text layout (traditional 
text) has an age related effect on reading performance, but spaced text 
does not.
1.5   Discussion and conclusion
The experiment examined the influence of interword spacing and chil-
dren’s age on Taiwanese children’s reading materials. It measured chil-
Figure 3: Reading performance (%) for different interword spacing arrangements and  
age difference.

105
Effects of interword spacing on Chinese children’s reading abilities
dren’s reading times, and assessed their reading performance with respect 
to these materials. The data revealed those different interword spacing 
arrangements and age groups affected children’s reading times and their 
reading performance.
Data analysis revealed that the Taiwanese children read interword 
spaced text significantly more quickly than the unspaced text layout (tradi-
tional text). This finding reflects that of Hsu and Huang [2000b] who, in an 
experiment that investigated interword spacing and Taiwanese adults with 
respect to reading times and comprehension, found that interword spac-
ing with a similar sized gap between words to those in this experiment, 
produced the fastest reading times compared to other interword spacing 
arrangements. It should be noted, however, that Hsu and Huang’s experi-
ment measured participants’ reading performance through a post-reading 
comprehension test. This experiment investigated reading performance by 
identifying substituted words that were inappropriately placed in the text. 
This type of task reduced participants’ skimming behavior and provided 
an extra visual cue which guided them to find the substituted words [Ber-
nard et al., 2002, 2003]. In addition, Hsu and Huang’s experiment only 
involved Taiwanese adults. This experiment therefore extends their find-
ings by confirming that interword spacing also helps Taiwanese children 
to read faster, although it uses different measures of reading performance.
There were differences between younger and older children with re-
spect to the percentage of detected substituted words. These results mir-
rored the finding of Hughes and Wilkins [2000] who, in a reading task, 
found that older children have no differences with regard to font size and 
typeface design in reading materials. However, the reading time of young-
er children decreased as the text size decreased. 
Further analyses of reading performance demonstrated that, with re-
spect to the percentage of detected substituted words, older children 
performed better than younger children. According to Li et al.’s [2009] 
Chinese word recognition model, the recognition of Chinese characters in-
volves both topdown and bottomup cognitive processing. This experiment 
additionally found that interword spacing, which is not used in written 
Chinese, assisted younger children to recognise words in text. It is possi-
ble that this finding can be attributed to the law of proximity [Wertheimer, 
1923; Koffka, 1935] in that the spaces between the groups of closely po-
sitioned characters made the characters in these groups appear to be cor-

106
Digital fonts and reading
rectly associated with each other. In other words, the spaces gave younger 
children visual cues as to which characters formed words. It is possible 
that interword spacing showed fewer advantages with older children than 
younger children with respect to reading performance because the older 
children in the experiment found the text too easy to understand. They 
may have anticipated some words and thus did not profit from the addi-
tional visual cues offered by interword spacing.
This experiment had two limitations. First, only two age groups (ages 
7 to 8 years and ages 10 to 11 years) were included in the research. If the 
experiment is repeated with children outside these age groups, different re-
sults may be obtained. As some researchers have suggested, younger chil-
dren are still developing their reading skills, so are more likely than older 
children to be affected by typographic variables [Hughes and Wilkins, 
2000, 2002; Reynolds and Walker, 2004]. Second, the study only used 
a small number of interword spacing arrangements. It may be found that 
interword spacing that is larger than a character wide is more beneficial to 
Taiwanese children than fully-spaced interspacing.
This study contributes to the limited body of work that relates to chil-
dren reading text with different sized interword spacing arrangements on 
tablet computers. The findings of this experiment should be useful to in-
structional designers, typographers and child educators creating reading 
materials for Taiwanese children.
Acknowledgment
This experiment was kindly supported by a grant from the Ministry 
of Science and Technology in Taiwan (contract number: MOST103-
2410-H-415-047). 
References 
Bai, X.J., Liang, F.F., Blythe, H.I., Zang, C.L., Yan, G.L., and Liversedge, S.P. 
(2013). Interword spacing effects on the acquisition of new vocabulary for 
readers of Chinese as a second language, J. Res. Read., 36(S1), pp. S4-S7.
Bassetti, B. (2009). Effects of adding interword spacing on Chinese reading: a 
comparison of Chinese native readers and English readers of Chinese as a 
second language, Appl. Psycholinguistics, 30(4), pp.757-775.

107
Effects of interword spacing on Chinese children’s reading abilities
Bernard, M., Chaparro, B. S., Mills, M. M., and Halcomb, C. G. (2002). Exam-
ining children’s reading performance and preference for different comput-
er-displayed text, Behav. Inform. Technol., 21(2), pp.87-96.
Bernard, M., Fernandez, M., and Hull, S. (2002). The effects of line length on 
children and adults’ online reading performance. Usability News, 4(2). 
Retrieved from http://usabilitynews.org/the-effects-of-line-length-on-chil-
dren-and-adults-online-reading-performance/
Bernard, M., Chaparro, B. S., Mills, M. M., and Halcomb, C. G. (2003). Com-
paring the effects of text size and format on the readability of comput-
er-displayed Times New Roman and Arial text, Int. J. Hum-Comput. St., 
59, pp. 823-835.
Chi, C. F., Cai, D., and You, M. (2003). Applying image descriptors to the as-
sessment of legibility in Chinese characters, Ergon., 46(8), pp. 825-841. 
Hsu, S., and Huang, K. (2000a). Interword spacing in Chinese text layout. Per-
cept. Motor Skill, 90(2), pp. 355-365.
Hsu, S., and Huang, K. (2000b). Effects of word spacing on reading Chinese text 
from a video display terminal, Percept. Motor Skill, 90(1), pp. 81-92.
Hughes, L. E., and Wilkins, A. J. (2000). Typography in children’s reading 
schemes may be suboptimal: evidence from measures of reading rat, J. 
Res. Read., 23(3), pp. 314-324.
Hughes, L. E., and Wilkins, A. J. (2002). Reading at a distance: implications 
for the design of text in children’s bog books, Bri. J. Educ. Psychol., 72, 
pp. 213-226. 
Inhoff, A. W., Liu, W., Wang, J., and Fu, D. (1997) Hanyu juzi yuedu zhong de 
yandong yu kongjian xinxi de yunyong (Eye movements and the use of 
spacing information in reading Chinese sentences), eds. Peng, D., “Hanyu 
renzhi yanjiu (Cognitive research on the Chinese language),” (Shandong 
Jiaoyu Chubanshe Press, Taiwan). pp. 296-312.
Koffka, K. (1935) Principles of Gestalt Psychology. (Harcourt Publishing, New 
York).
Li, X., Rayner, K., and Cave, K. R. (2009). On the segmentation of Chinese 
words during reading, Cognitive Psychol., 58, pp. 525-552.
Liu, I. M., Chuang, C. J., and Wu, J. T. (1987). Guiding rules for the computa-
tional analyses of Chinese words and proposition, Chinese J. Psychol., 29, 
pp. 51-61. (In Chinese)
Liu, I. M., Ye, J. S., Wang, L. H., and Chang, Y. K. (1974). Effects of arranging 
Chinese words as units on reading efficiency, Acta Psychologica Twaiwan-
ica, 16, pp. 25-32.

108
Digital fonts and reading
Nielsen, J. (2010). Children’s websites: Usability issues in designing for kids. 
Retrieved from http://www.nngroup.com/articles/childrens-websites-us-
ability-issues/
Reynolds, L., and Walker, S. (2004). You can’t see what the words say: word 
spacing and letter spacing in children’s reading books, J. Res. Read., 27(1), 
pp. 87-98.
Wang, P. Y., Wang, H. F., and Liu, Y. C. (2013). Elementary students’ reading 
behaviors of e-books with different adaptive designs, J. Educ. Media Libr. 
Sci., 51(2), pp. 267-291.
Wertheimer, M. (1923) Laws of organization in perceptual forms (Untersuchun-
gen zur Lehre von der Gestalt), II Psychologische Forschung, eds. Ellis, W. 
D., A sourcebook of Gestalt psychology, (Routledge, London)  
pp. 310-350.
Wilkins, A., Cleave, R. Grayson, N. and Wilson, L. (2009). Typography for chil-
dren may be inappropriately designed, J. Res. Read., 32(4), pp. 402-412.
Yao,Y. (2011). Interword spacing effects on reading Mandarin Chinese as a 
second language, Writ. Syst. Res., 3(1), pp. 23-40.
Yu, B., Zhang, W., Jing, Q., Peng, R., Zhang, G., and Simon, H. (1985). STM 
capacity for Chinese and English language materials, Mem. & Cogn., 
13(3), pp. 202-207. 

109
Chapter 7
Elements of Chinese  
typeface design
Xiaoqing Lu and Ting Tang
This chapter briefly introduces the modern Chinese typeface based on classification, in-
cluding its distinguishing features, different usages, and representative typefaces of the 
different styles. The complexity of the Chinese typeface, particularly in terms of the large 
quantity of Chinese characters, makes the Chinese typeface designs more difficult to devel-
op than those of other typefaces. In general, the workflow of Chinese typeface design in-
cludes three important phases, namely, formation of originality, development of the design 
specification, and implementation of the entire plan. Some particular challenges related to 
the development of the Chinese typeface are discussed, such as achieving the ideal visual 
balance of a character by adjusting the size, width, position, and density of its strokes; 
aligning the centers of the strokes and avoiding collision; and evaluating the effects of the 
different components on the layout of characters. To guarantee a consistent style, typefaces 
in different languages, when used simultaneously on one page, also need modification or 
redesign.
1.1   Introduction
In this chapter, we briefly introduce the modern Chinese typeface based 
on classification, including its distinguishing features, different usages, 
and representative typefaces of the different styles, such as Song, Hei, 
Fang Song, and Kai. The main part of this chapter describes the workflow 
involved in the Chinese typeface design. The complexity of the Chinese 
typeface, particularly in terms of the large quantity of Chinese characters, 
makes the Chinese typeface designs more difficult to develop than those of 
other typefaces. In general, the approach includes three important phases, 
namely, formation of originality, development of the design specification, 
and implementation of the entire plan. Moreover, several particular chal-
lenges related to the development of the Chinese typeface are discussed, 
such as achieving the ideal visual balance of a character by adjusting the 
size, width, position, and density of its strokes; aligning the centers of the 

110
Digital fonts and reading
strokes and avoiding collision; and evaluating the effects of the different 
components on the layout of characters. With the rapid international inte-
gration arising from the exchange of views, products, and services all over 
the world, more content needs to be published simultaneously in different 
languages. To guarantee a consistent style, characters or typefaces in dif-
ferent languages should be modified or redesigned at the stroke level. 
1.2   Background information
1.2.1   Basic concepts
The Chinese writing system is drastically different from Latin-based lan-
guages [Bathrobe, n.d.; Wikipedia, 2015]. A Chinese character generally 
represents one syllable of spoken Chinese, and may be a word on its own 
or a part of a polysyllabic word. All of them are glyphs whose components 
depict objects or represent abstract notions. Each Chinese character stands 
as a discrete unit, a self-contained form within an imaginary square box. A 
line of Chinese text is not separated by spaces into individual words, but 
only interrupted by punctuation marks. Before we provide details on the 
design of the Chinese typeface, understanding the important underlying 
concepts relative to Chinese characters is necessary.
1.2.1.1   Centroid 
The alignment of English letters and words relies on a baseline. However, 
aside from a baseline, the centroid of each character serves an important 
function in Chinese character alignment. Figure 1 shows the difference be-
tween the centroids of two characters. The horizontal orientation is not the 
Figure 1: Centroids of Jiang (畺) and Jiang (僵).

111
Elements of Chinese typeface design
only direction in which Chinese texts are typeset. The layouts of such texts 
frequently require arrangement in the vertical orientation. The centroids of 
characters should not be displaced in a horizontal line while being capable 
of shifting left or right in a vertical line. 
The centroid of a Chinese character depends on its geometric attributes, 
as well as on its structure. Taking characters ‘畺’ (jiang) and ‘ 僵’ (jiang) 
for example, the centroid of character ‘畺’ and the center of character ‘畺’ 
coincide because the structure of the former is bilaterally symmetric both 
in the up–down and left–right directions. However, the structure of char-
acter ‘僵’ is asymmetric, given that its left part, which has sparse strokes, 
and its right part, which has dense strokes, endow increased weight on the 
right part compared to the left part in terms of visual effect. Consequently, 
the centroid of character ‘僵’ slightly deviates to the left of the center of 
its right part ‘畺’.
1.2.1.2   Body frame and surface frame 
There are two important concepts relative to the size of Chinese charac-
ters: Body Frame (BF) and Surface Frame (SF). In a Chinese font, each 
character is fitted into its own space container, which is square shaped and 
allows the characters to be set neatly into rows. Typeface designers call 
such a square BF, shown in grey in Figure 2, reminding themselves not to 
allow any stroke to exceed the borders of a BF. BF is generally fixed for 
a certain font. SF, however, is the bounding box of a character, shown in 
dotted line in Figure 2. SFs vary from character to character in one font, 
but the differences among most SFs are slight. Neither BF nor SF can be 
seen in an accomplished typeface. They are just adopted by designers to 
ensure those characters of a same font appear to be the same size in terms 
of human visual perception.
Figure 2: Two Spring (春) characters from different fonts with same BF and different SF.

112
Digital fonts and reading
Figure 3: Same character with tight ZhongGong (left) and loose ZhongGong (right).
1.2.1.3   ZhongGong
ZhongGong (中宫), a special concept for Chinese typeface design, literal-
ly means central palace. However it references more than just the central 
part of a character, it depicts the density of a character. Shown as Figure 
3, the two graphs can be seen as the same character with different layouts 
of central strokes. A character with tight ZhongGong (left) exhibits more 
strokes arranged near the center, whereas those strokes stretch outside in a 
character with loose ZhongGong (right).
1.2.2   Typeface category 
Chinese characters comprise perhaps the oldest surviving writing system 
in the world and have existed for 8,000 years. Chinese typefaces have four 
major styles: Song, Hei, FangSong, and Kai, which intrinsically link the 
history of Chinese script. More new typefaces have been developed from 
other traditional scripts, such as seal, clerical, and cursive scripts, based on 
the handwritings of famous calligraphers and from innovations in modern 
art. As a result, Chinese characters have a variety of typefaces [Founder 
Type; Hanyi fonts; ZhongYi; DynaComware].
1.2.2.1   Song (宋)
Song, also called Ming in Japan, is a distinctive printed style of regular 
script with a long history dating back to the Song Dynasty. The Song style, 
as shown in Figure 4, is widely used in Chinese books, newspapers, and 
magazines. The most striking feature of Song is the triangle at the end of 
each single horizontal stroke. Such design can be perfectly exhibited in 
traditional printed documents with high resolution. However, when such 

113
Elements of Chinese typeface design
style is used for small computer displays or smartphones, most triangles 
are often rendered as a single dot, thus disturbing the original style. More-
over, the horizontal strokes in the Song style are thin, whereas vertical 
strokes are thick. The characters in the Song style exhibit geometrical reg-
ularity. 
1.2.2.2   Hei (黑)
Hei is known as the East Asian gothic style typeface, as shown in Figure 5, 
akin to the Sans-serif styles of Western typography. This style is commonly 
used in headlines, signs, and videos. Hei generally lacks decorations and 
has strokes of even thickness. Strokes in the classic Hei style have squared 
ends. However, new Hei styles tend to adopt rounded line ends and corners. 
Hei typefaces have low contrast, large counters, and frame-filling glyphs. 
Thus, these typefaces can be highly legible in low resolution.
Figure 4: Examples of Song: (left) traditional Song (FangZhengBaoSong, 方正报宋); 
(right) modern Song (FangZhengBoYaFangKanSong, 方正博雅方刊宋).
Figure 5: Examples of Hei: (top) FangZhengLanTingHei (方正兰亭黑); (bottom) 
Microsoft YaHei (微软雅黑).

114
Digital fonts and reading
1.2.2.3   FangSong (仿宋) 
FangSong is also called Imitation Song, which suggests that the former 
shares several main characteristics with the latter, particularly in terms of 
geometrical regularity in structure. However, FangSong, as shown in Fig-
ure 6 and Figure 7, has several distinctive differences from the Song style. 
The strokes in FangSong are relatively thin, whereas the stroke width vari-
ation between horizontal and vertical strokes is very low. Moreover, major 
horizontal strokes in a character are not absolutely horizontal but rather 
slant up slightly from left to right. Finally, the beginnings of strokes have 
slant serifs, and the intersections have sharp corners. 
FangSong was created for book publishing and is currently being used 
for the typesetting of formal documents.
Figure 6: Collection of poems, Xiao Huai Yi Yin Gao (小槐簃吟稿), printed in the Ju 
Zhen Fang Song (聚珍仿宋) typeface in the early 1920s.

115
Elements of Chinese typeface design
1.2.2.4   Kai (楷)
Kai or KaiShu, also commonly known as regular script or standard script, 
is the newest Chinese calligraphy style and is thus the most commonly used 
in modern writings and publications. Figure 8 illustrates four examples of 
Kai. This regular script is the most easily recognized, such that it is usually 
introduced to children and beginners learning the Chinese language. Kai 
has inherited many of the characteristics of neatly written text. Each stroke 
is independent and is placed carefully in clear order. Every end of the 
strokes shows how a brush is put down on and lifted from paper. 
Figure 7: Examples of FangSong: (first row) HuaWenFangSong (STFangsong)  
(华文仿宋); (second row) FangZhengFangSong (方正仿宋); (third row) 
FangZhengKeBenFangSong (方正刻本仿宋); (fourth row) FangZhengJuZhenXinFang  
(方正聚珍新仿).
Figure 8: Examples of Kai: (first row) FangZhengKaiTi (方正楷体); (second row) 
FangZhengBeiWeiKaiShu (方正北魏楷书); (third row) FangZhengDaWeiTi (方正大魏
体); (fourth row) FangZhengSongKeBenXiuKai (方正宋刻本秀楷).

116
Digital fonts and reading
1.3   Chinese typeface design
Compared with Latin letters or Arabic numerals, Chinese characters are 
significantly more difficult to design for several reasons. First, signifi-
cantly more Chinese characters exist. Approximately six thousand Chi-
nese characters are meant for daily use, and 47,000 more characters exist 
in the Kang-Xi Chinese dictionary. This significant number of characters 
results in a very large reference database and a time-consuming design 
process. Second, the structure of Chinese characters is considerably more 
complex than that of Latin letters and Arabic numbers. Chinese characters 
often have more than 10 strokes and intersection points, thus increasing 
the complexity of structure stability and consistency in the expression of 
all characters.
Although the designs of Chinese typefaces and English typefaces 
share many common concepts, theories, and methods [Bringhurst, 1992; 
White, 2004], the complexity of Chinese typefaces, especially in terms of 
the large quantity of Chinese characters, makes achieving a perfect design 
for all characters in one typeface impossible for a single designer. On av-
erage, designing one Chinese font, which includes 6,763 Chinese charac-
ters defined in the national standard (GB2312), takes approximately three 
human years to complete. To accomplish the task of designing one font, 
a design team, typically comprising one senior designer, two intermedi-
ate designers, five general designers, and one inspector, work together for 
three to five months.
The manner of developing the originality of a certain font is of lit-
tle consequence because a company will still select one senior typeface 
designer to take charge of the specification when the former decides to 
develop the font. In general, the experienced designer works with two in-
termediate designers to prepare the specification. In addition, one of them 
will be responsible for the direction and management of the successive 
font development. Five or more general designers design all the individual 
characters based on the specification. The inspector ensures the quality 
and style of the newly designed characters.

117
Elements of Chinese typeface design
1.3.1   Design workflow of Chinese typefaces
Designing a Chinese typeface generally has three phases: ‘formation of 
originality,’ ‘development of design specification,’ and ‘implementation 
of entire plan.’
1.3.1.1   Formation of originality
Every new typeface has a unique source of inspiration. For example,  
a modern opera house designed by French architects inspired the Fang-
ZhengJunHei font (方正俊黑体); traditional signboards of local shops 
inspired the FangZhengSongYan font (方正颜宋体); and the FangZheng-
JianZhi font (方正剪纸体) exhibits the essence of paper cutting, one of 
the most popular folk traditions in Chinese decorative art. Summarizing 
a general theory for stimulating inspiration is difficult because the origi-
nality involved in typeface design is diverse. However, the attributes of a 
typeface are based on three elements of typeface design: structure, stroke, 
and width. Structure includes the size and position of a typeface, as well as 
the centroid, which is drawn in auxiliary lines. Strokes, such as dots, hor-
izontals, verticals, rises, press downs, and throwaways, are the main parts 
of Chinese characters and are expressed using vertex-based contours. The 
width of strokes varies according to different typeface styles.
1.3.1.2   Development of design specification
Perfectly designing a single character is easy. However, ensuring consis-
tency in structure and style across all characters in one typeface is difficult. 
Theoretically, the best way to maintain consistency is for one designer to 
accomplish all character designs. However, three or four years are needed 
before a designer accomplishes his plans because more than 6,000 Chi-
nese characters exist in one font. In modern typeface companies, multiple 
designers commonly collaborate at different levels to shorten the develop-
ment cycle. However, this strategy also increases the risk of inconsistency. 
Design specifications are usually required for designing typefaces.
Comprehensive instructions regarding the design concept of new type-
faces are essential for executing the thoughts of designers. Comprehensive 
instructions also enable many designers to accomplish a design through a 

118
Digital fonts and reading
collaborative effort. Several or even dozens of sample characters in a spec-
ification are inadequate for collaboration. The quantity of design samples 
depends on an in-depth analysis of the structure of character sets and the 
similarities among the characters. On the basis of years of experience, most 
font design companies agreed that Chinese characters have approximately 
500 common radicals when almost all characters in a typeface are decom-
posed. Feasible instructions should obviously contain sufficient sample 
Figure 9: Specification example for Chinese typeface design (FangZhengJunHei,  
方正俊黑) showing sample strokes (provided by Shaobo Li).

119
Elements of Chinese typeface design
characters that cover all these components while including as many defor-
mations and combinations as possible. The number of characters should be 
at least 500. Using these sample characters in a specification, as shown in 
Figures 9 and 10, other cooperating designers could easily understand the 
design idea of a new typeface and consequently create other characters in 
the same style with common components and relatively minimal effort in 
terms of rearrangement. 
Figure 10: Specification example for same Chinese typeface design as Figure 9 
(FangZhengJunHei, 方正俊黑) showing sample components (provided by Shaobo Li).

120
Digital fonts and reading
1.3.1.3   Implementation of entire plan
Using the sample characters, designers can construct new characters in 
the same style with common components. For example, 捅 (tong) consists 
of two main components: 木 (mu) on the left and 甬 (yong) on the right. 
The component 木 can be found in several sample characters, such as 横 
(heng). The component 甬 can be found in the sample character 桶. The 
basic step for designing 捅 is selecting 木 from character 横, selecting 甬 
from 桶, and then combining them. 
Figure 11 shows a simplified illustration. However, this procedure 
is not simple. To achieve perfect or even acceptable typefaces, designers 
have to solve many challenging problems, some of which are discussed 
in the following sections.
1.3.2   Special problems in Chinese typeface design
1.3.2.1   Visual balance: size 
Chinese characters are square shaped, as in the case of 国 (guo), 图 (tu), 
and 口 (kou). However, most Chinese characters do not possess a square 
outline. In fact, special designs are adopted to convert these shapes into 
approximate squares. Moreover, the outline of some characters, such as卜 
(pu), are rectangular. In 上 (shang), the outline is nearly triangular, and in 
Figure 11: Design of new characters on the basis of previously designed characters 
according to their specifications.

121
Elements of Chinese typeface design
今 (jin), the outline is diamond-shaped. The differences among the various 
character shapes give rise to a challenge in character size uniformity. 
Assigning the same size to the occupied area of all characters would 
not produce visual similarity. For example, 今 appears to be slightly larger 
than 口 if they are designed with the same occupied area. An illustration 
is given in Figure 12.
Figure 12: Two characters with the same occupied area appear different in size: (left) 
a diamond and a square with the same area; (middle and right) are 今 and 口 with the 
same occupied areas.
Figure 13: Different sizes of shapes and their visual effects: (top) shapes with the same 
area; (middle) shapes with the same height; (bottom) shapes with the same visual size.

122
Digital fonts and reading
Figure 13 clearly shows the differences in the details of the square, the 
diamond, and the triangle. A triangle or a diamond with the same area as 
a square appears slightly larger than the latter (Figure 13, top). However, 
a triangle or a diamond with the same height as a square appears slightly 
smaller than the latter (Figure 13, middle). To make these characters ap-
pear to have the same height, designers attempt to identify the most suit-
able sizes for different characters. 
1.3.2.2   Visual balance: bounding strokes
Most outside strokes of a character contribute to forming the bounding 
box and are thus called bounding strokes. These strokes can be divided 
into two categories according to their joint type with the corresponding 
border. A stroke that joins a border with a point (a tip of the stroke) is 
called a virtual bounding stroke (Figure 14, left), whereas one that joins a 
border with a line (one edge of the stroke) is called a real bounding stroke 
(Figure 14, right). Different bounding strokes have different visual effects 
relative to character size. To make two similar characters look the same in 
size, different designs are adopted for virtual and real bounding strokes. 
Figure 14 shows that the tip of virtual bounding strokes is designed to 
overstep the bound of the occupied area slightly. The edge of a real bound-
ing stroke is kept inside the area.
Figure 14: Virtual bounding stroke and real bounding stroke. 

123
Elements of Chinese typeface design
1.3.2.3   Visual balance: density of stroke
The perception of the visual size of a character is influenced by another 
subjective factor, that is, the density of character strokes. Characters that 
consist of more strokes should generally appear larger than characters that 
consist of fewer strokes. For example, if 口 (kou) and 整 (zheng) are de-
signed to be similar in SF size (Figure 15, top), the character 整 looks 
more compact and smaller than 口. To achieve visual balance among the 
characters with different stroke densities, the SF of a complicated character 
is often adjusted carefully to appear larger, as shown in Figure 15, bottom.
1.3.2.4   Center alignment 
Properly and effectively aligning the center of components ensures a good 
set of characters. Two basic rules can be summarized as follows: centers of 
components in an up–down-structured character should be aligned vertical-
ly, whereas those of components in a left–right-structured character should 
align horizontally. For more complicated characters, such as up–middle–
down, left–middle–right, whole surround, half surround, and nested struc-
tures, more local alignments are set on the basis of hierarchical character 
decomposition, as shown in Figure 16. For example, the character 楼 (lou) 
Figure 15: Characters with different stroke densities: (top) 口 and 整 that are similar in 
SF size; (bottom) SF of 整 is enlarged.

124
Digital fonts and reading
can be divided into left and right parts in the first level. Then, the right part 
can be divided into upper and lower components. Thus, these two levels 
between corresponding components should be aligned differently.
1.3.2.5   Collision avoidance
Following the specification of a typeface, designers create most characters 
in this typeface on the basis of reference samples in the specification or by 
borrowing some components of the finished characters. Collision avoid-
ance is a notable occurrence in this process. Given that the components are 
from different characters, their adoption for constructing new characters 
may cause some strokes to connect or even overlap. Figure 17 shows that 
a horizontal stroke in 木 joins another horizontal stroke in 黄 (huang). 
Such unexpected connection not only damages the structure of characters 
but also hampers legibility. Consequently, the length and position of the 
strokes should be adjusted to achieve a harmonious layout.
Figure 16: Examples of centroid alignment. (Top) four characters are askew, according 
to a professional’s view, as some components are not aligned. The reference lines joining 
two centroids should be vertical or horizontal; (bottom) the centroids of corresponding 
characters are aligned.
Figure 17: Example of collision avoidance: (left) 木 is joined with 黄; (right) two 
components are separated by adjusting the length and position of a horizontal stroke.

125
Elements of Chinese typeface design
1.3.2.6   Effects of stroke width on visual balance
Stroke width is an important factor that influences the visual perception of 
size and stability. Adopting one solid width when designing all characters 
in one typeface is not feasible. For example, if the same stroke width is 
used for 膏 (gao) and 口 (Figure 18), 膏 looks obviously heavier than 口 
because the former contains more strokes and possesses a more compli-
cated structure. To harmonize these characters visually, they should be 
adjusted to the appropriate solid stroke width. 
The length of a stroke affects visual perception relative to the width of 
the stroke. Figure 19 illustrates this situation. Among the three lines with 
the same width, the longest line always appears thinner than the two other 
lines. Conversely, the shortest line appears the thickest. 
The Wundt Fick illusion [Fick, 1851] indicates the relation between 
the position of a stroke and the corresponding visual perception of length. 
Figure 20 shows that although all the lines in each of the four examples 
have the same length and width, the vertical lines in the first two (on the 
left) appear longer than the horizontal lines to which they are connected. 
Meanwhile, the horizontal lines in the last two examples appear longer 
than the vertical lines.
Figure 18: Characters 膏 and 口 with the same stroke width.
Figure 19: Strokes with same width and different length.

126
Digital fonts and reading
All of the foregoing observations highlight the necessity for adjusting 
strokes. An experienced designer usually spends considerable time ad-
justing stroke widths individually to balance complicated characters with 
multiple strokes visually. Figure 21 shows 膏 and 口 in the FangZheng­
LanTingHei (方正兰亭黑) typeface. Some adjustments to the stroke width 
in these characters can only be observed after careful examination.
1.3.2.7   Effect of component size on character structure
Traditional Chinese calligraphy has rules regarding character structure 
[Sun I Vision Design, 2011]. For example, having a tight upper loose low-
er, tight left loose right, and tight inside loose outside are valuable for 
designing modern typefaces. Identical components that appear in a single 
character are a good example. The sizes of duplicated components should 
be adjusted because their visual sizes are influenced by their positions in 
the structure of a character. A concise interpretation that consists of two 
identical squares is illustrated in Figure 22.
Figure 21: Sample characters with adjustment of stroke width.
Figure 20:  Examples of Wundt Fick illusion.

127
Elements of Chinese typeface design
The left square near an acute angle appears slightly larger than that on 
the right. Considering that Chinese text is read from left to right, experi-
enced designers are inclined to adopt components with different sizes to 
achieve a more stable structure. Four Pin (品) characters obtained from 
different typefaces that consist of three identical components of 口 are 
shown in Figure 23. Most 口 components at the lower left are designed to 
be smaller than their neighbors on the right on the basis of the rule ‘tight 
left loose right.’ In particular, the width of a 口 component at the lower 
left (labeled as b in Figure 23) is generally designed to be shorter than the 
width of a 口 component at the lower right (labeled as b or c in Figure 23) 
for many typefaces. Such fine adjustments fit the visual illusions caused by 
component positions and stabilize character structure.
Figure 22: Two identical squares look different in size.
Figure 23: Sample Pin (品) characters with same components in different typefaces: 
(left) FangZhengLanTingHei (方正兰亭黑); (second from left) FangZhengZhunYaSong 
(方正准雅宋); (third from left) FangZhengXiDengXian (方正细等线); (right) 
FangzhengHei (方正黑体). The widths of three 口 components in each 品 character 
are labeled as a, b and c when they are not equal in a character.

128
Digital fonts and reading
1.4   Harmony between different languages
As a result of globalization, articles now commonly contain several lan-
guages. Selecting typefaces originally designed for different languages, 
coordinating their different styles, and designing a harmonious layout 
across diverse cultures are intractable problems.
1.4.1   Uniform stroke styles
Some accepted recommendations could achieve a harmonious combina-
tion of Chinese and English text. These recommendations include Chinese 
Hei for Sans-serif English typefaces and Chinese Song for serif English 
typefaces. Such suggestions are obviously insufficient for professional de-
signers. To accomplish high-level work, typeface designers are required 
to perform highly specific modifications or even to create new typefaces. 
For example, the Hewlett–Packard company launched a market strategy, 
‘The Computer is Personal Again,’ in 2006. It was necessary to design a 
series of advertisements about the same content but in different languag-
es. In the Chinese version of this advertisement, the stroke style of every 
Chinese character references the structure of the corresponding letters in 
the English advertisement.
1.4.2   Coordinating the sizes of typefaces in different languages
When Chinese and English typefaces with the same typeface size are used, 
the typefaces appear inharmonious in size. Chinese and English typefaces 
adopt different methods for describing the size of typeface. Both typeface 
size and ZhongGong affect the visual size of Chinese typefaces. For En-
glish typefaces, x-height is the most important feature for depicting the 
visual size of letters [Kobayashi, 2005]. To achieve high accuracy when 
coordinating the sizes of typefaces combining different languages, the in-
terior of the typefaces should be adjusted.

129
Elements of Chinese typeface design
1.4.3   Unification of stroke width 
Assigning the same weight to different typefaces in one paragraph is a 
common method for achieving a smooth and unified layout. However, 
when the typefaces are from different languages, the layout effect is not 
always satisfied because the weights of these typefaces may have different 
meanings. To identify more alternative weights, designers tend to select 
typeface families to match other language typefaces in terms of size. Fig-
ure 24 shows examples of characters from the Helvetica family with the 
Chinese font FangZhengYuHei (方正悠黑). Helvetica Neue 65 in Figure 
24 (left) appears too dark, such that English letters protrude from the para-
graph. Helvetica Neue 45 in Figure 24 (middle) appears too light. In Figure 
24 (right) the English typeface redesigned on the basis of Helvetica is suit-
able for FangZhengYuHei (方正悠黑).
References
Bathrobe (n.d.) Bathrobe’s East Asian Writing Systems http://www.cjvlang.com/
Writing/writchin/index.html, accessed on 27 May 2015
Bringhurst, R. (1992) The elements of typographic style, (Hartley & Marks, 
Canada)
DynaComware (n.d.) http://www.dynacw.cn/, accessed on 27 May 2015
Fick, A. (1851) Da errone quodam optic asymmetria bulbi effecto. (Marburg, 
Koch, Dissertation).
Founder Type, Beijing Founder Electronics Co. Ltd, (n.d.) http://www.founder-
type.com.cn/, accessed on 27 May 2015
Hanyi fonts (n.d.) http://www.hanyi.com.cn, accessed on 27 May 2015
Kobayashi, A. (2005) Latin typeface: the background and use, (Bijutsu Shuppansha)
Figure 24: Combination of Chinese and English fonts with different stroke widths.

130
Digital fonts and reading
Sun I Vision Design, (2011) Type Design Guide Book, (Science Press, China 
Science Publishing & Media Ltd.).
White, A.W. (2004) Thinking in type: the practical philosophy of typography, (All-
worth Press).
Wikipedia (2015) Written Chinese http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Written_Chinese,  
accessed on 27 May 2015
ZhongYi Electronic Ltd.(n.d.)http://www.china-e.com.cn, accessed on 27 May 
2015

131
Chapter 8
Optimizing type for use in  
specific media
Eben Sorkin
This chapter describes optimizing type for specific media. It draws upon the author’s 
perspective and experience as a type designer. The chapter lists information to be gathered 
before beginning an optimization process and some ways to evaluate and apply that 
information to optimize type. Examples of problems to be overcome using optimization as 
well as examples in which an optimization process ceases to be relevant are also reviewed. 
Both printed type and type rendered to screen are considered. Some of the ways in which 
optimization for type could be approached in the future for computer rendered text are  
also discussed.
1.1   Introduction
This chapter examines the principles and methods used to optimize type 
for specific media known to the author, who has been a professional type 
designer since 2010. The material presented reflects his experience and 
thinking on the subject. 
The most celebrated type designs are often notable at least in part 
because they were designed for a specific mediaa and thus are a particular-
ly good fit to the task they were designed for.
Type optimization is a process motivated either by anticipation of a 
problem or in response to an observed problem. A more sophisticated mo-
tivation for optimization is to create continuity of the printed result of a 
font across two or more kinds of differing media and or printing methods.b 
This requires making a font with versions or ‘grades’ optimized to a spe-
cific process.
a	 An incomplete set of typefaces that fit this description include: Freight by Joshua Darden 
2005, Verdana by Matthew Carter 1996, Georgia by Matthew Carter 1993, Bell Centennial 
by Matthew Carter 1975–78
b	 Mercury Text by Hoefler & Frere-Jones, 1996

132
Digital fonts and reading
When thinking about optimization for specific media it is necessary to 
avoid considering media in isolation. Instead I recommend considering a 
set of factors and their interactions. 
1.2   Factors relevant to optimizing 
1.	
Distance at which the font will be read 
2.	
Physical size at which the font will be reproduced
3.	
Kind/s of media to optimize for
4.	
Technology used to reproduce the font
5.	
Formal characteristics of the font
6.	
Angle of view 
7.	
Readers of the font
By gathering information about these factors, the relevant design consid-
erations for optimizing are described. The more complete and precise the 
information is, the more it becomes possible to make deliberate and appro-
priate type design choices when optimizing a font.
Although the ideal is a full and detailed set of information, as a practi-
cal matter I have found it is not always possible to collect a complete set or 
to be completely certain about all the information. It is desirable therefore 
to maintain an awareness of how definite the information about each factor 
is to avoid over- or under-emphasizing that factor in the design process.
Thinking in terms of perception is a way to hold these factors together. 
The point of any optimization is to compensate for distortion in the way 
the font will be perceived by a reader. The factors listed are a list of con-
siderations that may have an impact on a reader’s perception. Distortion 
matters when it changes the clarity and utility of fonts. Fonts are tools and 
optimizations are there to make them better tools. Distortion can also alter 
the feeling or expression that the font brings to a text. It is only when a 
change to a font’s design allows a type to restore or improve utility and/or 
expression that we can claim optimization has taken place. 
For scientists who are using type for experimental purposes, being 
aware of how and why type may be optimized is also valuable because it 
can help them to better control experimental variables. A side benefit of 
this awareness is that it can also help make these same experiments more 
relevant and useful for type designers and typographers.

133
Optimizing type for use in specific media
1.3   Visual angle: physical size and reading distance 
Once the information is gathered the next problem is making practical use 
of it. What relationships should you begin with? Perhaps the most dom-
inant relationship among the factors is the visual angle. This term refers 
to the size the font will be on the retina inside the eye when it is read. 
The question of what the visual angle of a font is for optimizing can be 
resolved by looking at the relationship of the first two factors in our list: 
the physical size at which the font is reproduced and the range of distanc-
es from which the font will be read. A large visual angle permits clearer 
and more nuanced perception. A small visual angle is more challenging 
because fonts are more likely to be subject either to deficiencies in font 
reproduction or in our own ability to see and read them – or both.  
An identical font of the same physical size read from different distanc-
es has a different visual angle (Figure 1). 
That same font reproduced twice, once twice as large as the other, can 
have an equivalent visual angle provided the viewing distance is twice as 
far away for the font whose size is twice as large (Figure 2). 
Figure 1 : Distance changes the visual angle. 

134
Digital fonts and reading
Some optimizations will be fairly simple when it comes to the read-
ing distances we should anticipate. For example fonts intended for books, 
maps, magazines and other printed matter tend to be read from a fairly 
narrow range of distances: typically 30-40 cm or 12-16 inches. In contrast, 
a smart phone has a more variable range of likely reading distances from 
the eye. A sign in an airport or on a highway will need to be read easily 
from an even wider range of distances. With a larger range of visual angles 
it is practical to test from a set of the most likely reading distances as well 
as at the possible extremes.
Regardless of the physical size at which they are reproduced, when the 
visual angle is smaller, fonts tend to need to be spaced more widely and 
use lower stroke contrast. This tendency can be seen historically in Latin 
which makes it a cultural convention. However there may also be reasons 
to do with the maximum acuity of the human eye possibly combined with 
the effects of the psychological phenomena known as crowding [Pelli and 
Tillman, 2008]. If crowding is involved then the extra space given to fonts 
at smaller visual angles will be helping to correctly group the features we 
detect and combine to recognize glyphs. Fonts that will be read at larger 
visual angles often employ glyph widths that are relatively less wide and 
spacing that is tighter. However the need for this appears to be less given 
the large range of solutions seen for designs at large sizes. Depending on 
the style of the design it may also fall to a designer to make the details of 
the design more nuanced or subtle at a large visual angle or more heavy, 
substantial or brutal in the case of small visual angles.
Figure 2: Different physical sizes can have equivalent visual angles with distance.

135
Optimizing type for use in specific media
1.4   Output: font reproduction technology and media
As was the case with visual angle, we will need to again mix two factors 
from our list. In this case we will consider media and the technology used 
to reproduce the font together. The character of kinds of media and kinds 
of imaging technologies only become apparent and relevant when they are 
brought together and output is created. This output and patterns of recur-
ring problems seen in it can be evaluated and then corrected in the design 
of a font. It is this need for specificity that makes optimizing practical in 
the face of the overwhelming number of potential mixtures of media and 
technologies for reproducing fonts. 
Although we have established a practical way of managing the sheer 
diversity of media and font reproducing technology let us nevertheless 
briefly examine the diversity of both possible media and font reproduction 
technologies. 
When we think of media itself our first idea will likely be a physical 
material such as paper, film, plastic, foil or some other surface onto which 
a font can be printed. These forms of media offer a dauntingly large range 
of variation in characteristics. Some media will soak up ink a great deal, 
some very little and still others are impermeable requiring ink, toner or 
paint to dry on its surface. Some media have a rough texture and others 
are very smooth. Media can also be matte or shiny. Media can also exhib-
it a broad range of hues and degrees of brightness, thickness and even 
transparency. This is just a partial listing of characteristics. Each of these 
characteristics in turn makes a specific form of media either more or less 
suitable for another specific font reproduction technology.
Through applying cut vinyl, embossing, de-bossing, staining, sand-
blasting, cutting with lasers or carving, a font can be applied to surfaces 
less likely to come to mind as media, such as wood, stone, concrete and 
metal (see Figures 3-6).
Media can include the side of an aircraft, a building or ocean-going 
ship. As with the previous more conventional examples the technolo-
gy must be well matched to the characteristics of the material it will be 
applied to. 

136
Digital fonts and reading
 
Figure 3: Sand blasted and painted stone in the East Boston branch library sidewalk.
Figure 4: Letters designed by Lida Lopes-Cardozo; digitised by Eben Sorkin; laser-cut 
for Will Hill at Cambridge School of Art. Photo: Will Hill.
Figure 5: Palau de la Música Catalana, Barcelona, Spain.

137
Optimizing type for use in specific media
The sky becomes medium when airplanes ‘print’ dot matrix style in the 
sky with dots of smoke (Figure 7).
For output to inspire the effort of optimization the output must contain 
a problem that needs to be corrected. Figure 8 demonstrates an obvious 
problem from a relatively crude reproduction technology.
Figure 6: Two story tall letters on the Facebook campus, Menlo Park, CA.
Figure 7: Sky as seen from Golden Gate Park San Francisco, CA.

138
Digital fonts and reading
Problems that are sufficiently minor in the context of their normal use 
will not inspire optimization. The roughness seen in Figure 8 is no longer 
visible in Figure 9.
Type designers who are testing their designs will overcome the limita-
tions of a poor laser printer by using a similar method. They will output 
Figure 8: detail, YMCA Billboard, East Boston MA.
Figure 9: YMCA billboard seen at typical viewing distance. The white arrow points to the 
area seen in detail in Figure 8.

139
Optimizing type for use in specific media
their designs at a large size and step back from the page until the image of 
the text is at the appropriate visual angle. 
Clearly we can see that the more severe the output problem, the great-
er the size and scale required to overcome it. The scenario most likely to 
inspire optimization is the opposite: physically small text. Reproduction 
at small sizes is much more likely to exhibit and suffer from deficien-
cies when output. With small text a greater distance may make the prob-
lem even worse by making the text harder to read. If the text is instead 
brought closer to the eye then the deficiencies in reproduction become 
more obvious. 
Compare the degree of distortion in Figure 10 and Figure 11. Both are 
distorted but the details are kept more intact in the ‘5’ in Figure 11 which 
is physically larger. 
Figure 10: Text seen on the side of a cardboard box of laser printer paper.
Figure 11: Taken from the same source as Figure 10.

140
Digital fonts and reading
Type which will be set in or on media that exhibit ‘ink gain’ will tend 
to show an expansion of the shape of glyphs through the bleeding and or 
expansion of ink on the surface of the media. This kind of distortion can 
be partially compensated for. For example the white spaces where strokes 
join can be designed so that corners are cut into more deeply.c This feature 
is sometimes called an ‘ink trap’ or ‘light window’. Frederik Berlaen’s tool 
‘Rounding UFO’ has a function for programmatically adding this feature 
(see Figure 12). 
In addition to ink traps the shape of the letter itself can also be made 
somewhat smaller to allow for the degree of gain or expansion that is 
anticipated. 
Features of glyphs which are close together can be made to be farther 
apart for example between the base letter and a diacritic mark (Figure 13). 
c	 See: Bell Centennial by Matthew Carter 1975–78, Galfra by Ladislas Mandel 1975-
1981.
Figure 12: AE shown with and without ink traps made in rounding UFO. The AE glyph is 
from the Sorkin Type Co. font family Fjalla.
Figure 13: The ‘a’ glyph on the right has its diacritic mark raised. Sample from the 
author’s Merriweather font family.

141
Optimizing type for use in specific media
Slow changes in curves look circular whereas fast changes in direction 
appear sharper and have a shape that is more triangular or boxy. Ink gain 
can alter the character of a curve making the direction of a curve appear 
more gradual or slow. To compensate for anticipated ink gain, curves can 
be made more abrupt or sharper (Figure 14).
With reversed or white ‘knock out’ type the ink gain cuts into the glyph 
shape rather than expanding it (Figure 15).
The process called ‘halation’ is where light shines through glyphs 
which are illuminated or which are reflective. This is quite similar to ink 
gain as a problem in that glyph shapes seem to expand. 
Outputs that erode glyph shapes present a different problem. One solu-
tion is to build up the corners that are likely to be rounded by the erosion. 
The resulting studs or spikes will erode back to the desired shape. Again, 
the program ‘UFO rounded’ has a method for generating these features 
(Figure 16).
Figure 14: The upper two words without and with blur to simulate ink gain. The lower 
example is a modified set of shapes designed to resist the effects of ink gain. Words set in 
Merriweather and a modified Merriweather.
Figure 15: Ink gain in cutting into letter shapes.

142
Digital fonts and reading
A limit in the resolution of the technology, ink gain, and irregularity 
in the media being used can each contribute to a reduction in the ability 
to reproduce fine detail. These kinds of problems require font designs in 
which the thin parts of glyphs are made heavier or in some cases the fine 
parts of the design must be removed.
1.4.1   Dynamic type on screens 
The range of variation of screens and projection is not as large as we ob-
serve in static media but it is still very large and changing rapidly. At the 
time of writing there are an increasing range of manufactured goods which 
have historically not featured screens but which are beginning to make 
screens crucial to their basic use. Examples of this change include thermo-
stats, cars and wrist watches (see for example Figure 17). 
Figure 16: Basic AE shape on the left one with spikes on the right to resist visual erosions.
Figure 17: In 2014 Audi presented a screen based dashboard or instrument cluster. 
http://www.audi.com/com/brand/en/vorsprung_durch_technik/content/2014/03/audi-
virtual-cockpit.html. 

143
Optimizing type for use in specific media
More familiar use of screens includes phones, tablets, computers, tele-
visions, VR goggles and the cinema. 
Screens vary in the detail they can offer and in their reflectivity and 
contrast in the case of e-paper screens, or in their luminance and contrast 
as is the case with CRT, AMOLED, LCD and LED screens. Screen resolu-
tion has made a great deal of progress in the last decade. For instance early 
e-paper screens in 2009 had much lower contrast and resolution than they 
do in 2015. E-paper is useful in bright reading conditions because it does 
not need to emit a light that is brighter than is in the environment for the 
image to be perceived. Instead it reflects environmental light in a manner 
similar to paper. In contrast, laptops and smart phones use light emitting 
technologies. 
Unlike paper which will vary in effective resolution mostly depending 
on printing technology, screens have an inherent maximum resolution. 
Software combined with the video cards that control screens are the equiv-
alent to font reproduction technology relevant to screens.
Very low resolution screens tend to require font designs that are sim-
pler and grid oriented in both their construction and spacing. At the lowest 
resolutions the most pressing problems to solve are basic and critical. For 
instance we will want to avoid part of the glyph needed for easy recogni-
tion disappearing (see Figure 18).
Figure 18: The Author’s font Merriweather rendered in Wordpad at 8pt on Windows 
XP. The top example has no hints and the example below is using the TTFAutohinter. 
In addition preserving the shape of the letters the TTFAutohint makes the text rendering 
software use anti-aliasing which produces the grey pixels seen in the lower example. 

144
Digital fonts and reading
Although the software which renders text to screen is critical, the font 
itself may also contain software to help it render well. The software in 
the fonts is referred to as ‘hints’. These hints supplement the local text 
rendering software. When they are used they influence the reproduction of 
the font’s image on screen by temporarily altering the outlines of glyphs 
and sometimes also the spacing of the font. Hints can be considered a 
form of font optimization in part because they can be used to improve the 
appearance of a font on screens but also because for a given use they are 
effectively altering the shapes of glyphs for that use.
Hinting is powerful but it works better when the shapes found in fonts 
have been altered to get optimal results. For example in early versions 
of TTFAutohint if the height of overshoots and undershoots was made 
consistent fewer errors in rendering would result. In conventional type 
design this would not normally be done because it conflicts with the need 
for optical rather than geometric regularity in the font’s design. 
Optically based overshoots vary in height based on the degree to which 
a shape is pointed or sharp rather than flat. The sharper the shape the more 
it should overshoot in order to appear to be visually even (Figure 19). 
Many of the characteristics that help optimize a font for low resolution 
screens are held in common with optimizing a font for use at small optical 
Figure 19: Glyphs ‘o’ and ‘r’ showing the height of overshoot from the author’s font 
typeface Merriweather. Image taken from Fontlab Studio 5.  

145
Optimizing type for use in specific media
sizes: wider spacing, lower contrast, heavier details and heavier weight. 
As screen resolution increases type designers have greater freedom in 
choosing forms and spacing. Historically fonts that have been made spe-
cifically for screens will choose a horizontal or verticald shape rather than 
diagonal when this is possible.
As of the time of writing screen resolutions that have paper-like detail 
at typical reading distances have been released for smart phones, laptops 
and desktops. The iPhone 5 for instance has a pixel density of 325+ pixels 
per inch or ‘ppi’. One of the highest densities known to this author at this 
time is an astonishing 2098 ppi almost 6.5 times higher.e 
In the same way that distance and the optical size that results from it 
can sometimes effectively make differences in printing technology less 
relevant, differences in rendering software are becoming similarly less 
perceptible as screen resolutions rise. Better screen resolution means less 
optimization is necessary for the new high resolution screens as a form of 
media. 
Fonts that were made for low and medium resolution screen use can 
sometimes look out of place in very high resolution environments. They 
can be optimized to perform better in high resolution environments by 
adapting their shapes for larger optical sizes. What is the practical impact?
Microsoft implemented a font family for Windows 8 called Sitka. Sitka 
comes in six optical versions for each style in the family. Users can select 
optical sizes for themselves. However the Windows OS also has the novel 
capability of automatically choosing an optical version of Sitka for the 
user. 
Nick Sherman has taken this idea further by proposing a new font 
format which instead of presenting or switching automatically between a 
handful of static instances could instead be made to continuously adapt to 
conditions like a responsive web site. This kind of font format would in 
theory make a very broad range of continuous adaptive optimization for 
screen and or other media possible.f
d	 A good example of this is the lower bowl of the two story ‘g’ which John Berry mentions 
on page 9 of ‘Now Read This’ a booklet made in 2004 to promote fonts made for the then 
new Clear Type technology in Windows XP. 
e	 http://www.androidauthority.com/worlds-highest-ppi-display-2098ppi-oled-display-so-
ny-254182/
f	 http://alistapart.com/blog/post/variable-fonts-for-responsive-design

146
Digital fonts and reading
1.5   Formal characteristics of the font
There are a large number of observable formal characteristics or design 
variables found in font designs. When a type is optimized it is these char-
acteristics that will be adjusted. 
The more ubiquitous the characteristics within the design the greater 
its value is likely to be. Weight, contrast, width, slant, and spacing are all 
examples of characteristics found across an entire font. A font with high 
contrast or a strong slant is much more likely to need adjustment for media 
than a design with low or medium slant or contrast.g The adjustment need-
ed is likely to be a reduction in contrast or slant. Very thin or heavy fonts 
are more likely to need adjusting than middle weights. Similarly middle 
widths are less likely to need optimizing than wide or narrow ones.
Some formal characteristics are tied to parts of glyphs. These parts 
many not occur in every glyph but are instead scattered across the glyphs 
found in the font. Examples include stems, joins, bowls, and terminals. 
The frequency that a characteristic has in the script being designed matters 
a great deal. For example in the Latin script stems are fairly common. 
However in Cyrillic they dominate. In Greek stems are relatively uncom-
mon and round or bowl shapes dominate. Some scripts such as Chinese 
and Devanagari have a high proportion of glyphs with a high stoke density 
and therefore have a large number of joins. Any attempt at optimization 
should take these script-specific tendencies into account.
Some characteristics are only present in sub-sections of the typeface. 
Their importance to an optimization process can depend on how the font 
being optimized will be used. For example, because the lower case tends 
to predominate in most but not all uses of type the characteristic of this 
group tends to be quite important to the optimization process. However an 
all caps use would negate their importance altogether.
g	 Distortion applied to low contrast glyphs is less likely to be noticed than when it is ap-
plied to high contrast ones. Stronger slants are more likely to render poorly on low resolu-
tion screens.

147
Optimizing type for use in specific media
1.6   Angle of view
The perspective of the reader should also be considered. A sign for drivers 
painted on to the surface of a road is an example of optimizing for this 
factor. In this case the letters are stretched vertically to make them easier 
to read for drivers while approaching the sign which is printed on the road. 
See Figures 20 and 21.
Figure 20: ‘Stop’ sign for drivers. Note the very thick top stroke on the T.
Figure 21: A similar sign for drivers on a street in Hong Kong.

148
Digital fonts and reading
A street sign that needs to be visible from several angles can bene-
fit from the use of large counters and wider than normal letters. People 
viewing the sign from a position directly in front of the sign will be able 
to easily tolerate somewhat wider letters while people who see it from an 
angle on the left or right sides will benefit from the resistance that wider 
letters have to compression. Spacing the letters more widely will also help. 
See Figure 22.
Figure 22: This is a mock up of an imaginary street sign. A compressed style is used on 
top; a regular style is used in the middle and a wide style is used on the bottom. The signs 
have been rotated and given perspective. This set of examples show that compressed 
letterforms have greater problems of legibility than wide ones as the viewing angle moves 
increasingly away from centered view. The sign uses the type family Univers.

149
Optimizing type for use in specific media
1.7   The reader
When thinking about optimizing for media it is necessary to also think 
about who the reader might be. It is a mistake for instance to simply as-
sume a single kind of reader who is an adult, and an expert reader and 
who has perfect vision. Getting some insight into the readership a font is 
intended for can help you know how to optimize your font. Reading ability 
can vary for reasons of age, education, interest, and so on. For example we 
now know that a young reader will benefit from wider than normal word 
spaces (Pelli and Tillman, 2008). Readers with lower or reduced acuity 
including older readers will benefit from texts set at larger sizes.
1.8   Conclusion
Type is most effectively designed for media when a range of additional in-
formation is available. Relatively complete and precise information makes 
it possible to ground design choices in actual reading circumstances and in 
the needs of the readers.
References
Pelli, D. G. and Tillman, K. A. (2008). The uncrowded window of object recog-
nition. Nature Neuroscience, 11(10), pp. 1129-35. 

150
Chapter 9
‘Harmonised type design’ 
revisited
Titus Nemeth
In 1993 Charles Bigelow and Kris Holmes published The design of a Unicode font. It 
was one of the first scholarly discussions of type design for multiple scripts, and likely 
coined the term harmonised design. Bigelow and Holmes defined the concept thus: ‘By 
“harmonization”, we mean that the basic weights and alignments of disparate alphabets are 
regularized and tuned to work together, so that their inessential differences are minimized, 
but their essential, meaningful differences preserved.’ In 1993 the introduction of the Uni-
code standard provided the technological background which allowed this novel approach 
as fonts could now contain many thousands of characters. And just as Unicode aspired to 
be the single, universal encoding standard of the world, now it became tangible to create 
typefaces with unified typographic representations of many of the world’s scripts. Har-
monised type design was soon widely embraced, copied and promoted, and was received 
with little, if any, critique. Bigelow and Holmes’ assertion that ‘harmonization seems like 
a desirable goal’ appears to have been a view which was widely shared in the trade, and 
harmonisation became an established concept. This article revisits the notion of harmon-
ised type design 20 years after its inception. It critically assesses the origin of the concept, 
identifies its parallels to modernist design ideas, and queries its applicability in different 
typographic scenarios. Some limits of the concept of harmonised type design are discussed 
and different interpretations of designing type for multiple scripts are briefly mentioned.
1.1   Introduction
In 1993 Charles Bigelow and Kris Holmes published ‘The design of a Uni-
code font’ [1993], an account of the development of the Lucida Sans Uni-
code typeface. Based on the older Lucida Sans design, the suffix ‘Unicode’ 
identified concept and aspiration of the new typeface, both rooted in the 
historical circumstances of its development.
With the maturing of personal computers in the early 1990s, the need 
for standards compliance and cross-platform compatibility became in-
creasingly apparent, and the Unicode Standard was conceived as the 
universal encoding scheme that should facilitate seamless international 

151
‘Harmonised type design’ revisited
document exchange.a Developed by leading technology companies in the 
USA, it was only concerned with the encoding of characters; its definitions 
deliberately eschewed questions of appearance and – at least in principle – 
made no assumptions about the form of text thus encoded. But as Unicode 
aspired to provide an encoding standard for all languages of the world, 
it raised novel questions about typographic design. Although fonts could 
now technically contain characters for scripts as diverse as Arabic and 
Thai, there had hardly been any consideration about the aesthetic, cultur-
al and practical implications of such border-crossing typefaces. Whereas 
commercially successful Latin typefaces had been extended to Cyrillic 
and Greek, barely any designs ventured beyond the relative familiarity 
(and similarity) of these European scripts.
Against this background, and commissioned by Microsoft as a demon-
stration of the new technology, Bigelow and Holmes conceived Lucida 
Sans Unicode. Its express purpose was ‘to provide a standardized set of 
glyphs that could be used as a default core font for different operating sys-
tems and languages’ [Bigelow and Holmes, 1993, p. 291] in one, visually 
unified design. Bigelow and Holmes thus coined the term, and to a large 
extent also the concept of harmonised design’.b As the type’s reference to 
Unicode implied, the aspiration for this design approach went well beyond 
the familiar realm of European scripts. When the first version of Lucida 
Sans Unicode was released in 1993, it contained Latin, Cyrillic, Greek 
and Hebrew characters, and the designers planned the addition of Arabic, 
Armenian, Devanagari and other Indian scripts.
With the advent of the World Wide Web in the mid-1990s, internation-
alisation of computing and document exchange rapidly rose to unprec-
edented importance, and so did typefaces which included characters for 
multiple scripts, often in one ‘harmonised design’. To be sure, not all, and 
likely a minority of such types would have consciously followed Lucida 
Sans Unicode as model, or the design principles articulated by Bigelow and  
 
a	 For details of its history see Unicode, Inc [2009].
b	 Note that the term had been used before, albeit for a different purpose. When Jan Tsch-
ichold’s Sabon type was first published, it was described as ‘the first harmonized type’, 
circumscribing its conceptual basis as a design for the main then current composition tech-
niques: linecasting, Monotype composition and hand-composition. See Dreyfus [1994].

152
Digital fonts and reading
Holmes.c Nonetheless, as the first of its kind, accompanied by a substantial 
descriptive text, Lucida Sans Unicode marks an historic milestone. 
Twenty years on, this article proposes to revisit the notions first artic-
ulated by Bigelow and Holmes in the light of applied multi-script typog-
raphy. In order to arrive at more general observations, most examples 
shown here predate the concept of harmonisation, providing an histori-
cally longer, and technologically more diverse perspective. Indeed, this 
perspective is part of the argument, which identifies connections between 
typographic technology and harmonised design. In line with this perspec-
tive is the emphasis on applied typography, rather than type design, as the 
argument is less about how type designers have addressed harmonisation, 
than where and whether harmonisation is a useful approach.In conclusion, 
the paper briefly reviews some aspects of design practices which evolved 
in the wake of Lucida Sans Unicode.
1.2   What is harmonisation in type design?
When Bigelow and Holmes began their Lucida Sans Unicode project, a 
unified design approach to a typeface covering multiple scripts was a nov-
el proposition. Neither the conceptual, nor the practical implications and 
limits had been explored, and the two designers saw the project as a test 
bed for the concept of harmonisation. In their words, the idea meant ‘that 
the basic weights and alignments of disparate alphabets are regularized 
and tuned to work together, so that their inessential differences are min-
imized, but their essential, meaningful differences preserved.’ [Bigelow 
and Holmes, 1993, p. 292]d According to Bigelow and Holmes, through 
this approach ‘the “noise” of insignificant design artefacts and historical 
accidents is filtered out, leaving the “signal” of significant character fea-
tures amplified in comparison.’ Thus, it was assumed that the principle of 
harmonisation could benefit the transmission of information, or in other 
words improve legibility. Furthermore, practical and aesthetic consider-
ations were advanced in favour of harmonisation: ‘Within a harmonized 
font, when text changes from Latin to Cyrillic, or from Greek to Hebrew, 
c	 More recently, the term ‘matchmaking’ has frequently been used for a similar design 
approach. Semantically, the active ‘making’ of the match may indeed be an appropriate 
description of the process. 
d	 The next three quotes are from the same source.

153
‘Harmonised type design’ revisited
or when mathematical expressions or other symbols are introduced into 
text, the visual size, weight, and rhythm of the characters should not ap-
pear to change, should not jar or distract the reader, but the basic character 
shapes should nevertheless be distinctive and immediately recognizable.’
The case for harmonisation as seen by Bigelow and Holmes can there-
fore be divided into two parts: (1) the amplification of the ‘signal’ for 
improved legibility, and (2) the regularisation for aesthetic and practical 
reasons. The first part of the argument relies on the concept of ‘signal’ and 
‘noise’, yet lacks further evidence or justification of the assumed advantag-
es. Indeed, Bigelow and Holmes are conscious of the potential drawbacks 
in this approach, for ‘if [harmonisation] erases distinctive differences 
between scripts, it increases the possibility of confusion. In this view, the 
attempt to filter out unwanted noise may instead remove significant por-
tions of the signal and distort what remains, thus decreasing the signal and 
adding noise.’ In other words, if signals which are different and ought to 
be different are rendered similarly, their distinctiveness becomes blurred. 
Indeed, one needs to look no further than to highly modular (and thus 
regular) typefaces such as ITC Avant Garde, to appreciate that generally 
speaking, more uniformity reduces, rather than improves the transmission 
of information. It follows, that the ‘signal’ and ‘noise’ argument does not 
provide a convincing rationale by itself, leaving the case for harmonisa-
tion primarily down to aesthetic and practical reasons. 
Although the relevance of such considerations is undeniable for typog-
raphy, perhaps the scientific semblance of the argument for harmonisation 
appears somewhat lessened from this perspective. If regularity, then, is at 
the heart of the argument, the concept is firmly embedded in typograph-
ic practice, and it may be useful to consider it within a wider historical 
frame. For as Robin Kinross points out, the visions of ‘universal’ types 
have ‘cropped up repeatedly, encouraged by the standardization that is 
inherent in printing.’ [Kinross, 2002a, p. 233]
1.3   Harmonisation as an extension of modernism
Regular, systematic and therefore rational approaches to typography and 
the making of type have a long history. Kinross’s Modern typography 
[2004], perhaps the most comprehensive discussion of the subject, traces 
the origins of rational and regulating approaches to typography back to 

154
Digital fonts and reading
the turn from the seventeenth to the eighteenth century and the making of 
the ‘romain du roi’ type. It was conceived at the drawing board, a feature 
which made James Mosley observe that it ‘can be claimed to mark the 
beginning of the concept of “type design”, a process in which the form of 
the alphabet for a printing type is determined independently of its means 
of production.’ [1997, p. 5] This approach to the making of type received 
much mockery from practitioners for its unworldly attitude, most clearly 
apparent in overly regularised letterforms and the improbable demands of 
precision from the punchcutter.e
Whereas the ‘romain du roi’ may be seen as an early precursor, notions 
of rationally planned type became a recurring theme only in the twentieth 
century. As Kinross reminds us [2002a], related concepts of ‘universal’ as-
pirations can be traced from the emergence of an articulate modernity in 
the 1920s and 30s, to the late 1960s, up to the beginnings of digital typog-
raphy, often with explicit references to technological progress. Herbert 
Bayer’s alphabet for the Bauhaus (1926) and Jan Tschichold’s letterforms 
for Walter Porstmann’s new orthography (1930) were but the most radical 
instances of an approach to type design which was based on, and derived 
legitimacy from its rational, constructed and systematic principles. During 
the same era, one also finds the first successful application of similar, al-
beit tamed, ideas to a commercially viable type in Paul Renner’s Futura 
(1927). After the rupture of the Second World War, Adrian Frutiger’s mile-
stone Univers (1954) stands out as perhaps the most convincing combina-
tion of aspirations to regularity, systematic planning, and conventional let-
terforms.f As is apparent from this incomplete listing, a history of rational 
approaches to type design would go well beyond the scope of this chapter.g 
e	 As Mosley points out, another less discussed achievement of the committee was the 
establishment of a systematic measurement of type sizes and proportions. The ‘Calibres 
de toutes les sortes et grandeurs de lettres’ defined a rationally planned and regular se-
quence of related type sizes, as well as the principal proportions of the alphabet: capital 
and ascender height, x-height and descender height. For Mosley, this system is a likely and 
uncredited precursor to the point systems of Fournier and Didot, endowing the designers 
of the ‘romain du roi’ with great historical importance; nonetheless, he also grants that 
the academicians ‘can possibly be charged with some lack of appreciation of the practical 
realities of the crafts that they attempted to explore and codify.’ [Mosley, 1997, p. 14]. 
f	 For a critical contemporary appraisal of Univers see Froshaug [2000a].
g	 For discussions of the evolution of the notion of typeface families see Kinross [2002b], 
Biľak [2008] and recently Ulrich [2014].

155
‘Harmonised type design’ revisited
Yet even a superficial glance at the more recent history shows how resil-
ient and ultimately successful notions of rational planning and systemati-
sation in type design have become. From Frutiger’s Univers to Otl Eich-
er’s Rotis (1988), Lucas de Groot’s Thesis (1994) and Peter Biľak’s Greta 
Sans (2012), to name but a few widely celebrated examples, the elements 
which are considered part of a typeface (family) have been expanding in 
unprecedented ways and gave birth to what may be called type ‘systems’. 
Indeed, the trend of type-system-design, which assembles ever-more his-
torically unrelated styles under an umbrella name and concept, may be 
seen as one of the defining characteristics of current practice.
Arguably, from this perspective Bigelow and Holmes’s notion of har-
monised design, relating to the regularised treatment of different scripts, 
may be seen as part of a wider phenomenon. If the rationally planned, 
systematically organised and stylistically regularised design of type is a 
defining feature of contemporary practice, the extension of this trend to 
non-Latin scripts was bound to arise with increasing internationalisation. 
Indeed, for designers with western background and/or education, the rea-
soning for harmonisation would be compelling. It strikes a chord with an 
audience which has been accustomed and trained to think in grids and 
design systems, which has embraced typefaces for their perceived ‘uni-
versal’ and allegedly ‘neutral’ qualities, and which, by and large, has been 
anchored deeply in Latin-centric typography. 
With the benefit of the historical perspective, it even appears as if the 
case for harmonisation was perceived as self-evident, for little justification 
was provided in its favour. Bigelow and Holmes’s summary that ‘harmo-
nization seems like a desirable goal’ [1993, p. 292] may be applicable 
in the specific context of the Lucida Sans Unicode project, but calls for 
further scrutiny if taken as a more general design principle. In order to 
better identify the reasons for the apparent need of harmonised design, it 
may be useful to consider different typographic scenarios and query the 
applicability of the notions proposed by Bigelow and Holmes.
1.4   Where do we need harmonised type?
For the purpose of this discussion, one can distinguish two broad catego-
ries of multilingual texts in which two or more different scripts are likely 
to appear together. In the first category, the bulk of the text is written in 

156
Digital fonts and reading
one script and the other script(s) only appears in a complementary role, as 
in the archetypal case of the bilingual dictionary. Other examples of this 
category, which for the present discussion are called ‘mixed settings’, can 
be found in related kinds of documents such as those created for language 
training, linguistic analysis and generally scholarly texts.
The second suggested category, despite its acknowledged breadth, 
assembles all forms of parallel translations in which, at least in princi-
ple, all languages and scripts should be of equal standing and relevance. 
From literary texts to public signage, instruction manuals, package inserts 
and government forms, a range of vastly different kinds of texts fall into 
this definition; and notwithstanding their diversity, it is fair to assume that 
where texts have been translated and are presented together, the readers of 
all languages are considered as being equally important. Thus, it should 
follow that the presentation of their respective languages in type is also 
given equal importance.
1.4.1   Mixed settings
It is easy to think of practical constraints of documents with mixed set-
tings which can be eased by harmonised type. Especially in cases where 
economical setting is at a premium such as dictionaries, more regulari-
sation facilitates space efficient typography. Indeed, the different use of 
Cartesian space by different scripts appears as one of the most challenging 
factors in all kinds of multi-script settings.
The letterforms of Arabic, for example, have distinctive features which 
are distributed over the entire y-axis, making any regularised horizontal 
alignments difficult. As letters fuse with other letters according to their 
context, the positions of distinctive features frequently change. More-
over, a broader range of proportions is typical of the Arabic script, with 
some letterforms being tall and narrow, others flat and wide; critically, not 
only the proportions are diverse, but also the respective sizes and it is not 
uncommon for one letterform to appear many times as big as another. As 
a result, the Arabic alphabet is often described (at least by western observ-
ers) as appearing smaller than its Latin counterpart, for if the biggest Ara-
bic letters are equalised with the biggest Latin letters, the small Arabic 
letterforms are diminishing. So where both scripts appear in the same line 
of text, obvious practical problems arise for the typographer: if one uses 

157
‘Harmonised type design’ revisited
an Arabic body size equal to the Latin, it looks small; but if a larger body 
is chosen so that the Arabic appears similar in size, alignment and setting 
of the matter are more complicated. 
Here, one is reminded of Anthony Froshaug’s dictum that ‘typography 
is a grid’ [2000b], which concisely (albeit unwittingly) summarises both 
the primary difficulty of multi-script composition, and the fundamental 
Latin bias of typography. For as the reader would have gauged by now, the 
principal reaction to the conundrum of diverse uses of vertical space has 
rarely been to treat every script according to its own characteristics. More 
common is the attempt to standardise the proportions in a way more akin 
to those of the Latin script – as indeed proposed by harmonised design. 
Thus, letterforms, irrespective of their size and proportions (not to mention 
the script’s morphographic rules which define how letters are assembled in 
words and sentences), are modified according to the basic module of the 
typographic grid: a rectangle whose regular height allows the assembly of 
letters into lines and paragraphs. The advantages of such an approach for 
the typographer (or historically the compositor) are readily apparent, and 
establish the link to the precursors of harmonisation. Standardised type 
sizes – think of the ‘romain du roi’ – with regularised faces enable the 
mixing of different scripts with insouciance, and therefore greatly facili-
tate composition while economising space. In this perspective, the case for 
harmonisation appears as one strongly informed by practical constraints 
and needs.h
Despite the argument’s apparent seductive power, a review of actu-
al practice reveals that the regularity and uniformity it aspires to has not 
always and everywhere been equally coveted.i 
A striking example of a different approach can be found in A.F.L.  
Beeston’s Written Arabic (Figure 1), a concise language teaching booklet 
h	 Here, one should bear in mind that many of these constraints originated from the Latin 
script and frequently constitute less than ideal conditions for scripts with different charac-
teristics.
i	 The following examples were chosen for their exemplary qualities within the confines of 
this paper. Self-evidently, they can only provide a snapshot of the virtually unlimited body 
of multi-script settings, yet it is hoped they will illustrate the main lines of the argument. 
All figures except figure 4 and 5 show items from the author’s collection. Figure 4 and 5 
show an item from the collection of the National Library of Australia, Canberra, Bib ID 
1534032, which is gratefully acknowledged.

158
Digital fonts and reading
published in 1968 by Cambridge University Press, and printed by Stephen 
Austin and Sons in Hertford, UK. Here, a clear typographic editorial voice 
is apparent, prioritising function and pedagogic usefulness in an uncompro-
mising way. The Arabic type follows conventional proportions and styling, 
suitably so for a document aimed at beginners who are likely to be most 
familiar with handwritten letterforms. The large size used for the script 
tables at the beginning of the text facilitates easy recognition of letters and 
deciphering of words, and demonstrates with great clarity the joining of 
letters. Yet the emphasis on the usability for the reader is most apparent in 
the main text. The interspersed Arabic words are set in a size of unapolo-
getic irreverence for the Latin type, boldly emphasising convenience for 
the reader (a novice language learner), over abstract design aspirations. 
Half-way through the booklet the size of the Arabic is drastically reduced, 
consistent with the functional attitude, as by now the reader can be expect-
ed to be more familiar with the script.
It goes without saying that available typefaces and sizes would have 
influenced the typographic choices of Written Arabic, and that more finely 
graded types could have improved the appearance of some paragraphs. 
Nonetheless, its approach to multi-script typography remains refreshingly 
Figure 1: A.F.L. Beeston (1968) Written Arabic, Cambridge University Press. Reduced to 35% linear 
detail enlargement in box.

159
‘Harmonised type design’ revisited
unencumbered by the Systemzwangj of regularised design systems, while 
producing a highly readable and at times attractive document. Moreover, 
Written Arabic is not unique in its approach.
Another instructive example is found in The M.E.C.A.S. Grammar of 
Modern Literary Arabic,k published in 1965 by Khayats in Beirut, Leba-
non, and printed by the Heidelberg Press in the same city (Figure 2).
As in the setting of Written Arabic, there is little apparent concern for 
regularity, and there is no attempt to disguise the differences between Ara-
bic and Latin. Both scripts are given their appropriate size and space. Yet 
whereas in Written Arabic the setting does not suggest planning accord-
ing to the text’s characteristics, and the Arabic sometimes sits awkwardly 
within the Latin text, the M.E.C.A.S. Grammar exhibits a more balanced 
j	 This German term could be translated as ‘system coercion’, and denotes the inherent 
self-replicating power of a system, or the system’s tendency to impose its principles.
k	 The Middle East Centre for Arab Studies was an institution in the Lebanon, run by the 
British Foreign Office. It aspired to train British public servants in all aspects of the Arab 
world, and therefore attained a reputation as a ‘spy school’. See Craig [1998].
Figure 2: The Middle East Centre for Arab Studies (1965) The M.E.C.A.S. Grammar of Modern 
Literary Arabic, Beirut: Khayats. Reduced to 35% linear, detail enlargement in box.

160
Digital fonts and reading
composition. Here, undoubtedly due to the place of publication where 
mixed Arabic and Latin texts are common, the combination of the scripts 
appears to have been planned from the outset. Because the English text is 
set with ample interlinear space, it allows for the comfortable insertion of 
Arabic words and phrases without changes of density. The Latin type size 
is pleasant for continuous reading, whereas the Arabic’s larger size aids 
the quick perception of letters and small vowel marks for learners. Over-
all, the M.E.C.A.S. Grammar’s generous approach to multi-script compo-
sition achieves a high level of clarity, readability and elegance, making it 
an exemplary publication of the genre. 
To return to the archetypal document of category one, also in bilingual 
dictionaries, despite their specific constraints, the successful combination 
of different types without apparent harmonisation is common. Indeed, it is 
here that the functionality of non-harmonised types should least surprise, 
for it is the dictionary where typographic difference is a central tenet of 
the design. The Persian Vocabulary by A.K.S. Lambton, first published 
and printed in 1954 by Cambridge University Press, is but one example 
to illustrate the case (Figure 3). Composed in hot-metal with Monotype 
Series 507, the Persian lacks elegance, yet its distinctiveness to the Latin 
type is a desirable quality in a dictionary. Here, as in most typographic sce-
narios, text categories which have different functions should be visually 
demarcated. Notions of hierarchy, degrees of emphasis and textual-nav-
igation all depend on typographic differentiation. Indeed, a large part of 
the typographer’s job is to visualise the unlikeness of the many diverse 
elements a text may contain, to design difference by the judicious appli-
cation of unmistakably distinct typographic treatments to the text. Against 
this background, the applicability of harmonisation to type used in mixed 
settings could be questioned for its inherent risk of blurring differences.
1.4.2   Parallel settings
In parallel settings, the rigidity of the typographic grid is much alleviat-
ed. The technical constraints of mixed settings which prescribe regularity 
along the y-axis do not apply, providing greater flexibility in the treatment 
of different scripts.l This flexibility is apparent from the first complex typo-
l	 In print publications which have two languages on facing pages, shine-through from 

161
‘Harmonised type design’ revisited
graphic multi-script documents, the polyglot bibles. Their makeup demon-
strates how characteristics of different languages are better served by typo-
graphic flexibility, than rigid regularity.
A multilingual tour de force like Thomas Roycroft’s 1650s polyglot 
bible, which assembles nine languages in one parallel text edition, is a 
case in point (Figure 4). Here, no uniform baseline grid is possible, as the 
different founts are all cast on different bodies. Arabic, Persian and Syri-
ac are set with noticeably greater interlinear space than Amharic, Greek, 
Hebrew and Latin, in order to accommodate for the vowels above and 
below the letters (Figure 5).m Thus, the sizes of the text areas are chosen 
so as to maintain the synchronisation between languages, a difficult task 
which is remarkably well handled. Occasionally the width and arrange-
ment of columns also changes, showing flexibility from spread to spread 
to accommodate for changing text lengths. To be sure, this does not mean 
recto to verso may remain an issue, but not an insurmountable one.
m	In this particular Arabic fount, the common diacritic dots, which should be part of the 
letter, are cast and set separately like the discretionary vowel marks, contributing to the 
poor legibility of the type.
Figure 3: Lambton, A.K.S. (1969) Persian Vocabulary, Cambridge University Press, first published  
in 1954, this edition is the fourth reprint in offset. Reduced to 35% linear, with detail enlargement  
in box.

162
Digital fonts and reading
that the composition of every language is ideal, as much depends on the 
quality of the type and the skill of the printer, which would have varied 
from script to script.n Yet the approach of these progenitors of all multi-
script typography shows that parallel settings do not necessarily require 
regularity, but may benefit from flexibility.
Indeed, the different lengths of languages make irregular settings in 
multi-script editions more plausible. Arabic text, for example, tends to be 
shorter than its English equivalent. It follows, that although the character-
istics of the script call for greater interlinear space, and possibly a larger 
body size, the script’s efficiency along the x-axis balances the overall space 
requirements. Thus, bilingual editions of Arabic and English may actually 
achieve better text synchronisation from page to page if type size and in-
terlinear space are not identical, but chosen to the best effect of each script.
n	 In the event, the Arabic type is so incompetent as to be virtually unreadable.
Figure 4: Walton, B. ed. (1657) Biblia sacra polyglotta, 6 vols., vol.1, Reduced to 20% linear.

163
‘Harmonised type design’ revisited
Parallel settings that follow a similar approach are common wherever 
emphasis is laid on the smoothest reading experience, rather than design 
dogma. The iconic Loeb Classical Library, first published by Harvard Uni-
versity Press in 1912, is but one of the most celebrated cases – albeit only 
for the relatively unproblematic pairing of Greek and Latin.o 
A convincing Arabic-French example from the nineteenth century is 
found in the Histoire de Chems-Eddine et de Nour-Eddine, (Figure 6) 
first published by Hachette in Paris in 1853, and printed at the Imprimerie 
Impériale. Its spreads are organised into four text blocks of different pro-
portions, accommodating the original Arabic (in Maghrebi orthography), 
a French translation, a literal translation as well as a transliteration. With 
simple means every text category is differentiated, maintaining propor-
tions and spatial relationships that combine to a harmonious whole. The 
individual type choices merit particular attention. The original text is set 
o	 A recently initiated series by the same publisher extends the editorial idea of the Loeb 
Library to Indian literature. The Murty Classical Library of India, designed by Rathna Ra-
manathan of M9 Design in London, is a collection of parallel bilingual editions, pairing the 
major literary languages of India with English translations. Here, a combination of newly 
commissioned Indian types and existing Latin and Arabic types are used in a typographic 
approach that embraces variety over regularity.
Figure 5: Detail of figure 4.

164
Digital fonts and reading
in an Arabic type with stylistic references to Maghrebi scribal culture; the 
French translation and, on a smaller body, the literal translation, are set in 
a typical contemporary roman type; and the transliteration is distinguished 
with an italic fount. These choices suggest a search for appropriateness 
and authenticity within the cultural framework of each respective lan-
guage, rather than a uniform, regularised aesthetic for all. Thus, the type 
used for the French translation makes no attempt to imitate the Arabic, and 
vice-versa, there is no apparent dilution of the characteristics of the Arabic 
script to conform to those of Latin.p Indeed, as the reading of each text cat-
egory is bound to differ, the question as to why they should be stylistically 
regularised begs to be asked.
Similar cases abound before the 1980s and the digital revolution. Ironi-
cally, with hindsight it appears as if analogue typographic processes some-
times provided more flexibility, and were less prone to Systemzwang than 
the computer-based systems current for the last thirty to forty years. Even 
in the restrictive (and today little-understood) technology of hot-metal 
p	 Note that this is to be seen within the typographic context which implicitly imposes 
paradigms and techniques that arose from the Latin script, and thus prescribes non-Arabic 
features by definition.
Figure 6: Cherbonneau, M. (1853) Histoire de Chems-Eddine et de Nour-Eddine, Hachette, Paris.  
Reduced to 35% linear, detail enlargement in box.

165
‘Harmonised type design’ revisited
composition, exemplary cases of multi-script typography can be found. 
Some publications coming from Lebanon in the period from independence 
(1943) to civil war (1975), its short-lived golden era of Arabic printing, 
testify to the quality pre-digital composition could achieve. 
Like the aforementioned M.E.C.A.S. Grammar, the Anthologie bilingue 
de la littérature arabe contemporaine illustrates this point (Figure 7). A 
collection of Arabic literature with accompanying French translations, this 
volume was published and printed in 1961 by the Imprimérie Catholique 
in Beirut. The book is composed in the original hot-metal version of 
Monotype Series 549, a type that became genre-defining for high-quality 
Arabic book typography, and a Latin type of no lesser pedigree: Monotype 
Baskerville. For both languages, thus, a type of proven quality was chosen 
and set in the point size and with the appropriate leading required for the 
parallel setting;q consistent with this approach is the flexibility of the type 
area, which is allowed to vary slightly in height for language synchronisa-
tion. The resulting book provides an agreeable reading experience for each 
language on its own terms, with indubitable aesthetic qualities.
Although only a small selection (which could easily be expanded on), 
the above examples demonstrate that parallel editions do not require, and 
may in fact gain from thoughtful type mixing, rather than regularity as 
sought in harmonised design. Moreover, the natural contrast of different 
scripts not only offers aesthetic qualities, but may, when handled sensibly, 
provide tangible practical advantages in composition. In document design, 
the case for harmonised type design relies, thus, on a strong aesthetic pref-
erence for stylistic homogeneity.
Yet, as the category of parallel settings is defined in the present context, 
it entails numerous other applications with requirements different to those 
for continuous reading. Often, these uses are more recent and have no 
historical examples to draw from. In the following section, a brief glance 
beyond document design is therefore combined with some considerations 
of current practice in multi-script typography and type design. 
q	 Arguably, the Arabic could have benefited from more leading, which could have been 
balanced by a reduction of the body size, yet the limited range of founts available in 
hot-metal may not have allowed this.

166
Digital fonts and reading
1.5   Other applications and current practice
International airports provide a typical case of multi-script typography out-
side the domain of document design.r Especially in the recently emerged 
travel hubs in the Arabian Gulf and Asia, signage frequently incorporates 
two or more scripts.s
Bangkok’s Suvarnabhumi airport (Figure 8) provides an interesting 
case, with many signs featuring Chinese, Latin and Thai scripts.t Their 
typographic treatment is instructive, for here scripts with fundamentally  
 
r	 Bigelow and Holmes [1993, 293] name the signage of air travel as a factor which contrib-
uted to the familiarity of sans serif type around the world, influencing their stylistic choice 
in the Lucida Sans Unicode project.
s	 At the time of writing, none of the traditional western hubs in London, New York, Am-
sterdam, Paris or Frankfurt seem to provide any non-Latin signage.
t	 Beyond the overall impression, for this assessment the author relies on the judgements of 
colleagues familiar with Chinese and Thai scripts.
Figure 7: Monteil, V. (1961) Anthologie bilingue de la littérature arabe contemporaine, Imprimerie 
Catholique, Beirut. Reduced to 35% linear, detail enlargement in box.

167
‘Harmonised type design’ revisited
different characteristics meet: a bicameral alphabet, a unicameral abugida, 
and a logographic script are combined in what appears as a harmonious, 
yet not overly regularised configuration. Thai, the primary language, is 
set above Chinese and Latin, with ample space for vowels and tone marks 
above and below the characters. Its apparent size is slightly larger than the 
two additional scripts (justifiably so in Thailand), yet does not overpower 
Chinese and Latin which comfortably share the same vertical space with-
out undue distortion of their respective proportions. Stylistically, Latin 
and Thai are set in matching low-contrast types, with the Chinese some-
what set apart by its more modulated design, yet to no apparent functional 
disadvantage. Potentially, here a harmonised design approach could con-
tribute to a more balanced image, aligning the Chinese stylistically more 
closely with the two other scripts. Conversely, in a harmonised type ver-
tical proportions would likely be more restrained, and thus run counter to 
the successful use of space achieved through type mixing in this example.
Figure 8: Signage at Bangkok’s international Suvarnabhumi airport, photographs taken by the author 
in July 2014.

168
Digital fonts and reading
Unfortunately, the successful examples of parallel settings in signage 
are in the minority. Especially in the Gulf states, where multi-script set-
tings are the norm, the quantity of poor examples far outnumbers the con-
vincing cases. 
At Abu Dhabi airport (Figure 9), a custom Arabic typeface designed to 
imitate some characteristics of Frutiger is representative of an approach 
to multi-script design which can be summarised under the term ‘Latinisa-
tion’.u Here, proportions and characteristics of the Latin script are imposed 
on Arabic letterforms to the detriment of their legibility. Elements below 
the baseline, which are significantly more frequent and important in Ara-
bic than in Latin, are diminished to match the descender depth, whereas 
tall letterforms are reduced, artificially creating an x-height where there is 
none in the Arabic script.
If in Abu Dhabi design dogma arguably overrides functionality, by 
contrast the concept for the signage at Dubai’s airport is not readily appar-
ent (Figure 10). Advertisers Naskh bold, a high-contrast Letraset rub-
down lettering design conceived by Mourad and Arlette Boutros in the late 
1970s, is paired with bold Helvetica, suggesting little concern for stylistic 
compatibility or legibility. Perhaps, it may also indicate uncritical reliance 
on marketing claims, for according to Boutros, Advertisers Naskh was 
designed ‘to work in perfect harmony with Helvetica’, and that ‘the addi-
tion of linked straight lines to match the Latin baseline level is designed 
to achieve harmony when used alongside a Latin equivalent typeface such 
u	 Judging from Bigelow and Holmes’s definition of harmonised design, the signage at Abu 
Dhabi airport would not find their approval.
Figure 9: Signage at Abu Dhabi’s international airport, photograph taken by the author in September 2013.

169
‘Harmonised type design’ revisited
as Garamond, Palatino and Times Roman’ [Boutros, 2014]. Here, one is 
strikingly reminded of the flexibility of harmonisation as a concept for 
commercial exploitation, and its success on this level is undeniable.
Indeed, in recent years, harmonised design has been adopted and pro-
moted most vocally for marketing purposes, albeit rarely with reference 
to this term, or its originators. Foundries have recognised the potential 
market for non-Latin variants of their best-selling typefaces, and released 
a flurry of so-called ‘extensions’ to existing Latin designs. DIN, Frutiger, 
Helvetica, Palatino and Univers, just to name the most prolific company 
in this context, Monotype, all received their Arabic version, borrowing 
stylistic properties and – importantly – brand-recognisability from the 
Latin model. Whether a non-Latin extension to a design carrying decades 
worth of use can truly embody the same notions and associations in a 
different typographic culture is open to debate, although this question is 
rarely raised. How such extensions are undertaken is another consider-
ation which merits attention.
When Bigelow and Holmes proposed the concept of harmonised de-
sign, they were acutely aware of the potential for homogenisation it en-
tailed. They tried to avoid it by a conscious and deliberate attempt to learn 
and embrace ‘the basic rules of each non-Latin alphabet on its own terms’ 
[Bigelow and Holmes, 1993, p. 299]v Thus, regularisation was attempted, 
but only up to a certain point which, according to the knowledge and sen-
sibilities of the designers, stopped short of compromising the integrity of 
the script for ‘Latinate notions’.w Bigelow and Holmes drew the line in the 
v	 The next three references are from the same source.
w	The question remains as to how and where the line between (desired) harmonisation and 
Figure 10: Signage at Dubai’s international airport, photograph taken by the author in October 2012.

170
Digital fonts and reading
design of the Hebrew characters thus: rather than imposing a ‘strict Latin 
model’, they tested different alignments, and chose the (unaligned) height 
between Latin capitals and minuscules for the Hebrew letters. Moreover, 
the designers maintained the conventional contrast of Hebrew letters in 
which horizontal strokes are thicker than verticals – the opposite of the Lat-
in model – yet ‘weighted the Hebrew characters to have visual “presence” 
equivalent to that of the Latin.’ 
Whereas Bigelow and Holmes’s suggested approach appears as a sensi-
ble midway, negotiating script integrity and typographic constraints, more 
recently some harmonised designs disregard such caution. For example 
Boutros’s Tanseek type distorts the proportions of Arabic letterforms to 
fit the Latin x-height, and the bold weights of Nadine Chahine’s Frutiger 
Arabic feature the contrast of the Latin model, with vertical strokes thicker 
than horizontals.x Whether such decisions are truly successful in attaining 
formal harmony, and indeed what this harmony represents could only be 
discussed on a case-by-case basis, which goes beyond the scope of this 
chapter. 
Yet, it is worth mentioning that different approaches to designing type 
for multi-script typography can be found in other quarters. Adobe, among 
others, is going a different path in its expanding catalogue of non-Latin 
type. Rather than extending renowned typefaces with other scripts, fol-
lowing a narrowly defined stylistic model and brand, most of its non-Lat-
in designs are independently conceived as original typefaces. Designs like 
Adobe Arabic, Hebrew, Thai and Devanagari feature Latin glyph comple-
ments which are loosely reflecting style, apparent size and colour of the 
non-Latins, yet as their generic names suggest there is no pretence of di-
rect translatability of a specific design from one script to the other. Here, 
it appears as if an approach was taken that prioritises design integrity, pro-
viding typefaces which can stand on their own without deference to exist-
ing Latin models, implicitly encouraging the added flexibility type mix-
ing can provide.
(undesired) homogenisation should be drawn, and one would likely get different answers 
from different practitioners.
x	 Conversely, the brand Frutiger thus denotes on one hand a conventional Latin design, 
while on the other it features an Arabic design with inverted stroke contrast, a stylistic form 
not found in the œuvre of Adrian Frutiger. 

171
‘Harmonised type design’ revisited
1.6   Concluding remarks
As the discussion of multi-script scenarios demonstrates, the case for har-
monised type design is not as self-evident as Bigelow and Holmes sug-
gested in 1993. Undoubtedly, there are specialised applications in which 
pragmatic considerations and technical constraints make notions of har-
monised design applicable. A typical example would be the original con-
text of the Lucida Sans Unicode project, a type designed for a graphi-
cal user interface which for technical convenience needed to adhere to a 
shared set of vertical metrics, and for branding purposes to a unified visual 
language.y 
The fact remains that harmonisation overwhelmingly takes character-
istics, concepts, proportions and aesthetic notions of the Latin typograph-
ic world for granted, and seeks to adapt other scripts to these existing 
paradigms. Froshaug’s observation that ‘typography is a grid’ remains 
remarkably accurate in today’s digital environment, where the rectangu-
lar module still dominates design thinking and practice. And as has been 
argued above, regular, rectangular modules are – despite their appeal to a 
certain form of rationality – not as successful for most scripts, as they are 
for Latin. 
At any rate, harmonised design in its various guises is here to stay,  
if only for commercial convenience. As Kinross noted [2002a], the dream 
of the universal typeface which could achieve ‘a world of purified com-
munication, of meaning unencumbered by the obstacles of form’ through 
rational planning, has been a recurring one. And the observation that ‘like 
all dreams – especially recurring ones – it seems to say a good deal about 
the dreamer’ remains equally true in the realm of multi-script typography.
Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank Jacob Cawthorne and Ben Mitchell for their 
observations about the Chinese and Thai signage at Bangkok’s Suvarnabhu-
mi airport and the reviewers for their helpful observations and suggestions.
y	  Note that actual script mixing is rare in a GUI as a language change commonly affects all 
its elements. Moreover, the question whether a certain western aesthetic conveys the same 
notions in a different cultural context remains to be answered, but goes beyond the scope 
of this chapter.

172
Digital fonts and reading
References
Bigelow, C. and Holmes, K. (1993). The design of a Unicode font, Electronic 
Publishing, 6(3), pp. 289–305.
Biľak, P. (2008) Family planning, or how type families work, https://www.
typotheque.com/articles/type_families (accessed September 9, 2014), first 
published in CAP & Design, November 2007 (in Swedish).
BoutrosTM Arabic Typography (2014) “Boutros Advertisers Naskh”, http://www.
boutrosfonts.com/spip.php?article23 (accessed September 9, 2014).
Craig, J. (1998) Shemlan: a history of the Middle East Centre for Arab Studies, 
(Macmillan, Basingstoke).
Dreyfus, J. (1994) Into Print: Selected Writings on Printing History, Typography 
and Book Production, “Jan Tschichold’s Sabon: The first ‘Harmonized’ 
Type,” (The British Library, London) pp. 190–197, first published as “Sab-
on: the first ‘harmonized’ type” in the Penrose Annual, 61, London, 1968.
Froshaug, A. (2000a) Anthony Froshaug: Typography & texts / Documents of a 
life, ed. Kinross, R., “Univers,” (Hyphen Press, London) pp. 174–176.
Froshaug, A. (2000b) Anthony Froshaug: Typography & texts / Documents of 
a life, ed. Kinross, R., “Typography is a grid,” (Hyphen Press, London) 
pp. 187–190.
Kinross, R. (2002a) Unjustified texts: perspectives on typography, “Universal 
faces, ideal characters” (Hyphen Press, London) pp. 233–245, first pub-
lished in Baseline, no. 6, 1985.
Kinross, R. (2002b) Unjustified texts: perspectives on typography, “What is a 
typeface?” (Hyphen Press, London) pp. 113–130, first published in Base-
line, 7, 1986, pp. 14–18,
Kinross, R. (2004), Modern typography, 2nd Ed. (Hyphen Press, London).
Mosley, J. (1997). French academicians and modern typography: designing new 
types in the 1690s, Typography Papers, 2, pp. 5–29.
Ulrich, F. (2014) From compressed light to extended ultra: Visual systems in 
type designs, http://next.fontshop.com/content/from-compressed-light-to-
extended-ultra/ (accessed September 17, 2014).
Unicode, Inc. (2009) History of Unicode, ‘Chronology of Unicode Version 1.0,’  
http://www.unicode.org/history/versionone.html (accessed September 9, 
2014).

173
Chapter 10
Using pattern languages in  
typographic design
Rob McKaughan
Pattern languages, a design method created by Christopher Alexander for architecture, 
have enjoyed popularity in several fields including software and interaction design. These 
fields have found that pattern languages improve communication and documentation, par-
ticularly in multi-discipline teams. Patterns help designers break down complex problems 
and better understand the relationships of design elements. Patterns bridge disciplines by 
documenting the relevant knowledge from several fields as applied to solving a single 
problem. Finally, the creation of a pattern language is an opportunity to make explicit the 
assumptions and wisdom of skilled typographic practice. This chapter reviews the progress 
of pattern languages in the architecture, software, and interaction design fields to under-
stand how typeface design might benefit from using a pattern language. To illustrate the 
use of patterns for typeface design, this chapter includes a pattern language for designing 
newspaper typefaces.
1.1   Introduction
Everyone knows how to sing the blues. ‘I hate to see that evening sun go 
down / Because my baby, he’s gone left this town.’ [Handy, 1914]. ‘I used 
to have plenty of money, the finest clothes in town / but bad luck and trou-
ble overtaken me, bound to get me down.‘ [Hopkins, 1994]. In a sense, all 
blues songs are the same. The music is built around a twelve bar melody 
and a common chord progression. The lyrics tell stories primarily of bad 
luck, bad lovers, and bad habits. Yet, this seemingly limited language of 
the blues is one of the richest genres of American music and has given 
birth to Rock and Roll and many other forms of popular music.
Blues musicians rarely start a song from scratch. The tradition of the 
blues provides a language of tried-and-true musical, lyrical, and narrative 
patterns that musicians can use to tell their stories in new ways. That lan-
guage of patterns forms a solid foundation upon which artists can build 
expressive work. 

174
Digital fonts and reading
In the 1960s, architect Christopher Alexander observed another lan-
guage of patterns: ‘Every place is given its character by certain patterns 
of events that keep happening there.’ [Alexander, 1979]. He also observed 
that ‘there is a fundamental inner connection between each pattern of 
events, and the pattern of space in which it happens.’ [Alexander, 1979]. 
The architectural features of a place form these patterns in space, which 
in turn interact with the events and thus the character of the place. From 
this insight, Alexander created a new design approach for architecture by 
collecting these patterns into what he called a pattern language.
Each pattern in a pattern language is a rule of thumb abstracted from ex-
isting proven designs. More specifically, a pattern is a description of a prob-
lem and its solution in a particular context. These patterns are not recipes; 
they balance concrete physical descriptions while abstracting the pattern’s 
concepts for use in other designs. The patterns focus on the characteristics 
of the product, and not the process used by the designer [Tidwell, 2005]. 
They also include a clear description of why the pattern works well, with 
lots of examples. These patterns can then help practitioners, from novices 
to master architects, to create appropriate designs. 
For example, one of the patterns in Alexander’s A pattern language 
[Alexander, 1977] describes the problem that people naturally abandon 
rooms with one window for rooms with light coming from multiple direc-
tions. To create rooms people enjoy remaining in, the pattern’s solution 
recommends that architects build every room to have at least two walls 
facing the outdoors. This pattern, aptly named light on two sides of every 
room (pattern names appear in bold throughout this chapter), describes 
only the relationships of windows to walls and their impact on people. It 
does not prescribe particular floor plans, window treatments, or specific 
implementations. While this pattern might be something a master archi-
tect would know intuitively to build, a novice or a student might not. The 
intention of the pattern is to give any practitioner a good solution for this 
problem, as well as an understanding of why the solution works.  
Pattern languages have enjoyed great popularity in other design fields, 
particularly in software engineering and interaction design. Practitioners in 
these fields have found that pattern languages provide a common language 
amongst designers and members of other disciplines [Erikson, 2000; Beck 
et al., 2002]. Patterns capture and disseminate knowledge [Beck et al., 
2002], helping novice designers become productive more quickly [Chung 

175
Using pattern languages in typographic design
et al., 2004], and aiding experienced designers working in new areas  
[Kotula, 1996]. Patterns also help design in a complex problem space. The 
methodology of applying patterns provides a systematic design process, 
and it can identify gaps in the design brief or specification [Coplien in 
Beck et al., 2002]. Finally, thinking with patterns causes designers to work 
at a level of abstraction, removing the project-specific details, to see the 
essence of the design [Kotula, 1996].
Typography, like the fields mentioned above, is similarly concerned 
with complex, multilayered problem spaces. Consider the layout of a sim-
ple paragraph: legibility and economy do battle to set line spacing, column 
width, and type size; all of which are also influenced by page size, layout, 
editorial tone, and typeface choice. Laying out a paragraph requires bal-
ancing many variables. Typeface design is similarly complex. Consider 
the variety of newspaper typefaces such as those in Figure 1. Each letter 
represents many design choices – some stylistic, others practical thanks to 
the difficulties of printing legibly at small sizes with cheap paper and ink. 
All of these choices interact with each other. For example, the small sizes 
of newspaper text dictate certain letterform proportions, however the sty-
listic choice of a humanist axis over a Didone axis can make typefaces of 
the same proportions appear larger [Carter, 1971]. Thus a mindful stylistic 
choice can help address a practical issue. Just as easily, a stylist choice can 
create new problems. 
To make these choices quickly, it is helpful for designers to clearly 
understand the nuances of problems they are trying to solve, and how their 
solutions interact to improve or to diminish the overall design. Clearly 
documenting the choices and interactions in designs makes them easier to 
re-use, speeding up the design process in future projects, as well as provid-
ing a means of sharing good solutions with the entire community, creating 
a common language. The documentation also becomes a source of training 
for junior designers. It also is an opportunity to document hidden or for-
Figure 1: Four typefaces for newspapers; from left to right: Times New Roman, Nimrod, 
Zócalo Text, and Swift Neue, all set at 26 point to more easily view differences in 
features, proportions, and the modulation of the width of strokes.

176
Digital fonts and reading
gotten assumptions, as well as to integrate the increasingly diverse fields 
of knowledge required to design documents and typefaces well. 
Pattern languages have proven to be adept at solving these problems 
in several different design fields. They have the potential to be quite valu-
able. This chapter explores these possibilities through an example of a 
pattern language for newspaper typography and typeface design.
1.2   Pattern languages
The structure of pattern languages provides much of their practical value. 
Essentially, a pattern language is a collection of design rules of thumb 
captured from existing, proven designs. Each pattern describes a problem 
context and a suitable solution. The problem description lists all the design 
constraints that occur in the given context, including those constraints cre-
ated by related patterns. These constraints are always expressed in physical 
terms [Alexander, 1979]. This physical specificity makes patterns specific 
in application, therefore concrete and actionable. It also makes patterns 
easy for novices to grasp. 
A well-written problem description does more than define the context, 
it implicitly defines the applicability of the given pattern. Every prob-
lem has multiple solutions, therefore, multiple patterns that could apply. 
Designers carefully consider the design constraints for a project, and 
select only those patterns with contexts that are relevant to the problem at 
hand [Corfman, 1998]. This makes design choices and the impact of those 
choices explicit and deliberate.
Having clearly defined the problem space, a pattern must give a solu-
tion. A pattern’s solution describes the physical attributes and relation-
ships that resolve the constraints in the given context. Here again, physical 
descriptions keep patterns concrete and actionable, but there is an element 
of abstraction: solutions focus primarily on the relationships amongst ele-
ments, not on single elements [Tidwell, 2005]. Also, they describe only 
the relevant details of the solution, not a complete implementation. This 
abstraction enables individual patterns to be broadly applicable. Solutions 
may also make use of other patterns, specifying the relationships between 
them. This helps break up complex problems into smaller ones and focus-
es designers on the interplay of elements throughout the design.
A unique feature of pattern languages is that patterns clearly describe 

177
Using pattern languages in typographic design
the rationale behind each solution including the design tradeoffs and their 
consequences. Dearden and Finlay [2006] note that patterns ‘capture 
insights about the design that can inform even an experienced designer; 
explaining not only how a problem can be solved but also why a design 
choice is appropriate to a particular context.’ 
Patterns naturally become a conversational language because each pat-
tern contains a unique name that is easy to remember and use [Meszaros 
and Doble, 1998]. The pattern names become a lexicon, and the specificity 
of the pattern descriptions lends precision to this lexicon. Pattern languag-
es therefore are design languages facilitating communication amongst 
designers [Dearden and Finlay, 2006] and teams [Borchers, 2000].
Most importantly, each pattern includes several examples from real 
world designs. As Kohls and Uttecht [2009] point out, ‘There is one sec-
tion in most documented patterns that we consider as indispensable: the 
examples section. … Only experience with multiple examples helps iden-
tify relevant variables.’ 
The structure of patterns generalizes good designs while retaining an 
element of concreteness [Bayle et al., 1998]. This dual nature prevents 
patterns from being prescriptive. Instead, they describe design spaces 
more than specific designs [Buschmann et al., 2007]. Because patterns are 
not overly specific, they enable variety in implementation. For example, 
Alexander’s Entrance transition pattern suggests using architectural fea-
tures to give multiple cues of a transition from public to private place. The 
pattern does not prescribe a specific ground plan, but lists several patterns 
as options: Garden wall, Tapestry of light and dark, Trellised walk, etc. 
The designer can choose any of these, as well as choose how they want 
to realise each option that they choose. The actual design created from 
patterns is always an adaptation of design principles to a specific situation.
1.3   An illustrative example
At first glance, pattern languages can seem quite abstract. In practice, pat-
tern languages are most easily understood through example. This section 
will use a pattern language for newspapers [McKaughan, 2011] to illus-
trate the possibilities pattern languages have for typographic or typeface 
design. We start by painting an overall picture of the pattern language by 
naming several of the patterns and describing how they work in concert. 

178
Digital fonts and reading
Next, we go into more detail by listing the complete specification of one of 
those patterns. This is followed by a discussion which walks through that 
pattern in detail, highlighting the pattern structure and practical benefits.
1.3.1   A pattern language for news
Consider the front page of a newspaper. The brand is instantly recogniz-
able from the overall layout and typeface choices, even before we recog-
nize the publication logo. The weights and styles help readers navigate the 
page to find an article, and the text of that article is set so that it is easy 
to read, while packing in as much text as possible to save printing costs. 
The page demonstrates a number of problems and choices: some are con-
ventions for newspapers, some reveal the brand, and some solve material 
necessities of the print medium. These problems and choices operate at 
many different levels, from overall layout to the length of serifs, and all 
interact to form a unified whole.
This pattern language attacks these problems by first identifying broad 
issues such as branding, then proceeds through increasingly more detailed 
patterns all the way down to the level of letterform design.
Returning to the newspaper front page: A pattern called news typo-
graphic design outlines the overall typographic requirements of newspa-
pers – issues of brand, editorial feel, printing economy, etc. – and points 
towards general purpose patterns to maintain typographic identity, using 
a variegated typeface family composed of many styles, with an optional 
complementary sans-serif. The newspaper would have to employ a read-
ing typeface and an economic text setting to give readers a comfortable 
reading experience while remaining within cost constraints.
News typographic design also takes advantage of genre-specific pat-
terns such as newspaper text proportions and headline typefaces, which 
outline the requirements for the design of a newspaper typeface. These 
patterns lead to more detailed patterns for designing a typeface in this 
context with dark-printing letterforms with malleable joins, economic 
widths, and large apparent size. Media-specific patterns that describe 
typefaces for low-resolution screens or sturdiness for stereotyping help 
adapt a design to a particular medium.
The above patterns work together to set the design requirements for a 
newspaper. A few additional patterns can give the designer flexibility for 

179
Using pattern languages in typographic design
related publications. For example, to design the Sunday magazine sup-
plement for a newspaper, a designer might replace economic text set-
ting and newspaper text proportions with a luxurious text setting and 
book text proportions, while still employing the rest of the newspaper’s 
patterns. The result would be a much more open, magazine-like layout 
appropriate for a lazy Sunday morning read, while still adhering to the 
overall design of the publication. The magazine supplement would there-
fore function alongside the newspaper as a complementary member of 
the publication’s family.
1.3.2   Example pattern: newspaper text proportions
The following is the complete specification for the pattern, newspaper 
text proportions, mentioned in the previous section. It illustrates typo-
graphic patterns in more detail, particularly in the way that patterns spec-
ify relationships and employ other patterns to establish problem contexts 
and to solve them. A discussion of this pattern’s construction follows the 
pattern. 
1.3.2.1   Problem context
Morison eloquently described the context of newspaper typefaces:
The problem in designing a newspaper type is to secure the maximum size of 
letter on the smallest size of body with the least waste of space between letters 
and words; while also preserving the right relation between the appearance of the 
letters and the length of the line to which they are set, and to increase, if possible 
the ease of switching the eyes from the extreme right to the extreme left of the 
line [Morison, 1956].
Newspaper text proportions also derives its context from the read-
ing typeface and legible economic text setting: news type in a legible 
economic text setting is often set at 8 – 10 point, set with 1 – 2 points of 
leading or even set solid (line height is the type size itself with no extra 
space between lines), with measures of typically 12ems accommodating 
4 – 6 words. To balance economy and readability, the setting will have 
just enough interlinear space to be adequate for reading. The grey of text 
blocks set in this manner must balance with other elements of the news 

180
Digital fonts and reading
typographic design. The speed of news production prevents editors from 
fine-tuning all these parameters for each page.
1.3.2.2   Solution
Use proportions that provide sufficient interlinear space to read easily 
when set solid. Letter widths should be narrow enough to fit an average of 
six words in the given measure while still being easy to read. 
1.3.2.3   Rationale
Economy and readability are the two primary, opposing forces in newspa-
per proportions. Economy drives increasing the number of lines per col-
umn-inch and characters per line, driving type to be set solid, and increas-
ing the character density of each line. 
Readability requires sufficient interlinear space to allow the eye to eas-
ily track from the end of a line to the beginning of the next. Meanwhile, a 
reader’s perception of readability demands type that appears large.
Therefore, a balance must be struck: proportions to allow solid setting 
with readable interlinear space, while also having a high character density, 
without appearing crowded or dark, all while remaining readable.
1.3.2.4   Implementation
A news typeface must have the greatest possible size and clearness of 
impression [Morison, 1932]. It must appear equally readable and have a 
comparable size to typefaces previously used by the publication.
Use proportions that are oblong, not square, [Hutt, 1960] and that have 
economic widths to fit the appropriate number of words per line. Use 
sufficiently high ascenders so that good interlinear spacing is built into 
the design [Morison, 1956]. Shortening descenders can create extra space. 
The proportions of these extenders must balance with the x-height so that 
letters have large apparent size. Figures 2 and 3 demonstrate this balance 
of extenders, x-height, and interlinear space. 
Adjust serif dimensions to give the appropriate grey on the page. Serifs 
should taper because halation causes straight serifs to lose apparent length 
[Dawson and Farey, 2002].

181
Using pattern languages in typographic design
Figure 2: These text settings show the balance of vertical and horizontal proportions in a 
news context. Both columns are set on an 8-point baseline grid. The right column is set in 
a newspaper typeface, Nimrod, at 8-point. The left column is set in Hoefler Text, and has 
been scaled to match Nimrod’s x-height, thus both columns should have equal legibility. 
The left column is harder to read, though because its ascenders and descenders break up 
the interlinear space, often causing collisions as in the case of the letter g on the second 
line, making the text hard to scan. 
Figure 3: These settings continue the illustration: The right column is set in Nimrod 
8-point exactly as in figure 2. The left column is set in Mrs. Eaves, also at 8-point, set 
solid. Its small x-height and proportionately narrow letters pack in more text than Nimrod 
and with plenty of interlinear space. However, the very small letters are difficult to read 
and are off-putting. Taking figures 2 and 3 together, we see that for news settings, the 
x-height must be large enough for readability, ascenders and descenders moderate for 
interlinear space, and widths narrow enough for the necessary text density. It is easy to 
see that Nimrod was designed for this environment whereas Hoefler Text and Mrs. Eaves 
were not.

182
Digital fonts and reading
1.3.2.5   Pitfalls
Often designers believe that page economy requires a condensed type-
face, however this is not always the case. The contemporary news writing 
style tends towards short paragraphs, leaving much whitespace following 
the last line of each paragraph. Walter Tracy and Allen Hutt found that 
when setting English text in this writing style, a wider (or less condensed) 
letterform has little or no effect on the column length [Hutt, 1973]. The 
whitespace on the last line of a paragraph absorbs the extra space used by 
the wider letters. The proportions of a news typeface, therefore, need not 
be highly condensed to be economic. This effect varies with language and 
editorial style.
1.3.2.6   Related patterns
This pattern contributes to the economy of a legible economic text setting.
1.3.3   Discussion: the anatomy of a pattern
The first section of the pattern sets up the context of the pattern it attempts 
to solve (e.g. Morison’s quote), and identifies any constraints the context 
identifies (e.g. 8–9pt text size, set solid). The pattern explicitly lists the 
source of these constraints (e.g. the legible economic text setting pattern) 
so that designers understand the relationship between those sources and 
the solution to this problem, and thus how to adapt changes in one to the 
other. It also identifies environmental requirements, such as the editor’s 
lack of time for fine-tuning, so that hard requirements are clear.
The solution section provides a concise statement of the solution to the 
problem in terms of relationships to other entities. Specifying relationships 
(e.g. relating letter proportion to line spacing requirements) creates a con-
crete solution that enables designers to adapt the solution to the particular 
document, while still being abstract enough to apply to other documents.
The rationale for this solution immediately follows. This rationale 
is one of the unique factors of patterns as it not only explains why the 
solution works, but abstracts the solution so it is broadly applicable. The 
implementation section contains the concrete details on how to implement 
the solution, including examples wherever possible. This gives the prac-
tical side of the pattern. In a way the rationale and implementation are 

183
Using pattern languages in typographic design
yin-yang complements: the abstract and the practical. As described above, 
this attribute enables patterns to be both actionable and broadly applicable.
This pattern language contains a unique section not found in pattern 
languages used in other fields: the pitfalls’ section. This section captures 
an important body of knowledge that often differentiates experts from 
novices: the knowledge of what does not work. The pitfalls’ section doc-
uments common misunderstandings, misinterpretations, or easy mistakes 
one can make in implementing the solution to this context. The hope is 
to improve a practitioner’s efficiency by warning them about known bad 
ideas. Reiners et al. [2011] employed a similar idea as an Anti-pattern-at-
tribute in their software pattern language framework. 
The pattern concludes with references to other patterns. This explicitly 
identifies the other patterns to which this pattern contributes a part of the 
solution (e.g. this pattern helps solve a legible economic text setting), as 
well as other patterns this pattern depends on.
1.4   Possibilities for pattern languages in typographic design
There are many ways pattern languages can be useful in typographic de-
sign. This section focuses on three key opportunities: solving complex 
problems simply, combining knowledge from related fields, and making 
unstated assumptions explicit.
1.4.1   Solving complex problems simply
Typeface design and typographic layout require solutions to problems that 
are multilayered and have many variables to balance. For example, the 
layout of a paragraph depends not only on the column width and the over-
all page layout, but also on the design of the typeface used for the text, 
especially letterform proportions. For example, the proportions of news-
paper typefaces enable them to work with much less line spacing than the 
designs of book typefaces do. Meanwhile, printing costs can encourage 
editors to increase the density of text on the page, and thus to reduce the 
type size used in a paragraph. That type size influences the overall impres-
sion that a page of text gives. Choosing how to lay out a paragraph of text 
requires balancing all of these factors and considering the implications on 
broad and minute design requirements.

184
Digital fonts and reading
The structure of a pattern language lends itself well to solving these 
multi-layered typographic problems. Individual patterns can address dif-
ferent levels of scope in the design, from overall layout to fine letterform 
features like the design of serifs or the joins between strokes within a 
letter. Each pattern solves an aspect of the overall design brief, and also 
explicitly interacts with other patterns to solve larger, more complex prob-
lems. This interaction helps maintain the coherence through all levels of 
the design so that the sum of design choices creates a consistent document 
whole.
For example, consider the following patterns for newspaper layout and 
typeface design. An economic text setting for newspapers requires very 
high text density and the ability to justify text evenly in narrow columns. 
To accomplish this, it is helpful to be able to slightly widen and condense 
letters automatically in software to fit text well in the given space; how-
ever, this manipulation can distort letterforms. Typefaces designed with 
malleable joins, in which strokes join at ninety-degree angles, survive this 
treatment without distortion. Thus, malleable joins are a great advantage 
in this sort of environment, and so the economic text setting pattern will 
explicitly call for them. Similarly, an economic text setting is essential 
for newspapers, so a broad pattern documenting the news typographic 
design might call for a medium-scale pattern like economic text setting to 
meet its cost and preference requirements. Designers may likewise employ 
other patterns to solve other aspects of the design. All of these patterns 
work together, explicitly and implicitly, to satisfy the requirements of the 
publication at all levels of the design. 
As mentioned previously, the structure of patterns can help manage 
the complexity of a design. The relationships identified by patterns help 
designers understand the relationships between design elements [Bayle 
et al., 1998]. Designers can use this understanding to break down prob-
lems and to reflect on the impact of changes to a design. In a study by 
Dearden et al., [2002] ‘experienced designers indicated that the language 
had supported their design activity, in one case highlighting elements that 
would otherwise have been missed.’ Coplien concurred: ‘Once in a while, 
a pattern will solve a problem that seems like it should be in requirements, 
but the requirement is found to be missing.’ [Coplien in Beck et al., 2002]. 
Saponas et al. [2006] concluded that patterns enable designers to elimi-
nate more issues early in the design process. Designers using patterns can 

185
Using pattern languages in typographic design
therefore produce initial prototype designs that are more robust and better 
suited to project requirements.
Patterns break complex problems down into a set of relationships 
between elements. These relationships, in turn, identify free and invari-
ant variables. This enables designers to be expressive (explicitly by free 
variables), while still reliably addressing document needs (invariant vari-
ables). For example, while news typographic design and economic text 
setting define typeface proportions, and while malleable joins define 
one letterform feature, the style of the typeface is left undefined. Style, 
therefore, is a free variable, while the proportions and join structure are 
invariant. The patterns clarify the designers understanding by making the 
tradeoffs and relationships between variables explicit, thus making design 
choices easier and clearer to make. In this way, patterns become good food 
for design thought for each project.
This property of patterns, that of breaking down complex problems 
into clear relationships, makes them quite useful in education and in 
improving the contribution of novice designers. In a study using pattern 
languages for web site design, Dearden et al. [2002] observed that the 
process of using patterns ‘enabled novice users with no experience of web 
design to participate in the design of a website.’ Chung et al. [2004] found 
that patterns helped novices produce ideas and communicate them easi-
ly, avoiding problems early in the design process. Tidwell [1999] points 
out that it is difficult for novice designers to keep in mind all the myriad 
design principles they should apply. Because patterns encapsulate these 
principles, a pattern language helps novices use good principles effective-
ly in their designs.
1.4.2   Combining knowledge
Typographic design is increasingly a multidiscipline effort. Designers 
work with software developers, industrial designers, project managers, 
web designers, cognitive psychologists, and, of course, clients. Written 
properly, pattern languages are understandable by people in different dis-
ciplines. Patterns can bridge the communication gap between disciplines 
[Schmidt, 1995]. If written well enough for readers outside the problem 
domain, patterns can help people in a multidisciplinary team understand 
each other better [Borchers, 2000].

186
Digital fonts and reading
Much more interesting, however, is the potential pattern languages 
have to integrate knowledge from diverse fields. Authorship of typeface 
design patterns need not be limited to typeface designers. Patterns can 
encapsulate the diverse knowledge areas needed for typeface design: cog-
nitive psychology, graphic design, typographic design, printing processes, 
engineering, etc.
In doing so, patterns can relate issues from multiple fields to each other, 
and to place them in a specific, relevant context. For example, consider 
a pattern about condensed letter proportions. That pattern could include 
typeface design knowledge on making condensed types, knowledge from 
cognitive psychology on crowding and the legibility of narrow letters, and 
engineering recommendations on print or screen rendering of these forms. 
Designers would not have to interpret each field separately and synthesize 
their own theory to apply to their projects. Instead, the pattern language 
would provide a common, multi-disciplined understanding. Such a com-
mon understanding would be very valuable in typeface design because 
designers must forge their own multi-disciplined ideas, invariably leading 
to disagreement amongst designers.
1.4.3   Making assumptions explicit
The preceding sections outline the practical advantages to pattern languag-
es. There is also an important philosophical impact that pattern languages 
can have on typography as a discipline: the creation of a pattern language 
is an opportunity to make assumptions explicit. 
The typographic discipline boasts over five hundred years of traditions. 
Over time, conventions have formed, in part due to technical restrictions 
such as the size of a printing press, economic issues such as the cost of 
paper and materials, issues of legibility, and also due to a craftsman’s 
mindful intuition for solving these problems. What was economic neces-
sity later becomes convention and even later becomes invariant truth 
even though the necessity or technology the assumption was based on has 
faded. Few have attempted to revisit typographic conventions and practice 
to determine which assumptions are outdated, which are still applicable, 
and, more importantly, which have never been explicitly stated before. 
Writing a pattern language is an act of deep reflection. One has to agree 
on what good design is, and more importantly, what contributes to mak-

187
Using pattern languages in typographic design
ing a particular design good: i.e. what specific relationships exist that can 
generate new, equally good designs, repeatedly and reliably. To do this 
requires getting to the root of why those relationships work and, along the 
way, which typographic principles are valid and why. Creating a pattern 
language can thus help clarify the theoretical basis of typography.
A pattern language could also help clarify cases of simple disagree-
ment. The canon of typography includes many opinions that are unverified 
and taken as fact, often resulting in confusing or contradictory informa-
tion. For example, in ‘The Evolution of Times New Roman,’ [1973] John 
Dreyfus asserts that for serifs to hold up through the stereotyping pro-
cess, serifs should be thin and tapered like those of Perpetua. Allen Hutt 
writes in ‘Walter Tracy, type designer’ [1973] that serifs should be blunt, 
as Jubilee’s serifs are, to survive the same process. Two equally respected 
authors, writing in the same year, are in direct contradiction, without any 
further literature to resolve the debate. Design patterns must be specific to 
be useful, requiring clarity be brought to these murky waters. 
1.5   Alternatives to pattern languages
The pattern language is not the first system created to document design 
knowledge. Among those systems that the information design and interac-
tion design fields have looked into are guidelines, style guides, and genres. 
It is worth considering their relative advantages and disadvantages with 
respect to typography.
Relative to style guides, patterns appear to be an improvement. Style 
guides focus on a single publication or a particular implementation envi-
ronment. Patterns, on the other hand, abstract away the particular imple-
mentation environment and thus apply to many situations. This abstrac-
tion can be helpful when designers must adapt to circumstances not 
anticipated by a style guide. Patterns also identify the context in which 
they are applicable [Dearden and Finlay, 2006], which provides guidance 
as to which patterns are most appropriate for a given problem. Borchers 
[2000] found patterns superior due to ‘their standard format, hierarchical 
networking, inclusion of examples, and discussion of problem context as 
well as solution.’
Compared to guidelines, patterns are both more general and use exam-
ples that are more specific [Dearden and Finlay, 2006], enabling patterns to 

188
Digital fonts and reading
be more universally applicable as well as actionable. In interaction design, 
Granlund et al. found that guidelines omit basic UI design knowledge:
The major forces influencing design: the user, the context, and the task, are 
missing from guidelines. Design rationale is missing, too. Patterns capture and 
document all of this important knowledge [Granlund et al., 2001].
The difference between guidelines and pattern languages is more subtle 
than the above. Unlike guidelines, patterns are generative, informing de-
signers about design options at each point in the design process, while pro-
viding an easy way to capture options already explored [Borchers, 2000].
Document genre analysis was formulated by Delin, Bateman, and Allen 
based on the work of Waller and Twyman. This framework analyzes the 
content, rhetoric, layout, navigation, and linguistic structure of documents 
to find the common relationships in these structures. From this commonal-
ity, one can study how document genres form and evolve over time [Delin 
et al., 2002].
Waller et al. [2012] describe three key differences between patterns and 
genres: firstly, genres use existing names, names that users of documents 
might use, to describe structures and genres. A pattern language, on the oth-
er hand, is an exercise for practitioners in naming the underlying structures 
in their work. Secondly, genres describe conventions; whereas patterns fol-
low underlying insights into the strategies or behaviors of those who use 
created works. Finally, Genres, by definition, describe genre [Delin et al., 
2002], whereas patterns are specifically intended to cross genre boundaries. 
In fact, as Tidwell [1999] points out, patterns can even cross disciplines.
There may be a further distinction: genres were initially formulated as 
an analysis technique to study how documents coalesce into genres [Delin 
et al., 2002]. Pattern languages, however, were created for practice, specif-
ically to empower ordinary people to improve the quality of architecture in 
their lives [Alexander, 1979]. Both frameworks operate in the space of de-
sign relationships, but they were conceived for different users and purpos-
es. Patterns and genres differ in that genres form a descriptive framework 
focused on genres as seen by users of documents, whereas patterns form 
a design framework focused on creators. That said, it is likely that both 
frameworks can be used for either analysis or practice – indeed they can 
be quite complementary, with pattern makers finding inspiration in genre 
analyses and vice versa.

189
Using pattern languages in typographic design
1.6   Conclusions
Christopher Alexander’s pattern languages have enjoyed success as a de-
sign methodology in the software engineering, interaction design, and oth-
er fields. In these fields, pattern languages provided a design vernacular, 
helping improve communications and documentation. The inter-related, 
generative nature of patterns enabled them to solve complex problems, 
producing designs whose elements work together as a whole, integrated 
design. This structure also helped designers better understand the rela-
tionships of design elements. By encapsulating knowledge of good de-
signs, pattern languages helped train novice designers and helped expert 
designers work in unfamiliar domains. Pattern languages also integrated 
knowledge from different disciplines, giving designers coherent multi-dis-
ciplined design guidance.
Pattern languages will be very useful for typographic design. Waller et 
al. [2012] concur and go on to describe a program of developing a corpus 
of document patterns informed by and informing document genre analy-
sis. This substantial effort will be worthwhile in documenting an explicit 
understanding of the patterns, assumptions, and practices in document 
design. 
Pattern languages also have many other helpful attributes: document-
ing typographic patterns is an opportunity to combine knowledge from 
reading science, typographic design, and engineering into a single, coher-
ent knowledge base. The organized complexity of pattern languages will 
help designers understand and manage the many mutually dependent 
variables in typeface and document design. The natural design language 
arising out of patterns will help refine the typographic lexicon and will 
enable designers to document more easily their design tradeoffs – issues 
infrequently discussed in typographic literature. This documentation will 
help train novice and experienced designers alike to work in new areas. 
Finally, all these benefits can apply equally to typeface design and typo-
graphic design. The typographic community would profit from creating a 
pattern language for both.

190
Digital fonts and reading
References
Alexander, C. (1979). The timeless way of building. (Oxford University Press, 
New York).
Alexander, C., Ishikawa, S., Silverstein, M., Jacobson, M., Fiksdahl-King, I., 
& Angel, S. (1977). A pattern language: towns, buildings, construction. 
Later printing. (Oxford University Press, New York).
Bayle, E., Bellamy, R., Casaday, G., Erickson, T., Fincher, S., Grinter, B., et al. 
(1998). Putting it all together: towards a pattern language for interaction 
design: A CHI 97 workshop, ACM SIGCHI Bulletin, 30(1), pp. 17–23. 
doi:10.1.1.35.3561
Beck, K., Crocker, R., Meszaros, G., Coplien, J. O., Dominick, L., Paulisch, F., 
& Vlissides, J. (2002). Industrial experience with design patterns, ICSE 
‘96 Proceedings of the 18th international conference on Software engi-
neering, (IEEE Computer Society, Washington, D.C.) pp. 103–114.
Borchers, J. (2000). Interaction design patterns: twelve theses, CHI2000 Pat-
terns workshop (Vol. 2, p. 3). The Hague. doi:10.1.1.35.3561
Buschmann, F., Henney, K., & Schmidt, D. C. (2007). Pattern-oriented software 
architecture: On patterns and pattern languages (Vol. 5). (John Wiley & 
Sons, Chichester).
Carter, M. (1971). Olympian: a new type for papers. Interpresgrafik, 7,  
pp. 42–47.
Chung, E. S., Hong, J. I., Lin, J., Prabaker, M. K., Landay, J. A., & Liu, A. 
L. (2004). Development and evaluation of emerging design patterns for 
ubiquitous computing. In Proceedings of the 5th conference on Designing 
interactive systems: processes, practices, methods, and techniques, (ACM: 
Cambridge Massachusetts) pp. 233–242. doi:10.1145/1013115.1013148
Corfman, R. (1998). An overview of patterns. In L. Rising (Ed.), The patterns 
handbook: techniques, strategies, and applications (Cambridge University 
Press: Cambridge) pp. 19–30.
Dawson, R., & Farey, D. (2002). The Times vernacular 2002.
Dearden, A., & Finlay, J. (2006). Pattern languages in HCI: a critical review. 
Human–Computer Interaction, 21(1), pp. 49–102.
Dearden, A., Finlay, J., Allgar, L., & McManus, B. (2002). Evaluating pattern 
languages in participatory design. In CHI’02 extended abstracts on Human 
factors in computing systems, pp. 664–665.
Delin, J., Bateman, J., & Allen, P. (2002). A model of genre in document layout. 

191
Using pattern languages in typographic design
Information Design Journal, 11(1), pp. 54–66.
Dreyfus, J. (1973). The evolution of Times New Roman. Penrose Annual, 66,  
pp. 165–174.
Erickson, T. (2000). Lingua francas for design: sacred places and pattern lan-
guages. In Proceedings of Designing Interactive Systems, (ACM Press: 
Brooklyn, NY), pp. 357-368. http://www.visi.com/~snowfall/ LinguaFran-
ca_DIS2000.html.
Granlund, A., Lafreniere, D., & Carr, D. A. (2001). A pattern-supported ap-
proach to the user interface design process. In Proceedings of HCI Interna-
tional (Vol. 1) pp. 282–286. doi:10.1.1.20.7928
Handy, W.C. (1914, original publishing) St. Louis blues. Blues standard. 
Hopkins, S. L. (1994) Sinner’s prayer. Performed by Eric Clapton on From the 
cradle, compact disc. 
Hutt, A. (1960). Newspaper design. (Oxford University Press, London).
Hutt, A. (1973). Walter Tracy, type designer. Penrose Annual, 66, pp. 101–115.
Kohls, C., & Uttecht, J.-G. (2009). Lessons learnt in mining and writing design 
patterns for educational interactive graphics. Computers in Human Behav-
ior, 25, pp. 1040–1055. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2009.01.004
Kotula, J. (1996). Discovering patterns: an industry report. Software: practice 
and experience, 26(11), pp. 1261–1276.
McKaughan, R. (2011). Towards a pattern language for typeface design. Mas-
ters dissertation. University of Reading.
Meszaros, G., & Doble, J. (1998). A pattern language for pattern writing. Pattern 
Languages of Program Design, 3, pp. 529–574.
Morison, S. (1956). Interlinear space or “leading” in typographical composi-
tion. (unpublished). MS Add.9812/B3/21.2. Cambridge University Library 
Stanley Morison Archives.
Morison, S. (anonymous). (1932). Printing the Times; a record of the chang-
es introduced in the issue for October 3, 1932. (Printing House Square, 
London).
Reiners, R., Astrova, I., & Zimmermann, A. (2011). Introducing new Pattern 
Language Concepts and an Extended Pattern Structure for Ubiquitous 
Computing Application Design Support. In PATTERNS 2011, The Third 
International Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications,  
pp. 61–66. 
Saponas, T. S., Prabaker, M. K., Abowd, G. D., & Landay, J. A. (2006). The im-
pact of pre-patterns on the design of digital home applications. In Proceed-

192
Digital fonts and reading
ings of the 6th conference on Designing Interactive systems, (ACM: Uni-
versity Park, Pennsylvania) pp. 189–198.  doi:10.1145/1142405.1142436
Schmidt, D. C., Fayad, M., & Johnson, R. E. (1995). Software patterns. Commu-
nications of the ACM, 38(10), pp. 37–39. doi:10.1145/236156.236164
Tidwell, J. (2005). Designing interfaces: patterns for effective interaction de-
sign. (O’Reilly Media, Sebastapol, California).
Tidwell, J. 1999. Common Ground: A Pattern Language for Human-Computer 
Interface Design. Available online: http://www.mit.edu/~jtidwell/com-
mon_ground.html.
Waller, R., Delin, J., & Thomas, M. (2012). Towards a pattern language ap-
proach to document description. Discours. Revue de Linguistique, Psycho-
linguistique et Informatique, (10). Retrieved from http://discours.revues.
org/8673

193
Chapter 11
How does expertise contribute  
to the recognition of Latin and  
Chinese characters? 
Mary C. Dyson, Keith Tam, Clare Leake, Brian Kwok
Are characters in writing systems (e.g. Latin or Chinese) perceived in the same way as 
objects or do we process characters in a different way? Previous research [Gauthier et al., 
2006] has suggested that readers familiar with a writing system are able to take advan-
tage of the stylistic regularities in typefaces, whereas those without this expertise cannot. 
The experiments described in this chapter explore whether a different form of expertise, 
acquired through design training, also affects our perception of unfamiliar characters, 
meaningless shapes if we cannot read the script. A comparison was made of Chinese bilin-
guals and English monolinguals and those with and without design expertise. All partici-
pants were asked to discriminate between strings of characters in both Latin and Chinese 
and in different typefaces. The results reveal that non-designers are more susceptible to 
interference from incongruent font information than designers, particularly in an unfamil-
iar, or less familiar, writing system. However, design expertise appears to facilitate the 
abstraction of the character shapes from the stylistic variations. These results were found in 
UK students and not the more fluent bilingual students in Hong Kong suggesting the need 
for further exploration of the effects of different types and levels of expertise on character 
recognition. 
1.1   Introduction
The extent to which character recognition is regarded as a form of object 
recognition, as opposed to a more specialized activity, varies. For some 
researchers, the logical starting point is to consider letters and words as 
objects [e.g. Majaj et al., 2002; Pelli et al., 2006; Pelli and Tillman, 2007]. 
In recognizing an object, such as a chair, we disregard variations in style or 
orientation or viewpoint. Similarly, in reading, variation in characters due 
to font or size needs to be ignored to identify the character. 
Various studies, summarized in Sanocki and Dyson [2012], have shown 
that characters presented in mixed fonts, rather than a single font, are rec-
ognized less efficiently, even though the font is irrelevant. Sanocki [1987] 
termed this a ‘font-regularity’ effect and described the process whereby the 

194
Digital fonts and reading
perceptual system can become tuned to a particular font over time and a set 
of font parameters are developed.
Gauthier et al., [2006] extended the research to compare font tuning 
effects between Chinese-English bilinguals, familiar with Chinese char-
acters and the Latin alphabet, and non-Chinese who had no experience 
with Chinese characters but were familiar with the Latin alphabet. They 
found evidence for font tuning only when participants were familiar with 
the writing system, from which Gauthier et al. conclude that expert readers 
perceive letters in a different manner from shapes, i.e. taking advantage of 
font regularity. These results support an account of the perceptual system 
becoming tuned to typical font regularities through experience with the 
writing system.
The degree to which Chinese characters are processed holistically has 
been studied with non-Chinese and Chinese readers [Hsiao and Cottrell, 
2009; Wong et al., 2012]. These studies have drawn parallels with holistic 
processing of faces, which is regarded as an indicator of expertise in face 
recognition. One explanation for the link between expertise and holistic 
processing is that perceptual expertise involves fine-level discrimination 
between similar objects (e.g. recognizing individual faces) and holistic 
processing is developed as an optimal strategy for such discrimination 
[Richler et al., 2011]. 
However, the relationship between reading expertise in Chinese and 
holistic processing may not be straightforward. Wong et al. [2012] found 
evidence of holistic processing of Chinese characters by experts in read-
ing Chinese and novices. The similar results for experts and novices are 
explained by introducing two origins for holistic processing: experts al-
locate their attention to appropriate aspects of the stimulus; novices are 
inefficient in their processing [Wong et al., 2012]. In contrast, Hsiao and 
Cottrell [2009] found holistic processing only in novices and conclude that 
the nature of processing is stimulus and task dependent, and does not relate 
only to visual expertise. 
There is some evidence that typeface expertise, through design training, 
also develops a strategy of holistic processing which aids Latin typeface 
identification [Dyson and Stott, 2012]. Designers may therefore develop 
perceptual abilities which are qualitatively different from non-designers, 
and from the processes used in normal reading where identification of char-
acters, rather than typefaces, is required. 

195
How does expertise contribute to the recognition of Latin and Chinese characters? 
The manner of processing Chinese characters is likely to depend on 
reading expertise as configural information, the relationship between fea-
tures, is not important for recognizing Chinese characters [Ge et al., 2006]; 
a Chinese reader identifies individual stroke patterns, whilst a non-Chinese 
reader may process the character as a whole [Hsiao and Cottrell, 2009]. 
However, despite the differences in character shape and alphabetic versus 
non-alphabetic writing system, Wong et al. [2012] do not propose two 
different types of reading expertise for Latin and Chinese.  
A widely used method to explore holistic processing of faces, extend-
ed to words [Wong et al., 2011], is the composite matching task which 
requires matching, or discrimination, of two stimuli whilst also presenting 
an irrelevant part. This part may be congruent with the target response (e.g. 
both same) or incongruent (e.g. targets are the same but irrelevant parts are 
different). One way of measuring holistic processing is the advantage for 
congruent conditions compared to incongruent, indicating that attention 
has been directed to all parts, not just the target. 
With reading expertise, we can identify characters by ignoring font 
variation to reveal the basic shapes. However, a study by Lewis and Walker 
[1989] found that reaction times to words are slower if the perceptual qual-
ities of the font are inconsistent with the meaning of the word (incongruent 
condition), e.g. the word ‘heavy’ in a ‘light’ font. This indicates an intru-
sion of the irrelevant font dimension. 
In order to further explore the way in which characters are processed 
by experts (in reading) and to extend this to look at the contribution of 
typeface expertise, the following research questions were both addressed 
in two experiments:  
•	
Do designers demonstrate font tuning in a writing system  
they cannot read? 
•	
Does congruency between letter identity and font influence 
performance? 

196
Digital fonts and reading
1.2   Method
1.2.1   Experimental design
Two experiments were conducted: one in the UK (Experiment 1) and one 
in Hong Kong (Experiment 2) involving Chinese and non-Chinese read-
ers, with and without design training. All participants were presented with 
both Chinese and Latin characters, consequently non-Chinese readers 
were responding to characters in a writing system they could not read, i.e. 
no reading expertise (see Table 1). 
1.2.2   Participants
Participants were volunteers from the University of Reading, UK (Experi-
ment 1) and Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong  (Experiment 
2). In Experiment 1, the non-Chinese-reading designers were twelve Mas-
ters students or final year BA students from the Department of Typography 
& Graphic Communication. The non-Chinese-reading non-designers were 
twelve students without any significant design education. The Chinese 
non-designer participants were twelve English as second language (ESL) 
students who (apart from one) had grown up in China and started learning 
English in primary or at the beginning of secondary school. Most had only 
been in England one or two months and were studying summer courses 
to improve their English before starting a Masters. It was not possible 
to recruit a group of Chinese-reading designers within the University of 
Reading. As students in Hong Kong are all bi-lingual, in Experiment 2 
there were just two groups: non-designers (N=12) and designers (N=12). 
All of the participants were undergraduate students from the Hong Kong 
Polytechnic University. The designers were recruited from the School of 
Design, from the BA (Hons) in Design programme. The non-designers 
were recruited from other departments of the university.
It was made clear to participants in both experiments that their par-
ticipation and the results were not part of any assessment on their pro-
grammes. The research project received ethical review according to the 
procedures specified by the University of Reading Research Ethics Com-
mittee and was given a favorable ethical opinion for conduct; participants 
in Hong Kong gave their informed consent. 

197
How does expertise contribute to the recognition of Latin and Chinese characters? 
Table 1: Summary of participant categories and their characteristics.
Non-Chinese readers (monolinguals)
Chinese readers (bilingual)
Non-designers 
N=12 
UK (Expt 1)
Designers 
N=12 
UK (Expt 1)
Non-designers 
N=24 UK+HK 
(Expt 1 & 2)
Designers 
N=12 
HK (Expt 2)
Latin 
fonts
Reading  
expertise
Reading & typeface  
expertise
Reading  
expertise
Reading &  
typeface expertise
Chinese 
fonts
No reading 
expertise
No reading 
expertise but
typeface expertise
Reading  
expertise
Reading &  
typeface expertise
1.2.3   Material
The experiments used a discrimination task where two character strings 
were judged as either containing the same characters or different charac-
ters. The order of characters was jumbled from one string to the next. The 
characters strings were in the same font or a different font. This resulted in 
pairs of letter strings that were either congruent in terms of characters and 
font (i.e. same characters in the same font or different characters in dif-
ferent fonts) or incongruent (i.e. same characters in two different fonts or 
different characters in the same font). Figure 1a and 1b illustrate examples 
of Latin character strings.
The Latin characters used two fonts: Berthold Bodoni and Stempel 
Garamond. These fonts have similar x-heights, which removes the prob-
lem of adjusting point size to have the same apparent size [Beier and 
Dyson, 2014]. Different x-heights are illustrated in Figure 2.
Figure 1a (left): congruent strings, Figure 1b (right): incongruent strings.

198
Digital fonts and reading
Chinese characters do not have x-heights, but because the ‘Ideographic 
Character Face’ (ICF) boxes vary, sizes might appear slightly different, but 
not as much as variation from x-heights in Latin fonts (see Figure 3).
The Chinese fonts differed between the UK and HK to extend the range 
of fonts tested. In the UK, the two Chinese fonts were SimSun and SimHei 
and in Hong Kong, STXihei and STSong  (see Figure 4). SimHei and 
STXihei belong to the Heiti category of Chinese typefaces with minimal 
stroke modulations and can be considered equivalents to sans serif Latin 
fonts. SimSun and STSong are similar to seriffed Latin fonts in that they 
have marked stroke modulations and have serif-like terminals. These fonts 
share similar proportions and their appearing sizes are similar. They were 
Figure 2: Times New Roman (left) has a smaller x-height than Verdana (right) and hence 
appears smaller visually even when set at the same point size.
Figure 3: The grey boxes indicate the approximate Ideographic Character Face (ICF) 
boxes of three typefaces: (a) STSong Regular, (b) STHeiti Light and (c) Biao Kai Ti. 
Also known as ‘average character face’, the ICF box specifies the approximate bounding 
box of the full-width ideographic characters in a Chinese font. Fonts (a) and (b) appear 
similar in size when set at the same point size because the ICF boxes of these two fonts 
are of similar sizes. Font (c) appears to be smaller compared with (a) and (b) because its 
ICF box is smaller.

199
How does expertise contribute to the recognition of Latin and Chinese characters? 
chosen because they contain all of the characters that were needed for the 
study in both Traditional and Simplified versions.
Pilot work explored the characteristics of the character strings across the 
two writing systems, to achieve a level of difficulty for the Chinese materi-
al that was appropriate for both non-Chinese and Chinese participants. Ini-
tially four characters were tested, as this number showed evidence of font 
tuning in a previous study with Latin fonts [Dyson, 2014]. However, this 
number was found to be too difficult for the average non-Chinese reader 
and the Chinese strings were reduced to three characters, whilst retaining 
four Latin characters. We decided that three characters would not be too 
great a deviation from the four used in the Latin version because Chinese 
characters tend to be more complex in nature. The experimental proce-
dure, adjusting the rate of presentation (see below), ensured that the Chi-
nese version would not be too easy for Chinese readers. Latin fonts were 
presented in 36 point (in line with previous work) and Chinese in 24 point. 
Equating the average height of Chinese characters with the x-height of the 
two Latin fonts results in a size of around 18 points. This was increased 
to 24 point to cater for the difficulty experienced by non-Chinese readers.
Latin 4-character strings were created from 26 lowercase letters, ran-
domly generated with no repeat characters per string, and meaningful 
combinations were removed. There were 400 same character and 400 dif-
ferent character strings from which items were selected at random for each 
participant. Trials (pairs of strings) were evenly split between same and 
different fonts, and same and different characters. 
Given the vast number of Chinese characters (character sets for Tra-
ditional and Simplified Chinese fonts range from 6,000 to 13,000 charac-
ters), we decided to use the 581 most frequently used characters in pub-
lishing, mass media, and the Internet [Wang, 2006]. These were converted 
from Simplified to Traditional by the second author to create two sets. The 
3-character strings were randomly generated and the same constraints ap-
plied as with Latin, i.e. no repeat character and no meaningful sequences. 
Figure 4: Example fonts used in two experiments, shown at 50% point size.

200
Digital fonts and reading
1.2.4   Procedure
Experiment 1 was run on a Dell Latitude D820 laptop with a TFT-LCD of 
8.7″ by 13.56″ and a diagonal of 15.4″, set to a resolution of 1280 × 800 
(96dpi). Experiment 2 was run on a Dell Optiplex 755 computer, with a 
Dell 10.5″ by 18.75″ LCD monitor (21.5″ diagonal) attached to it, set to a 
resolution of 1280 × 800 (96dpi). E-Prime software controlled the timing 
and presentation of material, recorded responses, and provided feedback 
on the accuracy of responses.
Participants were shown two strings of 3 (Chinese) or 4 (Latin) charac-
ters, each followed by a mask made up of other letters (see Figures 5 and 
6). The mask was used to halt the processing of the character string. The 
task was to determine whether the strings contained the same characters 
or different characters; where characters were different, just one character 
was changed. Participants responded by using a rating scale from ‘sure 
same’, ‘same’ to ‘different’ and ‘sure different’ using four keys on the key-
board (‘A’, ‘S’, ‘K’, ‘L’). This scale allows the participant to adopt differ-
ent criteria reflecting confidence in their decision. They were encouraged 
to use all four responses and received feedback on the accuracy of their 
response with either a green tick or a red cross. Although participants were 
told that the fonts would change they were told to ignore this.
To equate the level of difficulty across participants, the duration of 
strings was adjusted based on the results of two practice blocks. In the first 
practice block sets of strings were displayed at 4 different times. These 
times were set according to the difficulty of the specific task for the group 
of participants, i.e. non-Chinese readers started much slower for Chinese 
characters than Latin. The set where the participant had the most correct 
responses then determined the display time for the start of the next practice 
block. During this second practice block the display time was decreased 
using a staircase adjustment. This aimed to identify the duration for each 
participant that resulted in a performance level of around 75% (i.e. mid-
way between chance and perfect performance).
In Experiment 1, non-Chinese readers started with Latin, and Chinese 
readers with Chinese, i.e. starting with the more familiar writing system. 
The Chinese readers were asked whether they were more familiar with 
Simplified or Traditional characters prior to the test and did the version 
containing those characters; all chose Simplified (most participants were 

201
How does expertise contribute to the recognition of Latin and Chinese characters? 
Figure 5: Sequence of screens for Chinese Traditional characters where font is the same 
but characters are different: correct response is different.
Figure 6: Sequence of screens for Latin characters where font and characters are 
different: correct response is different.

202
Digital fonts and reading
from mainland China). All Non-Chinese participants did the Simplified 
version because this was considered to be an easier task as characters are 
visually less complex. Their practice blocks were extended after pilot 
work indicated that the task was difficult and more practice would avoid 
results at chance level (i.e. guessing). 
In Experiment 2, as participants were bilingual, half started with Latin 
and half with Chinese, and all Traditional characters.
Both experiments comprised the same number of 4 blocks of 48 trials 
in Latin and in Chinese characters. 
1.3   Results
Accuracy of responses and reaction times (RT) were measured. A discrim-
ination index p(A) was calculated to determine accuracy as this measures 
sensitivity and is independent of response bias. Scores range from 0.5 
(chance performance) to 1.0 (perfect discrimination). Performance was 
compared on same and different fonts, and also congruent versus incon-
gruent trials. All graphs include standard errors of the mean bars indicating 
the variability among participants.
1.3.1   Experiment 1
The three groups of participants were analyzed separately and the results 
are summarized below. 
1.3.1.1   Non-Chinese readers, designers
An analysis of variance of the discrimination scores revealed a main ef-
fect of font tuning (F (1,11) = 10.44, p = 0.008, η2 = .45), and writing system 
(F(1,11) = 50.05, p<0.0001, η2 = .82). As illustrated in Figure 7, same fonts 
are more accurate than different fonts; Latin characters are discriminated 
more accurately than Chinese, as would be expected. 
The interaction between font tuning and writing system (F(1,11) = 3.65, 
p = 0.08, η2 = .25) was not significant, although the effect size is large. Post hoc 
comparisons using Student-Newman-Keuls of same versus different fonts in 
each writing system confirm that same fonts are more accurately discriminat-
ed than different fonts with Chinese characters (p<0.05), but not Latin. 

203
How does expertise contribute to the recognition of Latin and Chinese characters? 
Figure 7: Average discrimination scores for two writing systems comparing same and 
different font pairs.
Figure 8: Average discrimination scores for two writing systems comparing congruent 
and incongruent font pairs.
Figure 9: Average discrimination scores for two writing systems comparing congruent 
and incongruent font pairs.

204
Digital fonts and reading
Overall, Chinese characters, were responded to more quickly than 
Latin characters (F1,11) = 24.53, p = 0.0004, η2 = .69), but there were no 
differences in RT for same versus different fonts. 
When analyzed in relation to congruence, no differences were found in 
accuracy or RT for congruent versus incongruent pairs. 
1.3.1.2   Non-Chinese readers, non-designers
There were no significant differences between same and different font 
pairs in non-designers, but a main effect of congruency (F(1,11) = 6.78, 
p = 0.025, η2 =.38) and writing system (F(1,11) = 43.21, p<0.0001, η2 = .80). 
The interaction between congruency and writing system is not significant 
(F(1,11) = 1.0, p = 0.34, η2 =.08). The results are shown in Figure 8. Unlike 
with designers, Chinese characters were not responded to more quickly 
than Latin. 
1.3.1.3   Chinese readers, non-designers
There were no significant differences between same and different font 
pairs with Chinese non-designers, and no significant effects of congru-
ency. However, the non-significant interaction between congruency and 
writing system has a large effect size (F(1,11) = 3.23, p = 0.1, η2 =.23) As 
shown in Figure 9, post hoc comparison of Latin characters reveal a signif-
icant difference between congruent and incongruent (p = 0.034), not found 
in Chinese. There were no RT differences. 
1.3.2   Experiment 2
1.3.2.1   Chinese readers, designers
There were no significant differences for accuracy or RT when comparing 
same and different fonts or congruency.
1.3.2.2   Chinese readers, non-designers
As with designers, there were also no significant differences.

205
How does expertise contribute to the recognition of Latin and Chinese characters? 
1.3.3   Combining Experiments 1 and 2
Analyzing both experiments together, bilinguals (Hong Kong and UK 
participants) were more accurate than UK monolinguals, (F(1,56)=27.87, 
p<0.0001, η2=.33) and Chinese characters were less accurately discrimi-
nated (F(1,56)=45.99, p<0.0001, η2=.45). As expected, these results were 
primarily due to less accurate performance by monolinguals with Chinese 
characters, resulting in a significant interaction between writing system 
and reading expertise (F(1,56)=38.71, p<0.0001, η2=.41). 
An unanticipated outcome, illustrated in Figure 10, was a significant 
interaction between writing system and typeface expertise (F(1,56)=5.70, 
p=0.025, η2=.09). There is a greater difference between the writing sys-
tems in non-designers.
 Figure 10: Average discrimination scores for designers and non-designers comparing two 
writing systems.
Figure 11: Average discrimination scores for designers and non-designers, according to 
reading expertise, comparing same and different font pairs.

206
Digital fonts and reading
There was also an interaction between font tuning, reading expertise, 
and typeface expertise (F(1,56) =4.32,p = 0.042, η2 =.07) illustrated in Fig-
ure 11, which confirms the difference in outcomes between Experiments 1 
and 2. 
The RT results indicate that Latin characters are responded to more 
slowly (F(1,56) = 7.21, p<0.01, η2 =.11) and there is an interaction between 
writing system and reading expertise with English monolinguals respond-
ing quicker to Chinese characters and slower to Latin, compared to bilin-
guals (F(1,56) = 27.3, p<0.0001, η2 =.33). 
1.4   Discussion
A clear distinction between the two locations emerges from comparing 
Experiments 1 and 2, with no effects of font tuning or congruency with 
Hong Kong participants. The most likely explanation is the level of bilin-
gualism in Hong Kong, compared with UK participants. Although Chi-
nese-reading participants in the UK were also familiar with English, their 
reading expertise is likely to have been less well developed than the Hong 
Kong students. Slower RT for English monolinguals reading Latin charac-
ters may simply be the result of the design of Experiment 1 as these partic-
ipants completed the Latin part of the experiment first, and were therefore 
less familiar with the task. 
The results from Experiment 1 suggest that differences may emerge 
when the writing system is less familiar. The two groups of non-Chinese 
readers processed Chinese characters in a different manner to Latin, pre-
sumably treating them as shapes, rather than meaningful characters. Of 
particular interest, however, is the font tuning effect found with designers 
who have no Chinese reading expertise. This suggests that their typeface 
expertise enables them to identify the stylistic regularities across same font 
trials which facilitate discrimination of shapes. The definition of exper-
tise in letter perception, adopted by Gauthier et al., [2008], may therefore 
require refining to include not only expert readers, but also those who are 
expert in attending to font information. 
 The non-designers without Chinese reading expertise were also influ-
enced by font information, but this served as interference when conflicting 
with the character information (incongruent condition). The characters may 
have been processed as a whole, as suggested by Hsiao and Cottrell [2009], 

207
How does expertise contribute to the recognition of Latin and Chinese characters? 
with the most salient differences being between SimSun and SimHei. This 
may also explain the congruency effect for Chinese readers with ESL when 
viewing Latin characters. Although their discrimination of Latin characters 
is good, their unfamiliarity, relative to Chinese, may have resulted in inter-
ference from font characteristics. 
The only difference in RT within these three groups was designers 
responding more quickly to Chinese characters than Latin, supporting the 
idea that Chinese fonts were processed in a different way to non-designers 
that increased the efficiency of the task. 
The larger difference between the two writing systems in accuracy of 
discrimination for non-designers may reflect the attentional differences 
described above. As design training focuses on stylistic details of fonts, 
UK designers may have benefitted from attending to these aspects of 
Chinese characters, to compensate for lack of reading expertise, whereas 
attending to Latin fonts may have hindered character discrimination. In 
these circumstances, competing manners of expertise may misdirect atten-
tion to less appropriate aspects of the task.
1.5   Conclusion
The results confirm that designers can demonstrate font tuning in a writing 
system they cannot read, and congruency between letter identity and font 
influences performance of non-designers.  
References
Beier, S. and Dyson, M. C. (2014). The influence of serifs on ‘h’ and ‘i’:  
useful knowledge from design-led scientific research. Visible Lang., 47(3),  
pp. 74-95. 
Dyson, M. C. (2014). Applying psychological theory to typography: is how we 
perceive letterforms special?, ed. Machin, D., “Visual Communication, ” 
(De Gruyter Mouton, Berlin) pp. 215-242.
Dyson, M. C. and Stott, C. A. (2012). Characterizing typographic expertise:  
Do we process typefaces like faces? Vis. Cogn. 20(9), pp. 1082-1094. 
Gauthier, I., Wong, A. C.-N., Hayward, W. G. and Cheung, O. S. (2006). Font 
tuning associated with expertise in letter perception. Perception, 35,  
pp. 541-559. 

208
Digital fonts and reading
Ge, L. Z., Wang, Z., McCleery, J. P. and Lee, K. (2006). Activation of face ex-
pertise and the inversion effect. Psychol. Sci., 17(1), pp. 12-16. 
Hsiao, J. H. and Cottrell, G. W. (2009). Not all visual expertise is holistic, but 
it may be leftist: the case of Chinese character recognition, Psychol. Sci., 
20(4), pp. 455-463. 
Lewis, C. and Walker, P. (1989). Typographic influences on reading. Brit. J. 
Psychol., 80(2), pp. 241-257. 
Majaj, N. J., Pelli, D. G., Kurshan, P. and Palomares, M. (2002). The role of 
spatial frequency channels in letter identification. Vision Res., 42(9),  
pp. 1165-1184.
Pelli, D. G. and Tillman, K. A. (2007). Parts, wholes, and context in reading: a triple 
dissociation. PLoS ONE, 2(8), pp. e680. 
Pelli, D. G., Burns, C. W., Farell, B. and Moore-Page, D. C. (2006). Feature 
detection and letter identification. Vision Res., 46(28), pp. 4646–4674. 
Richler, J. J., Cheung, O. S. and Gauthier, I. (2011). Holistic processing predicts 
face recognition. Psychol. Sci., 22(4), pp. 464-471. 
Sanocki, T. (1987). Visual knowledge underlying letter perception: font-specific 
schematic tuning. J. Exp. Psychol. Human, 13(2), pp. 267-278. 
Sanocki, T. and Dyson, M. C. (2012). Letter processing and font information 
during reading: Beyond distinctiveness, where vision meets design. Atten. 
Percept. Psycho., 74(1), pp. 132-145. 
Wang, Y. Q. (2006). Chinese characters 581 (The Language & Culture Press, 
Beijing). 
Wong, A. C. N., Bukach, C. M., Hsiao, J., Greenspon, E., Ahern, E., Duan, Y. 
and Lui, K. F. H. (2012). Holistic processing as a hallmark of perceptual 
expertise for nonface categories including Chinese characters. J. Vision, 
12(13), pp. 1-15. 
Wong, A. C. N., Bukach, C. M., Yuen, C., Yang, L., Leung, S. and Greenspon, 
E. (2011). Holistic processing of words modulated by reading experience. 
PLoS ONE, 6(6), pp. e20753. 

209
Chapter 12
Newspaper text
Lucie Lacava
This chapter examines the many factors to be considered in the selection of a text font for a 
newspaper. Following a brief look back at the history of newspapers, it explores the process 
of font selection, from the initial visual considerations, to the paper quality and the print-
ing tests which are critical in determining whether the font is fit to print. The relationship 
between the personality of the font and the demographics of its future readership will also 
be explored. The central aim of this chapter is to show that, once carefully selected and test-
ed, design must be used to further improve the readability of text. The correlation between 
the size of the font, the column width, and the hyphenation and justification greatly affect 
the readability or comprehension of the text. From theory to practice; two newspaper text 
case studies, one in English, the other in Arabic, will be discussed.
1.1   Introduction
When I first entered the world of newspapers back in the early 80s, the 
common mantra was that there were only a handful of newspaper text 
faces good enough to be used in newsprint. This statement no longer rings 
true since the last twenty years have been rather prolific in the creation 
of text fonts custom-designed for specific newspapers. Unfortunately, we 
may have reached the end of this era, since newspapers are no longer in-
vesting in advancing the quality of the print product alone, unless it is part 
of the big picture and benefits all of the new digital platforms.
Looking back at the history of news publications, it is difficult to pin-
point which text fonts were designed specifically for print, but certainly 
worth mentioning are: Century created for Century Magazine in 1894, and 
Ionic No. 5 introduced by Linotype, which made its first appearance in the 
Evening News of Newark, N.J. in 1926, and was soon adopted by 3,000 
newspapers across the US after only 18 months [Anon, 1995].
It seems that we ought to give much credit to England for advancing the 
quality of typography in newspapers; The London Gazette, first published 
in Oxford in 1665, considered by many historians to be the first English 

210
Digital fonts and reading
newspaper [Andrlik, 2014], used Garamond as text font. It eventually 
made its way to the American colonies as the official newspaper published 
by his majesty King Charles II. Garamond, and the Old Style Galardes, 
became the most popular text fonts used in newspapers until the turn of 
the century. This is not surprising since it was considered to be among the 
most legible serif typefaces for use in print. Later in 1932, Times New 
Roman was developed for The Times of London. There is some contro-
versy surrounding the origin of the design of Times New Roman. It may or 
may not have been the first text font commissioned specifically for usage 
in a newspaper. Either way, it is certainly the most famous, and worth a 
second look. Even though it promises to be a fascinating topic, we will not 
dwell on it in this chapter.
For reasons unrelated to its origins, Times New Roman continues to be 
one of the most popular, recognizable, and widely used text fonts today. 
Perpetuated by the fact that it has been made easily available as default in 
many operating systems such as Mac OS X, and MS Windows, teachers 
from senior school are known to have repeatedly asked that assignments 
be printed using none other than Times New Roman, as is the text in  
this book. 
1.2   Fonts and demographics
By the 1900s, magazines were expensive to produce and distribute, but 
also the content was of interest mostly to a wealthy demographic. On the 
other hand, newspapers, whose readership was predominantly male, were 
accessible as a mass medium. Thirteen years after Times New Roman 
first appeared in The Times of London, Peggy Lang appraised its true 
worth in a periodical ‘Times Roman: A Revaluation’ [Lang, 1946]. Of 
particular interest in the article is her reference to the MEMORANDUM 
ON A PROPOSAL TO REVISE THE TYPOGRAPHY OF THE TIMES 
prepared in 1930 by Mr. Stanley Morison, which begins by describing the 
qualities of the proposed editorial text and heading fonts, and the nature of 
the reading public of THE TIMES back then. 

211
Newspaper text
‘It cannot be denied that the approval of such readers will be found if it be shown 
that… the new typography is worthy of THE TIMES—masculine, English, direct, 
simple, not more novel than it behoveth to be novel, or more novel than logic is 
novel in newspaper typography and absolutely free from faddishness and frivolity.’ 
[Lang, 1946]
One can deduce from the above excerpt the importance given to the 
reader and Morison’s perception of how the institution, the quality of the 
content, and the typography must be functional, as opposed to ornate, and 
most importantly reflect a sense of national pride. Three generations later, 
all of these attributes still ring true in the selection of a newspaper font, 
except for the ‘masculine’ remark. Today’s newspapers, unless aimed at 
a niche market, are designed to appeal to male and female alike. Lang 
continues to describe the painstakingly detailed process, which can serve 
as a template for future generations. 
Today a serif font is universally used as newspaper text. The classic 
traits of a modern newspaper text typeface are: narrow width, increased 
x-height, small cap-height, open counters, robust serifs, reduced stroke 
contrast, and looser spacing.
I took part in a legibility study in 1990: a joint effort organized by The 
Poynter Institute, FL, and the Font Bureau, MA, where a number of text 
fonts using identical settings were printed on seven different newspaper 
presses at different institutions across the continent. The results were an 
eye opener for me since the same text could range from extremely legible 
to almost illegible from one newspaper to the next depending on paper 
quality, inking, and the printing process.
A great lesson learned from the above experience was to select a hand-
ful of potential text fonts and always run a series of print tests at the same 
location where they would be printed from. One should never assume that 
the latest release would fit the bill. 
I had the opportunity and privilege to work with world renowned type 
designers on several occasions where I commissioned custom text fonts 
for specific newspaper projects. Among the most popular today would be 
Chronicle, originally designed by Hoefler & Frere-Jones for the Toronto 
Star. Chronicle Text has since evolved into four grades of Roman, which 
are progressively more robust to accommodate different degrees of inking 
on the presses.

212
Digital fonts and reading
A budget allotted for custom-designed newspaper text fonts is increas-
ingly rare. Only for certain high profile redesigns or ‘refresh’ as we prefer 
calling them today, might a publisher agree to invest in an entire family 
custom-designed for a specific title. After all, type is in the DNA of the 
brand, as the logo alone does not make the brand.
1.3   Case Study 1: the Baltimore Sun redesign
The Baltimore Sun redesign of 2005 was one of those special projects. At 
the onset of the redesign it was agreed by the powers that be (and the rede-
sign committee) that we would be commissioning custom fonts. I invited 
Jean François Porchez to propose a series of sketches for text and display 
typography. Porchez was a great fit since he had previously designed a 
series of extra condensed Didones, which had some affinities with the dis-
play faces in use at the time, and had designed text faces for Le Monde in 
France. It is always wise to carry over some distinctive visual elements 
from the previous design, and keep some familiarity with the old for the 
reader’s sake and comfort. Furthermore I had seen Porchez speak at the 
Association Typographique Internationale (ATypI)  conference in Vancou-
ver, and was particularly interested in his theory on how the diagonal stress 
of the lower case round characters accelerated the reading of text. The man-
date given to Porchez was to design a series of display Didones, and a 
matching text family. 
Figure 1: Mencken headline, deck and text as it appeared on newsprint.

213
Newspaper text
‘Mencken is a Didone for the 21st Century’ Jean François Porchez  
Looking back at the first half of the 1900s, typographers in North Amer-
ica had adopted Bodoni as the universal style for newspaper headlines. 
Because of the high contrast between the thicks and thins Bodoni was con-
sidered to be one of the most beautiful and elegant fonts of all time, it 
combined aesthetic appeal with high legibility on newsprint. On the other 
hand, a modern newspaper text font must have even strokes; however, I 
personally welcome a little more contrast in the letterform. The inking on 
newsprint usually makes a text face appear bolder, and fuzzier. The contrast 
in the letter strokes would actually act as an inkwell, resulting in a sharper 
crisper appearance on paper. An inkwell (or inktrap) is usually found in 
type designed specifically for agate. A deeper or exaggerated angle is cre-
ated where the strokes of a letter meet, allowing the ink to fill the triangle 
in between, resulting in a sharper corner after printing (Figure 2). 
Type designer Christian Schwartz explains below his inspiration behind 
Amplitude, and how inktraps work on newsprint.
‘In [design] school, I often used Matthew Carter’s Bell Centennial, originally 
designed for telephone directories, as a display face. I liked the striking and 
unique forms created by the ‘ink traps’, spaces carved out where strokes 
converged that would later be filled in by the expansion of ink on paper. Without 
these notches, forms would fill in to the point of illegibility. While I was working 
at Font Bureau, we had a lot of newspaper projects come through the studio, and 
Figure 2: Amplitude, by Christian Schwartz.

214
Digital fonts and reading
I got some hands-on experience with the specific demands of printing small type 
on absorbent  paper. Amplitude is a reaction to these two factors, and is essentially 
an agate face  drawn for display. However, the inktraps function as more than a 
stylistic quirk on  paper, and keep the typeface legible on newsprint at all sizes.’ 
[Schwartz, n.d.]  
My theory is that having a little more contrast between the strokes of a 
text font will have a similar effect to inktraps. Sharpness and extra contrast 
are qualities I look for in newspaper text faces.
When possible, it is preferable to keep text and display in the same 
serif family, resulting in a more harmonious transition, and a subtle but 
uniform look throughout (Figure 1). 
Porchez named the new text font after Henry Louis Mencken (1880-
1956), renowned American journalist, editor and columnist for The Sun, 
and known typophile. According to the London Daily Mail, ‘Mencken 
ventured beyond the typewriter into the world of typography, because he 
felt Americans did not recognize irony when they read it, he proposed the 
creation of a special typeface to be called ironics, with the text slanting in 
the opposite direction from italic types, to indicate the author’s humour.’ 
[ZeCraft, n.d.]
The previous custom fonts in The Baltimore Sun had been in place 
since the mid-nineties, and according to reader surveys were a main point 
Figure 3: Sun text (top), Mencken text (bottom) occupies the same width but has a larger 
x-height resulting in improved legibility at smaller point sizes.

215
Newspaper text
of dissatisfaction. Generally newspaper readers do not like to change their 
reading habits, and changing the text font of a newspaper is guaranteed 
to cause reaction. It is always recommended to make the text face bigger, 
or at least ‘appear bigger’ when replacing the text font. Porchez designed 
Mencken Text to be slightly more condensed than the previous text font, 
but with a larger x-height, and slightly bolder, making letter forms appear 
bigger and therefore more legible, without taking up valuable extra line 
space (Figure 3).
Porchez describes below what makes Mencken a good newspaper type-
face. Of particular interest to me is his theory of the ‘oblique axis’ which I 
would describe as an aerodynamic design feature which accelerates the eye 
movement from one letter to the next, giving the text a gentle lift resulting 
in a faster read (Figure 4 and 5).
‘Mencken Text …is a low contrast Transitional-style typeface designed with an 
oblique axis, an emphasis on horizontals and possesses open counters. The Text 
family features more Didonesque [Didot is a typical french typeface from the end 
of 18th century] capitals to harmonise with the Head versions... ’ [ZeCraft, n.d.]
‘The first feature is probably a large x-height, strategies to cut small size with 
more open counters, reducing contrast in the distribution of weight, meanwhile 
increasing the features of the typeface in order to make key details still visible 
when very small…
...Based on my experience with Le Monde oblique typeface, I decided to change 
the main characteristics of Mencken for small sizes: the axis move to oblique, 
weight contrast is reduced, ending stroke opened (compare “e”) to increase the 
legibility. Newspapers faces are a real challenge today. To fight the narrow effect 
in text face, the best is to play with proportions of the various letters: Increasing a 
bit some widths, reducing others, depending on the language you’re working on. 
This way, you can lie to readers about the real general narrowness of a typeface, 
because of the variations in widths, you created a rhythm, a modulation who help 
to maintain a sort of fluidity, very important to read easily.’a
a	 Interview with Tim Ahrens, Questions Design, 27 January 2007

216
Digital fonts and reading
Once the beta version of the text font has been tested and approved, 
then comes the designer’s work of setting the right point size and leading 
based on the column width, followed by the ‘h&j’ or hyphenation and 
justification. Software programs such as InDesign and Quark Xpress allow 
for very sophisticated spacing features. Still, a designer will require sever-
al days if not weeks of adjusting by infinite decimals the space between the 
words and within the words, the ‘m or the n width’ of the indents, and the 
Figure 4: Characteristics are different depending on their size of use. Comparison of 
Mencken text and display. 


Newspaper text
OHDGLQJMXVWWRJHWWKHULJKWHYHQJUD\IURPWKHWH[W6HH)LJXUHDDQGE
IRUDQH[DPSOHRIWKH%DOWLPRUH6XQEHIRUHDQGDIWHUWKHUHGHVLJQ
Today, more broadsheet newspapers are moving to a narrower web 
ZLGWKDQGDUHDGRSWLQJÀXVKOHIWRUUDJJHGWH[WWR¿WWKHVOLPPHUFROXPQV
and avoid ‘rivers’. Rivers are white space created by having wide gaps 
between words on multiple consecutive lines, when the type is set too big 
for the width of the column.
2WKHUIDFWRUVWKDWFDQDIIHFWOHJLELOLW\DUHZLGRZVDQGRUSKDQV²VLQ-
gle words found at the bottom of a paragraph or at the top of a column. 
These create unwanted white space. Too many consecutive hyphens at the 
end of lines within a column can also be annoying to the reader. Given the 
option, I prefer more hyphens versus bad word spacing; of course copy 
editing can remedy most of these issues.
Figure 5: The oblique axis of the text speeds up the eye movement; the large x-height 
LQFUHDVHVOHJLELOLW\DQGWKHGLGRQHVTXHDI¿QLWLHVZLWKWKHGLVSOD\RIIHUDKDUPRQLRXV
reading experience in the transition from headline to text.

218
Digital fonts and reading
Figure 6a: the Baltimore Sun: before.

219
Newspaper text
Figure 6b: the Baltimore Sun: after.

220
Digital fonts and reading
1.4   Case Study 2: Al Ittihad redesign
The most challenging project in my career to date has to be Al Ittihad. This 
political daily newspaper is one of the leading and most highly regarded 
newspapers in the United Arab Emirates. Following the successful launch 
of The National in 2008, a startup based in Abu Dhabi, I was invited by 
the Editor to critique its sister paper Al Ittihad located a couple of floors 
up in the same building.
Al Ittihad is the oldest Arabic language newspaper in the Emirates. 
During my critique I said, among other things, that the headlines and text 
must have been difficult to read, no pun intended, since I had no knowl-
edge of Arabic whatsoever. My observations were based on the fact that 
the headlines had been horizontally scaled, a technique used to squeeze 
more words per line, which has the negative effect of distorting the let-
terforms, while the text font seemed to be filling in at the counters, for 
example the bowls of letters resembling the lower case e in script. The 
Editor agreed with my critique and gave me the contract to redesign the 
entire paper including display and text fonts. The mandate was to redesign 
the oldest Arabic newspaper in the UAE, while respecting tradition.
First I had to take a crash course in Arabic type design, not literally, 
but had to do enough research to fully understand the different styles and 
their origins. I was lucky to have been introduced to Patrick Giasson, who 
worked for Monotype in London at the time. 
I was immediately drawn to Kufi, for headlines, because of its geomet-
ric clean and modern appearance, (ironically, Kufic is one of the oldest 
Arabic styles) comparable to Futura or Helvetica. While the Naskh, a serif 
like font, seemed more appropriate for text.
Giasson explained through several sketches and email exchanges the 
differences between the various styles. For text settings and immersive 
reading, most publications in the Arabic language use modulated fonts, 
and predominantly in a simplified version of the Naskh style. 
Other styles, particularly Kufi, are also in common usage, but in a dif-
ferent context. The geometric simplicity of the Kufi style conveys a con-
temporary, ‘modern’ essence. Therefore it is now quite commonly used for 
headlines in contemporary publishing (magazines rather than newspapers). 
The text typeface which had been used by the newspaper up to that 
point was a very conventional design with very soft letter shapes and very 

221
Newspaper text
modest counter shapes which tended to fill in even at normal text size. Its 
soft design and light weight gave it a weak presence on the page. 
Submitting a text typeface with more open counter shapes and a more 
geometric flavour seemed logical and ideal; the new design improved leg-
ibility and had a sturdier presence on the page. 
The more angular and clearly defined design of the characters also 
gave more tonality to the text while still striking a good balance between 
conventional design and a contemporary modulation. 
Giving strong angularity to the characters achieved two goals, at the 
micro- and macro- levels. Firstly, the deeply incised counter shapes would 
act as ink traps at small sizes. Secondly, the angularity of the design would 
also echo and harmonise with the confident geometry and tapered finials 
of both the Headline typefaces and the Sections typeface. 
In so doing a stylistic consistency could be kept in the typographic 
palette of the newspaper, from the largest elements of the Sections titles, 
through the Headlines and down to the smallest text settings.
 During a process which lasted 14 months, we introduced four custom 
designed Arabic typefaces. These modern display faces form a strong link 
with the paper’s Islamic heritage. The end result was greater legibility of 
the text, and an evolutionary redesign, acclaimed both inside and outside 
the newsroom.
Once the proposed text A was approved (Figure 7), Giasson made fur-
ther adjustments to improve the text (Figure 8).
Since compact leading can result in clashes of small marks above tall 
ascending letters, shortened versions of tall letters with small marks were 
created to avoid the risk of collision with low descending letters from the 
line above. Creating a more regular global line height results in less disrup-
tion in reading flow. Giasson’s horizontally compact design is space saving, 
allowing more words per line than a typical Arabic newspaper typeface.
In Arabic, several letters share the base shape and are only differenti-
ated by dots’ number and position. In Ittihad Text, markedly larger dots 
than average text typefaces offer clearer letter differentiation therefore 
increased legibility even at very small sizes such as finance/sports listings 
and agate (Figure 9).

222
Digital fonts and reading
However, the narrow space-saving proportions of the characters of Itti-
had Text + large dot size for increased legibility could result in potential dot 
collisions with other dots or base letters. To address this, Giasson reviewed 
all letter combinations.
Careful adjustment of dot position to ensure good legibility and avoid 
dot collisions were done via OpenType coding, i.e. automatic adjustment 
as the line is composed, so users do not need to make manual adjustments. 
8$( QHZVSDSHUV XVH /DWLQ QXPHUDO FKDUDFWHUV7KH /DWLQ QXPHUDOV
usually stand out from the Arabic text; in their usual structure, the weight 
distribution emphasizes the vertical strokes. Pen-derived Arabic scripts, 
such as Naskh, are modulated on a more horizontal stress. To remedy this, 
Giasson created numerals with weight emphasis on the horizontal strokes, 
WREHWWHUEOHQGKDUPRQL]HZLWKWKH$UDELFVFULSW)LJXUH
Newspaper redesigns have the reputation of introducing white space 
to the detriment of the written word. The new Ittihad text did not require 
any additional editing or trimming of stories, while offering an improved 
reader experience.
)LJXUH&XUUHQWDQGSURSRVHGWH[WFRPSDULVRQ3URSRVDO$ZDVVHOHFWHG

223
Newspaper text
Figure 8: Final text sample.

224
Digital fonts and reading
1.5   Conclusion
Since writing this chapter, my faith in the creation and proliferation of new 
text faces for newspapers has been renewed. During the past few months I 
have been working on a newspaper project in South East Asia. Thanks to a 
generous budget, and the need for a common look and feel across all plat-
forms, I was able to commission an extensive custom serif family, which 
includes text, allowing me to gather fresh information for my next chapter 
on newspaper fonts.
Figure 9: Larger dots offer clearer letter differentiation.
Figure 10: Roman numerals harmonize with Arabic text.

225
Newspaper text
References
Ahrens, T., Questions Design, 27 January 2007
Anon (1995) Customized type makes new Sun easier to read. The Baltimore 
Sun, http://articles.baltimoresun.com/1995-09-18/news/1995261066_1_
text-type-new-sun-ionic, accessed 21 May 2015
Andrlik, T. (2014) London Gazette: the Crown’s official mouthpiece. http://allth-
ingsliberty.com/2014/02/london-gazette/, accessed 21 May 2015
Lang, P. (1946). Times Roman: A Revaluation In Alphabet and Image 2. ( Shen-
val Press, London).
Schwartz, C. (n.d.) Amplitude. http://www.christianschwartz.com/amplitude.
shtml, accessed 21 May 2015.
ZeCraft (n.d.) Online at http://www.zecraft.com/fonts/Mencken, accessed 21 
May 2015.

226
Chapter 13
Perception of fonts:  
perceived personality traits and 
appropriate uses
Dawn Shaikh and Barbara Chaparro
This chapter discusses the personality traits of onscreen typefaces and the perceived appro-
priateness of typefaces for a variety of onscreen document types including website ads, 
written assignments, email, résumés, spreadsheets, and web pages. Results from two stud-
ies will be discussed. In Study 1 participants rated the perception of 40 typefaces’ person-
alities using 15 semantic differential scales. The results of a factor analysis revealed three 
correlated factors named Potency, Evaluative, and Activity based on Osgood, Suci and 
Tannenbaum [1957] that explain the perception of onscreen typeface personalities. Potency 
describes the ruggedness and masculinity of a typeface, Evaluative describes the perceived 
beauty and value of a typeface, and Activity describes the excitement, loudness, and speed 
of a typeface. Comparison of semantic differential charts for serif, san serif, display, and 
script typefaces revealed the serif and san serif typefaces to be neutral across factors; the 
bolder, blockier display typefaces were perceived as more Potent, more Evaluative; and the 
script typefaces were perceived as less Potent, more Evaluative, and less active. In Study 2, 
typeface appropriateness was evaluated for a variety of document types. General findings 
imply that for documents such as website ads, the most appropriate typefaces are those that 
have personalities congruent with the featured product’s personality. For all other onscreen 
documents the most appropriate typefaces were those that were higher on Potency and 
Evaluative than Activity, and higher in perceived legibility.
1.1   Introduction
Standing at any bus stop or sitting in any airport terminal one quickly notic-
es that reading from a screen is now the norm. According to a 2014 study 
by Mary Meeker of Kleiner Perkins, Americans spend approximately five 
hours a day in front of a computer, smartphone, or tablet; the Chinese aver-
age 6.5 hours a day in front of these devices [Epstein, 2014]. In Canada, 
folks who own a smartphone claim to spend 86% of their time consuming 
information on a screen [The Globe and Mail, 2014]. Newsfeeds warn of 
email apnea, distracted driving, and electronic screen syndrome. All sig-

227
Perception of fonts: perceived personality traits and appropriate uses
nals point to the fact that consumers are spending more and more time 
staring at screens. 
With screen-based information consumption on the rise, typeface de-
sign has shifted from print to screen focus. Services like Google Fonts and 
TypeKit popularized the concept of web fonts and quickly brought propri-
etary and open source typefaces to screens. Google’s Open Sans (by Steve 
Matteson), Roboto (by Christian Robertson), and Droid Sans/Serif (by 
Steve Matteson) were specifically designed for use on screens. According 
to Google Fonts, these three typeface families receive approximately 90 
trillion views monthly [Google.com, 2014]. Microsoft’s Advanced Reading 
Technologies team has pioneered fonts for screens through their ClearType 
efforts and most recently the release of Sitka, by Matthew Carter, for the 
Internet Explorer 11 reading view featured in Windows 8.1 [Blogs.msdn.
com, 2014]. Sitka is the first Microsoft-designed typeface ‘with scientific 
legibility studies integrated directly into the design process’ [Blogs.msdn.
com, 2014].
Onscreen typeface research often focuses on legibility and layout is-
sues. This chapter focuses on the perception of onscreen typefaces - in 
terms of personality and the perceived appropriateness of typefaces for var-
ious document types [Shaikh, 2007].
1.1.1   Semantic differential scale
The application of the semantic differential scale (SDS) to typeface con-
notation research has become a standard. Since the introduction of SDS 
in 1957, 15 of the 20 studies reviewed employed some variation of SDS. 
The number of semantic scales (adjective pairs such as good/bad, old‐fash-
ioned/modern, etc) used in these studies varied from 10 to 28. Osgood et 
al. [1957] defined semantic meaning as ‘the relation of signs to their sig-
nificance’ (p. 3). The semantic differential ‘relates to the functioning of 
representational processes in language behavior and hence may serve as an 
index of these processes’ (p. 9). In his seminal text, Osgood justified the use 
of the semantic differential scale as follows – to allow us to use 
‘linguistic encoding as an index of meaning we need (a) a carefully devised 
sample of alternative verbal responses which can be standardized across 
subjects, (b) these alternatives to be elicited from subjects rather than emitted so 
that encoding fluency is eliminated as a variable, and (c) these alternatives to be 
representative of the major ways in which meanings vary’ (p. 19).

228
Digital fonts and reading
Researchers use a 7‐point scale to allow participants to judge both 
direction and intensity of their responses. The semantic differential pro-
vides participants with the concept (e.g., a sample of type) and a set of 
bipolar adjectives on a scale that has varying points of intensity.
In repeated tests of SDS, Osgood et al. [1957] consistently found three 
factors to explain the meaning of various stimuli: evaluative, potency, 
and activity. The names of the factors were based on the highest loading 
scale and have become the standard factors to explain semantic meaning. 
Osgood et al. reported that SDS will work with virtually any concept: 
personality traits, sonar signals, aesthetics, advertising, politics, mass 
communication, and art. Other researchers have applied SDS to typeface 
personality, writing sample evaluations, art, advertisements, and much 
more. The evaluative factor measures worth of items (good/bad, beautiful/
ugly). The potency factor indicates the strength or power of items being 
judged (strong/weak). The activity factor implies the action level of the 
stimuli (active/passive, fast/slow).
1.1.2   Semantic differentials scales and typeface  
connotation research
The use of adjectives scales to rate typefaces was first done by Ovink 
[1938] who used adjectives such as force, strength, precision, fineness, 
warmth, and comfort. Participants rated the typefaces on a 5‐point scale 
denoting how appropriately the typeface represented the idea. His analy-
ses resulted in three categories of typeface connotation: (1) luxury/refine-
ment, (2)  economy/precision, and (3)  strength. 
The idea of using semantic differential scales (SDS) to determine type-
face connotations is attributed to J. Brinton [1961]. SDS use a 7‐point 
scale with bipolar adjective pairs as anchors. The methodology (or some 
variation of it) quickly became popular in this area of research and has 
been used by 15 of the 20 reported typeface personality studies since 1961.
A factor analysis of semantic scale data was first conducted by Tannen-
baum, Jacobson, and Norris [1964]. Based on 25 scales (adjective pairs) 
Tannenbaum et al. found four factors describing typeface personality: 
Evaluation, Potency, Activity, and Complexity. Using a similar methodol-
ogy, Wendt [1968] based his study on a German researcher’s (Hofstätter) 
SDS. Wendt created a typeface‐specific set of scales and subsequently 

229
Perception of fonts: perceived personality traits and appropriate uses
found four factors: (1) weight, strength or firmness v. looseness or laxity, 
(2) tradition, despondency, paltriness v. progress and generosity, (3) order 
and reliability, and (4)  extraordinary v. ordinary. Five factors were iden-
tified by Rowe [1982]. She labeled her factors as Potency, Elegance, 
Novelty, Antiquity, and Evaluation. Similarly, Bartram [1982] evaluated 
type with scales created specifically for type by designers and found four 
factors: Evaluation, Potency, Mood, and Activity. More recently, Hender-
son, Giese, and Cote [2004] used SDS and factor analysis to determine 
‘impressions’ of type which generated four factors: pleasing/displeasing, 
engaging/boring, reassuring/unsettling, and prominent/subtle. Osgood’s 
dimensions of Evaluative, Potency, and Activity formed the basis for a 
2006 study by Doyle and Bottomley. Breaking away from the traditional 
SDS, this study used an 11‐point scale and three single‐item scales. The 
single‐item scales used adjective clusters from Osgood’s dimensions as 
anchors (for example on the positive side of Activity the researchers put 
the adjective cluster active, lively, young, fast and on the negative Activity 
side was a cluster containing passive, still, old, slow). The researchers 
claimed this allowed them to assess the same semantic dimensions without 
as much time investment. However, the use of three single‐item scales 
eliminated the ability to differentiate one typeface’s personality from 
another.
Brumberger’s [2001] study used bipolar adjectives split on their own 
7‐point scale. She established 3 factors describing typeface personality 
which she labeled as elegance, directness, and friendliness. Mackiewicz 
and Moeller [2004] followed Brumberger’s example of not using bipolar 
adjective pairs by correlating personality ratings with subjective com-
ments from participants.
The use of SDS confirms that readers attribute personality traits to 
typefaces. With some level of consistency, Osgood’s dimensions of Eval-
uative, Potency, and Activity show up as constructs to describe typeface 
personalities. 
1.1.3   Addressing methodological concerns with  
previous studies
Two primary methodological concerns were identified with previous type-
face personality studies: stimuli selection and semantic scales.

230
Digital fonts and reading
1.1.3.1   Stimuli 
The most commonly used stimulus has been the alphabet in upper and 
lower case with a set of numbers and sometimes symbols [Tannenbaum 
et al., 1964; Kastl and Child, 1968; Wendt, 1968; Benton, 1979; Bartram, 
1982; Walker et al., 1986; Brumberger, 2001; Mackiewicz and Moeller, 
2004; Shaikh et al., 2006]. The problem with using the alphabet is that it 
does not adequately represent the visual pattern of words and continuous 
text. The letter combination ‘uvw’ does not occur in text but only as a pat-
tern in the English alphabet. The use of the alphabet removes any ‘effect 
created by the visual pattern of the letters’ [Morrison, 1986, p. 237]. The 
need for realistic strings of text is reinforced by Matthew Carter: ‘A letter 
only has properties relative to the letters around it’ [as cited by Boser, 
2003, p. 46]. Other researchers have used text from the Declaration of 
Independence [Poffenberger and Franken, 1923], the quote ‘Now is the 
time for all good men…’ [Davis and Smith, 1933], the letters NRESTA 
[Tantillo et al., 1995], and unspecified lines of text [Brinton, 1961]. Such 
famous text samples invoke connotations for many users and may vary 
depending on age and related demographics. Morrison [1986] and Ovink 
[1938] avoided the alphabet and meaningful text by using samples that 
were a third‐degree approximation to English [Morrison] or nonsense text 
[Ovink]. 
The studies presented below rely on third-degree approximation to 
English. Such text appears to be English by mimicking the visual patterns 
of the language but has no meaningful content. Third-degree approxima-
tion to English ensures that each trigram within a ‘word’ is a combination 
that routinely appears in English (the word eating has the following tri-
grams: eat, ati, tin, and ing). Third-degree approximation also addresses 
the issues of content‐based confounds since it has no inherent meaning.
1.1.3.2   Semantic scales
The selection of semantic scales has varied by study as well. In some cas-
es, the scales are based on Osgood’s [1957] initial research; but in other 
cases, the selection is left up to designers who may not use the same ter-
minology as laypersons. Additionally, some of the studies did not ensure 
that the semantic scales used were connotative in nature. Using terms that 

231
Perception of fonts: perceived personality traits and appropriate uses
are denotative for typefaces can create confounds and factors that are chal-
lenging to explain. Outside of Osgood’s work, which has been applied to a 
variety of areas, no other standard approach exists for choosing the bipolar 
adjectives.
In order to choose semantic scales in our studies, a literature review 
was completed of 20 previous studies. Content analysis was conducted on 
all of the adjectives. The most commonly used adjectives were identified. 
Additionally, guidance was taken from Osgood’s [1957] seminal research 
and recommendation for choosing bipolar adjective pairs:
1.	
Choose approximately three closely‐related scales to represent each factor
2.	
Try to choose scales that load maximally on one factor and minimally on 
other factors
3.	
Choose scales that are relevant to the concept being tested
4.	
Choose scales that are connotative rather than denotative in nature
5.	
Ensure the anchors are considered polar opposites in terms of positive  
and negative
The final scales chosen included at least three scales from the main fac-
tors found in Osgood’s work (evaluative, potency, and activity). The scales 
were used in several typeface studies which indicated they were relevant 
in the field of typeface research and had been established by previous 
work to be bipolar opposites in this context. All scales were connotative in 
nature rather than denotative. 
1.2   Study 1: perceived personality of onscreen typefaces
Typographers routinely describe typefaces using personality descriptors. 
Secrest [1947] labeled Baskerville as ‘a bit of a bore’ and ‘exact and me-
chanical’ while calling Caslon full of ‘quiet dignity’. Roboto, the font en-
countered by one billion Android smartphone users, is described as friend-
ly, ‘like a friend’s handwriting’ [Daily Intelligencer, 2014]. De Groot’s 
Calibri, the default font in Microsoft Office applications, is ‘warm’ and 
‘soft’ [Lucasfonts.com, 2014] (Figure 1). Since typefaces are often similar, 
Secrest speculated that designers must think of typefaces as they think of 
people - by minute distinguishing details and in terms of personalities. 
Do casual consumers of onscreen information consistently attribute such 
personality descriptors to typefaces? 

232
Digital fonts and reading
An online survey using semantic differentials was used to investigate 
this. Responses from 379 participants revealed a consistent approach to 
personifying 40 select onscreen typefaces (see Table 1). 
Table 1: Typefaces evaluated using semantic differential scales.
Figure 1: Baskerville, Caslon, Roboto, and Calibri fonts.

233
Perception of fonts: perceived personality traits and appropriate uses
Participants rated a 40-word nonsense text sample (third order approx-
imation of English) on 15 semantic scales allowing respondents to judge 
both direction and intensity of their responses [Osgood et al, 1957]. Figure 
2 shows the passage and semantic scales.
Results from a factor analysis revealed three factors to describe the 
typefaces: Evaluative, Potency, and Activity. The three factors accounted 
for approximately 66% of the variance. Osgood et al., [1957] described 
these factors as follows:
•	
Potency reflects typefaces judged as strong, powerful, or forceful
•	
Evaluative reflects typefaces viewed as valuable, worthy, or 
important.
•	
Activity reflects typefaces considered to be full of energy, 
movement, and action. 
Figure 2: Examples of text sample, semantic scales, and legibility question.

234
Digital fonts and reading
The factors were correlated; Potency and Activity were positively 
correlated, and Potency and Evaluative were negatively correlated. The 
typefaces viewed as high in Potency were likely to be higher in Activity. 
Conversely, the Potent typefaces were likely to be lower on the Evalua-
tive factor. The typefaces seen as more Potent, less Evaluative, and more 
Active tended to be the bold, dark, block-like typefaces (Broadway, Agen-
cy, Playbill). Scripted typefaces (Vivaldi, French Script, Monotype Cor-
siva) tended to be less Potent, more Evaluative, and less Active. Serif and 
Sans Serif typefaces generally represented the middle of each factor.
Figure 3 shows the differences across typeface classes on the scale. 
Script/Handwriting typefaces were distinctly more feminine, beautiful, 
expensive, soft, delicate, relaxed, quiet, happy, weak, and warm. Display 
typefaces were characterized as ugly, cheap, and bad. While sans serif and 
serif typefaces had much in common, subtle differences were noticeable: 
serifs were more delicate, beautiful, expensive, warm, and old. 
Within each class (Figures 4-7), typefaces varied across the scales to 
reveal typeface-specific perceptions of personality. Among the serif type-
faces, Courier New stood out as the extreme on many scales - masculine, 
hard, stiff, ugly, cheap, bad, passive, weak, cool, and old. Poor Richard 
was characterized as the most feminine, active, and exciting of the serifs. 
The two monospaced sans serif typefaces, Lucida Console and Consolas 
were both outliers on the sans serif scale - more masculine, rugged, stiff, 
and cheap. Incised 901BLT was the most soft, delicate, relaxed, and pas-
sive of the sans serifs. The most feminine sans serif typeface was Century 
Gothic. Within the display typefaces, Curlz was the most feminine and 
Impact was the most masculine, hard, rugged, stiff, ugly, and sad. Vival-
di, from the script/handwriting group, was labeled as feminine, delicate, 
expensive, and old. The loudest, most exciting, and happiest of the script/
handwriting typefaces was Gigi.


Perception of fonts: perceived personality traits and appropriate uses
)LJXUH7\SHIDFHVE\FODVV

236
Digital fonts and reading
Figure 4: Serif typefaces.

237
Perception of fonts: perceived personality traits and appropriate uses
Figure 5: Sans Serif typefaces.

238
Digital fonts and reading
Figure 6: Display typefaces.

239
Perception of fonts: perceived personality traits and appropriate uses
Figure 7: Script/Handwriting typefaces.

240
Digital fonts and reading
Previous research on typeface personality has utilized a variety of 
semantic scales which have resulted in variations of the factors proffered 
by Osgood et al. [1957]. For example, Tannenbaum et al. [1964] found an 
Evaluative, Potency, and Activity factor containing semantic scales very 
similar to those found in this study. However, they found two additional 
factors labeled as Complexity and Physical. Wendt [1968] found only two 
factors that did not have anything in common with the results of this study. 
His factors were described as a feminine factor and a poorly defined factor. 
The work of Rowe [1982] resulted in five factors with some similarity to 
the ones identified in the present study. Rowe established a Potency factor 
very similar to the one found. She also found an Elegance factor that was 
comparable to the factor labeled as Evaluation in the current study. How-
ever, she found a Novelty, Antiquity, and Evaluation factor that did not 
correspond to the factors in the present study. Similarly, Bartram [1982] 
also discussed factors labeled as Evaluation, Potency, and Activity which 
were equivalent to the factors found in the present study. However, he 
also had a Mood factor. All of these previous studies share some common 
methodological concerns: they all used alphabet samples; they all used at 
least one denotative semantic scale; they did not control for x‐height of the 
typefaces when presenting stimuli; and they all used samples sizes that are 
too small for factor analysis.
Based on Osgood’s [1957] research, the Evaluative factor typically 
accounts for more variance than the other two factors. This has also been 
found in typeface personality research by Tannenbaum and colleagues 
[1964] and Bartram [1982]. However, the results of our study indicate that 
the Potency factor (36.1%) accounts for a larger percentage of the variance 
than the Evaluative (17.9%) and Activity (11.8%) factors. Rowe [1982] 
also found the Potency factor to account for the most variance. The three 
factors found in our study were correlated. No previous typeface person-
ality studies have reported factor correlations; in fact, most of them have 
reported using orthogonal/varimax rotations.
1.3   Study 2: perceived appropriateness of typefaces for various 
document types
Typefaces are often designed for a specific purpose - Inconsolata was 
‘designed for code listings’ [Levien.com, 2014]; Vivaldi is ‘ideal for in-

241
Perception of fonts: perceived personality traits and appropriate uses
vitations, announcements, and other work requiring a distinctive, formal 
appearance’ [Myfonts.com, 2014] (Figure 8). 
Typographers, communications experts, and marketing professionals of-
ten attribute appropriateness to different typefaces – ‘Fresh produce al-
ways seems to want an improvised, handwritten sort of message, while 
high-tech applications demand a cool, technocratic look’ [Spiekerman 
and Ginger, 2003, p. 126]. Studies have confirmed that in paper-based 
studies, participants are able to identify typefaces that are more appropri-
ate for specific purposes [Haskins, 1958; Walker, Smith, and Livingston, 
1986; Brumberger, 2003a, 2003b; Doyle and Bottomley, 2006]. Addition-
al research focused on print has shown that user success and happiness 
increased when uses and typefaces were congruent [Brumberger, 2001; 
Doyle and Bottomley, 2004]. Do casual consumers of onscreen text per-
ceive typefaces to be more appropriate for certain types of documents?
Data was collected for 261 participants using an online paired com-
parison activity where stimuli were compared two at a time with a forced 
choice question - which is more appropriate? Participants evaluated web-
site ads for seven products and résumés for seven careers. Using the data 
from Study 1 discussed above, typefaces were aligned with products and 
careers that were determined through additional research [Shaikh, 2007] to 
be similar on the three factors (Potency, Evaluative, Activity). Additionally 
participants evaluated a school assignment, email, spreadsheet, and sample 
of website text. For these text-heavy documents, typefaces were selected 
across the three factors with a consideration for legibility. Similar to Study 
1, all text was third order approximation of English to avoid a content con-
found. Samples of stimuli are shown in Figures 9-11. The careers used in 
the résumés included a Florist, DJ, Paralegal, Butcher, Human Resources 
Figure 8: Inconsolata and Vivaldi. 

242
Digital fonts and reading
Assistant, Statistician, and Webmaster. The products used in the ads in-
cluded a hammer, perfume, luggage, cakes, burglar alarm, insulation, and 
cooking oil.
Figure 9: Website ad for cakes, perfume, and luggage.

243
Perception of fonts: perceived personality traits and appropriate uses
Data revealed that participants consistently agreed on the typefaces 
that were most appropriate for each of the six document types. However, 
when choosing appropriate typefaces, legibility trumped congruency for 
all document types except website ads. When choosing type for website 
ads, appropriate typefaces were more likely to share similar perceived per-
sonality factors (Activity, Potency, and Evaluative) for the product adver-
Figure 10: Assignment sample.
Figure 11: Email sample.

244
Digital fonts and reading
tised. For example, website ads for items strong on the Potency factor 
(hammer) were reported to be most appropriate when displayed in a type-
face strong on the factor (Impact, Bauhaus93); ads for items weak on the 
Potency factor (cakes) similarly were reported to be most appropriate with 
typefaces weak on the factor (French Script, Vivaldi). The same was true 
for the Evaluative factor - items like perfume that were viewed as high on 
the Evaluative factor were best represented by a typeface that was high on 
the Evaluative scale, such as French Script or Vivaldi. The Activity factor 
showed similar, but less pronounced patterns. 
The website ad stimuli findings were similar to those of Poffenberger 
and Franken [1923] where he found a similar typeface to be appropriate 
for perfume and building material advertisements. Data from Doyle and 
Bottomley [2006] support the idea that typeface personality should match 
the content in logos and advertisements. Doyle and Bottomley also the-
orized that the Evaluative factor was the most important factor in deter-
mining appropriate typefaces for products. Our findings do not support 
their theory. Our study results are based on fewer products than the studies 
conducted by Doyle and Bottomley and the typefaces that were high on 
the Evaluative factor differed considerably between the two studies. Our 
study suggests the impact of the Evaluative factor is much less that what 
Doyle and Bottomley found. 
For all text-heavy documents (including résumés for specific careers), 
the most appropriate typeface was the most legible which corresponded to 
the typefaces reported to be neutral across all factors. The legible, neutral 
typefaces were typically serif and sans serif. These findings are similar to 
those of Brumberger [2003b] where participants perceived the typeface 
Arial as most appropriate for all text passages she evaluated. The script-
ed typeface in her studies was judged to be least appropriate regardless  
of content. 
1.4   Summary
Results of this research indicate that there are three underlying factors 
which explain the perception of onscreen typeface personality - Poten-
cy, Evaluative, and Activity. In addition, the research suggests that online 
readers are able to identify appropriate typefaces for a variety of docu-
ments commonly encountered. Overall, typefaces that are viewed as neu-

245
Perception of fonts: perceived personality traits and appropriate uses
tral in terms of personality and high on perceived legibility are deemed as 
appropriate typefaces for most onscreen documents (assignments, email, 
résumés, spreadsheets, and website text). For website ads, the appropriate 
typeface is most often the one that is congruent with the product in terms 
of personality. 
References
Bartram, D. (1982). The perception of semantic quality in type: Differences 
between designers and non‐designers. Information Design Journal, 3,  
pp. 38‐50.
Benton, C. L. (1979). The connotative dimensions of selected display typefaces. 
Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Association for Education in 
Journalism, Houston, TX.
Blogs.msdn.com, (2014). MSDN Blogs. [online] Available at: http://blogs.msdn.
com/b/ie/archive/2014/03/04/introducing-reading-view-in-ie-11.aspx [Ac-
cessed 20 Sep. 2014].
Boser, U. (2003, September 1). A man of letters. U.S. News & World Report, 
135, pp. 44‐46.
Brinton, J. E. (1961). The ‘feeling’ of type faces. CA Magazine, 3, pp. 43‐45.
Brumberger, E. R. (2001). The rhetoric of typography: Five experimental studies 
of typeface personality and its effects on readers and reading. PhD. New 
Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM.
Brumberger, E. R. (2003a). The rhetoric of typography: The awareness and im-
pact of typeface appropriateness. Technical Communication, 50(2),  
pp. 224‐231.
Brumberger, E. R. (2003b). The rhetoric of typography: The persona of typeface 
and text. Technical Communication, 50(2), pp. 206‐223.
Daily Intelligencer, (2014). Google Is Designing the Font of the Future. [online] 
Available at: http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2014/07/google-is-de-
signing-the-font-of-the-future.html [Accessed 20 Sep. 2014].
Davis, R. C., & Smith, H. J. (1933). Determinants of feeling tone in type faces. 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 17, pp. 742‐764.
Doyle, J. R., & Bottomley, P. A. (2004). Font appropriateness and brand choice. 
Journal of Business Research, 57, pp. 873‐880.

246
Digital fonts and reading
Doyle, J. R., & Bottomley, P. A. (2006). Dressed for the occasion: Font‐product 
congruity in the perception of logotype. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 
16(2), pp. 112‐123.
Epstein, Z. (2014). Horrifying chart reveals how much time we spend staring at 
screens each day. [online] BGR. Available at: http://bgr.com/2014/05/29/
smartphone-computer-usage-study-chart/ [Accessed 20 Sep. 2014].
Google.com, (2014). Google Fonts. [online] Available at: https://www.google.
com/fonts#Analytics:total [Accessed 20 Sep. 2014].
Haskins, J. B. (1958). Testing suitability of typefaces for editorial subject‐matter.  
Journalism Quarterly, 35, pp. 186‐194.
Henderson, P. W., Giese, J. L., & Cote, J. A. (2004). Impression management us-
ing typeface design. Journal of Marketing, 68, pp. 60‐72. Retrieved online 
September 15, 2006, from http://www.new‐edgeinc.com/pdf/Typeface.pdf.
Kastl, A. J., & Child, I. L. (1968). Emotional meaning of four typographical 
variables. Journal of Applied Psychology, 52, pp. 440‐446.
Levien.com, (2014). Inconsolata. [online] Available at: http://levien.com/type/
myfonts/inconsolata.html [Accessed 20 Sep. 2014].
Lucasfonts.com, (2014). LucasFonts | Case Studies > Calibri + Consolas. [on-
line] Available at: http://www.lucasfonts.com/case-studies/calibri-consolas/ 
[Accessed 20 Sep. 2014].
Mackiewicz, J., & Moeller, R. (2004). Why people perceive typefaces to have 
different personalities. Paper presented at the International Professional 
Communication Conference, Minneapolis, MN.
Morrison, G. R. (1986). Communicability of the emotional connotation of type. 
Educational Communications and Technology Journal, 34, pp. 235‐244.
Myfonts.com, (2014). Vivaldi™ - Webfont & Desktop font « MyFonts. [online]  
Available at: https://www.myfonts.com/fonts/linotype/vivaldi/ [Accessed 
20 Sep. 2014].
Osgood, C. E., Suci, G. J., & Tannenbaum, P. H. (1957). The measurement of 
meaning. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Ovink, G. W. (1938). Legibility, atmosphere-value and forms of printing type. 
Leiden, Holland: A.W. Sijthoff’s Uitgeversmaatschappij N.V.
Poffenberger, A. T., & Franken, R. B. (1923). A study of the appropriateness of 
type faces. Journal of Applied Psychology, 7, pp. 312‐329.
Rowe, C. L. B. (1982). The connotative dimensions of selected display typefac-
es. Information Design Journal, 3, pp. 30‐37.

247
Perception of fonts: perceived personality traits and appropriate uses
Secrest, J. M. (1947). Personalities in type designs. Printer’s Ink, 218(7),  
pp. 52-53.
Shaikh, A. D., Chaparro, B. S., & Fox, D. (2006). Perception of fonts: Perceived 
personality traits and uses. Retrieved February 01, 2006, from http://psy-
chology.wichita.edu/surl/usabilitynews/81/PersonalityofFonts.htm
Shaikh, A. (2007). Psychology of onscreen type: Investigations regarding 
typeface personality, appropriateness, and impact on document perception. 
PhD. Wichita State University.
Spiekermann, E. and Ginger, E. (2003). Stop stealing sheep & find out how type 
works. 1st ed. Berkeley, Calif.: Adobe Press.
Tannenbaum, P. H., Jacobson, H. K., & Norris, E. L. (1964). An experimental in-
vestigation of typeface connotations. Journalism Quarterly, 41, pp. 65‐73.
Tantillo, J., Di Lorenzo‐Aiss, J., & Mathisen, R. E. (1995). Quantifying per-
ceived differences in type styles: An exploratory study. Psychology & 
Marketing, 12, pp. 447‐457.
The Globe and Mail, (2014). Digital overload: How we are seduced by dis-
traction. [online] Available at: http://www.theglobeandmail.com/life/
relationships/digital-overload-how-we-are-seduced-by-distraction/arti-
cle17725778/?page=all [Accessed 20 Sep. 2014].
Walker, P., Smith, S., & Livingston, A. (1986). Predicting the appropriateness 
of a typeface on the basis of multi‐modal features. Information Design 
Journal, 5, pp. 29‐42.
Wendt, D. (1968). Semantic differentials of typefaces as a method of congeniali-
ty research. The Journal of Typographic Research, 2, pp. 3‐25.

248
Chapter 14
Legibility and readability of  
Arabic fonts on Personal Digital 
Assistants PDAs
Mrouj Almuhajri and Ching Y. Suen
Electronic reading opens new avenues especially with the advance of modern reading 
devices. The new generation of Personal Digital Assistants PDAs is more popular and 
more affordable. Therefore, it is necessary to re-evaluate typefaces used in these devices as 
they form a substantial component in reading. In this chapter, we present a survey which 
has been conducted to identify Arab community preferences among some selected fonts on 
PDAs, to infer the popularity of using these devices for reading. The results were taken as 
a basis to conduct experiments in order to investigate six Arabic fonts on PDAs from the 
perspective of legibility and readability to come up with the best fonts. Two experiments 
were conducted to evaluate the legibility of the selected fonts using a novel method named 
M-Short-Exposure method for isolated Arabic letters and connected letters. Then, another 
experiment for readability was also performed considering reading speed and comprehen-
sion of running texts. Thus, our findings identify the most legible and/or readable Arabic 
font(s) among the tested fonts. Moreover, some recommendations have been made on bet-
ter use of legible and/or readable Arabic fonts for different purposes.
1.1   Introduction
The E-book market has blossomed because of the appearance of Personal 
Digital Assistants (PDAs) which have become more durable, more color-
ful, and more multifunctional. Hence, many improved features of these 
digital devices stimulate e-reading in a significant way leading to the need 
to test typefaces used on them.
Reading legibility and readability are two important concepts in this 
study. Tracy [1986] defined legibility as the ability to read and recognize 
letters in a clear and an easy way. In contrast, readability is described as 
how comfortable visual processing is while reading, and how comprehen-
sible the long text is.

249
Legibility and readability of Arabic fonts on Personal Digital Assistants PDAs
1.2   Related work
Legibility and readability are two concepts with a relationship which may 
cause confusion between them due to some overlap in their test methods. 
High legibility is very important for reading as it affects reading speed and 
the effort needed to identify letters in the right way. Based on history, we 
see many methods have been produced to determine the level of legibility 
of typefaces. Based on Beier [2012] the main test methods for legibility 
are: reader’s preferences, visual accuracy threshold, search task, and con-
tinuous reading. Moreover, readability is related to reading performance 
as it tests the quality of text and the ability to recognize it in meaningful 
groupings. To test readability, several methods are used with running text 
including reading speed, word-search speed, eye-tracking, comprehension, 
and reader fatigue.  Nevertheless, many aspects can influence readability, 
such as spacing, margins, use of words, and reader knowledge and skills.
1.2.1   Methodology of testing legibility and readability 
1.2.1.1   Reader’s preferences
People’s opinion is a concern in this method where participants are asked 
to rank their preferences based on typefaces, sizes, styles, etc. Shaikh 
[2007] has evaluated 40 Latin typefaces through 15 semantic differential 
scales (SDS) as pairs of opposite adjectives including legibility. Her re-
sults reveal that serif and sans serif typefaces are more legible than display 
and script typefaces. Following the same procedure, Nikfal [2011] inves-
tigated 20 Arabic typefaces with four personalities. As a result, some fonts 
were defined with high legibility like Times New Roman and Simplified 
Arabic and they were recommended to be used in official documents, re-
ports, and forms. Voorhees [2011] evaluated the congeniality of reading on 
digital platforms in comparison with paper of high resolution by reading 
five short text stories (one per device) in different orders. Feedback was 
collected from participants considering device type and features available 
for reading. The Kindle was recorded as the favorite, and the laptop and 
iPod touch were the least preferred. Also, the ability to change typeface 
and page layout were rated the most desirable feature.

250
Digital fonts and reading
1.2.1.2   Visual accuracy threshold
In this method, the focus is on identifying letters and words regardless 
of their comprehension. To measure visual accuracy, several approaches 
have been suggested such as the rapid exposure method. Participants are 
exposed to the stimulus for a very short time in which the eye is unable to 
move from one fixation to another. The tachistoscope was one of the ear-
liest tools used, known as Flash Recognition Training (FRT), to measure 
recall of visual information. It has been used to rank the legibility of a set 
of characters and numerals [Suen, 1986]. Nowadays, these tools have been 
superseded by computers. 
The short-exposure method of a single character was used in Beier and 
Larson [2010] based on Macromedia Flash MX. Each letter was exposed 
for 43 milliseconds, and then participants had to name it. Thus, accuracy 
of visual characters was measured, and hence type legibility. Moreover, 
the legibility of two Latin ClearType fonts compared to traditional serif 
fonts has been investigated using the short-exposure method [Chaparro, 
Shaikh and Chaparro, 2006]. A collection of letters, digits, and symbols 
were exposed for 34 milliseconds. Findings were positive for the new 
fonts of ClearType. However, the old style digits used in Constantia font 
like 0, 1, and 2 caused confusion with letters o, l, and z.
1.2.1.3   Continuous reading 
This method is used to measure readability of typefaces by testing them 
in running texts. One technique used to evaluate the reading process is 
to measure the reading speed and comprehension or accuracy. However, 
many factors could be considered in these measurements like leading and 
spacing in text [Chaparro, Baker, Shaikh, Hull and Brady, 2004]. From the 
reading speed and comprehension level, it was revealed that margins gave 
better performance despite a lower speed. On the other hand, leading did 
not affect the performance of reading but influenced the participant’s satis-
faction. Another factor is font size and style which are considered in mea-
suring legibility and readability. Ramadan [2011] conducted an experiment 
on university students who were asked to read 24 passages on a computer 
screen with four Arabic fonts in three font sizes. After recording reading 
speed and testing comprehension by answering given questions, the out-
comes showed that both variables (font style and size) are significant.

251
Legibility and readability of Arabic fonts on Personal Digital Assistants PDAs
Another technique to estimate reading performance and behavior in 
running text is eye tracking. It provides rich data from eye movements 
related to the process of reading. The effect of font size and font type on 
online reading has been examined through eye-tracking [Beymer, Russell 
and Orton, 2008]. Fixation durations were significantly longer with small-
er size (10 pt) type leading to slower reading. Also, serif fonts gave slight-
ly better reading performance than sans serif fonts. In addition, another 
study has been conducted on Arabic typefaces of different sizes using 
eye-tracking measurement [Al-Wabil and George, 2010]. Participants read 
aloud electronic passages on a computer screen and eye movements and 
oral reading were recorded. The finding suggests bigger sizes (16 or 14 pt) 
produce better reading performance.
1.3   The survey 
In this survey, we aimed to collect data about the popularity of using Per-
sonal Digital Assistants PDAs, such as the iPad, for reading in Arab Com-
munities; and Arab preferences regarding the fonts used on those electron-
ic devices.
1.3.1   Font selection
Certain Arabic typefaces were selected for this survey. It was difficult to 
make a decision among a huge number of Arabic typefaces based on a 
short line of text. The Arabic Font Specimen Book [2009] was used as a 
reference.a Therefore, 13 typefaces, shown in Figure 1, were chosen con-
sidering six factors: type function, style classification, publisher, compat-
ibility with platforms, format, multi-script support and, previous studies.
1.3.2   Methodology
Participants were recruited through the Arab association living in Montre-
al, Canada. The final analysis was based on 53 participants (36 male and 
17 female) in which 39 of them reported that they do use PDAs for general 
reading and e-book reading.
a	 The quality of this publication has been strongly challenged by experts in the field 
[Nemeth, 2009].

252
Digital fonts and reading
The text used is shown in Figure 2, part of a poem written by one of 
the earliest Arab lexicographers and philologists, Al-Khalil Al-Farahidi, 
which has all Arabic alphabetical letters in the same text. Also, it is show-
ing all alphabetical letters in isolated shape standing alone beside each 
RWKHU$OWKRXJKWKHVL]HZDV¿[HGIRUDOOIRQWVLQWKLVVXUYH\WKHKHLJKW
RIHDFKIRQWZDVGLIIHUHQW7KHUHIRUHZHQHHGHGWRQRUPDOL]HDOOIRQWVWR
the same height considering the ratio between height and width. Figure 2 
shows examples of two fonts (Deco Type Naskh and Uthman Script Hafs) 
EHIRUHDQGDIWHUQRUPDOL]DWLRQ
Apple iPad OS 6.1.3 devices with retina display were used to run the 
survey. Among several Apple survey applications, iSurvey v 2.10.7 was 
chosen to build and run the survey because it has the required features.
Figure 1: Fonts used in the survey.
)LJXUH1RUPDOL]DWLRQSURFHVVIRUWZRGLIIHUHQWIRQWV

253
Legibility and readability of Arabic fonts on Personal Digital Assistants PDAs
1.3.2.1   Design and procedure
Each participant went through two different sections in the survey and 
completed them. The first section was about personal information and 
reading habits using Personal Digital Assistants PDAs. The second sec-
tion introduced the 13 selected fonts to be rated. Each font image was 
shown one at a time in the middle of the screen and followed by three 
descriptions: Legible, Easy to read, and Comfortable for eyes. Participants 
were asked to rate each font image using five-point scales ranging from 
Strongly Agree to Strongly Disagree.
1.3.3   Results and discussion
General information showed that Apple devices, iPad and iPhone in par-
ticular, are the most commonly used devices in personal Arabic e-reading 
activities with a total of 73.02%. Kindle and similar devices which use 
e-ink gave low usability, and the reason behind this was suggested because 
of the lack of Arabic language support up to the time of the survey. Figure 
3 illustrates the number of users for each specified gadget.
The second section gave us rich data about the selected fonts. The top 
six fonts preferred by participants were: Almohanad, Geeza Pro, Hasan 
Enas, Times New Roman, Uthman SH, and Yakout Reg. These fonts got 
the highest agreement and lowest disagreement scores for the average of 
all descriptive characteristics. In contrast, Tanseek Modern Pro has the 
lowest legibility rate, and Deco Type Naskh was considered as the hardest 
to read and the least comfortable for the eyes. Therefore, we avoided these 
two fonts in our final decision due to their poor performance. Finally, we 
minimized the number of fonts regarding our results, analyses, and com-
parisons among fonts. Thus, a group of six fonts only were selected for 
the next experiment: Almohanad, Badiya Reg, Geeza Pro, Hasan Enas, 
Uthman Script Hafs, and Yakout Reg. 
1.4   Experiments and results: legibility experiments
Among the methods mentioned in the related work section to test font’s 
legibility, the short-exposure method of a single character was chosen as 
the basis for our test. Although it has not been tested on Arabic yet, we 

254
Digital fonts and reading
thought that we cannot use it for many reasons. First of all, the Arabic 
language has different features and clear structure which influence the way 
of recognizing letters. Isolated letters could be simply identified if they 
are shown in a single presentation. For example, although the letters in 
Figure 4 have the same structure, the number and the position of diacritic 
dots would distinguish a letter and make it recognizable from others. In 
addition, unlike the Latin language, letters should be connected in order to 
create words, and each Arabic letter could have several forms depending 
on its position. It has been claimed that when an Arabic word contains two 
or more connected letters which have dots, it becomes difficult to differ-
entiate among them especially in smaller sizes [Abubaker and Lu, 2012]. 
So, applying the same technique with Arabic typefaces to discover their 
legibility might give an inaccurate result. 
1.4.1   Pilot Test
To emphasize our thoughts, we ran a pilot study using the same method 
of short-exposure of a single character on a small number of participants 
(6 male and 6 female). Six fonts selected from the survey were prepared 
Figure 4:  Different letters of the same shape but different number and position of 
diacritic dots.
Figure 3: Number of users for each specific gadget in the survey.

255
Legibility and readability of Arabic fonts on Personal Digital Assistants PDAs
in which each letter in each font produced an image of 1.3 × 1.3 square 
inches in size 18 pt. All letters stood on a fixed virtual baseline in the mid-
dle. A small tool was developed in order to implement the test in Google 
Chrome browser.
Test material is located in the area of fixation point where participants 
were asked to focus on. The distance between the participants and screen 
was set to 50 cm approximately. Participants were asked to press the next 
button to trigger an exposure of a single character, and name it aloud. 
Exposure time was fixed for each letter at 50 milliseconds which is half of 
the time suggested for the human eye to not only receive a photon, but to 
pass a signal to the brain for conscious response [Gibbs, 1996]. Each par-
ticipant got six exposures of different fonts with random chosen letters and 
in a random order. A mask of black dots was exposed after each letter in 
order to remove the afterimage appearance after the original image ceased 
to control the timeframe on the retina [Beier and Larson, 2010]. Figure 5 
shows an example of a test character and the image which followed.
As expected, the accuracy of all 72 exposures gave 97.2% correct 
results with a total of two errors only. That supports the need for a modi-
fied method to suit Arabic font features.
1.4.2   Experiment 1: letter legibility
Isolated letters are tested using the proposed method M-Short-Exposure, 
in which M refers to modified.
1.4.2.1   Participants, material, and apparatus
A total number of 138 participants (53 male and 85 female) engaged in the 
legibility and readability experiments. All were students who speak Arabic 
as their native language. 
Figure 5: The test character (left) and after image (right) sample.

256
Digital fonts and reading
For each of the six fonts, a 3 × 3 matrix was prepared using Adobe 
Photoshop CS6 with nine Arabic isolated letters in which each letter takes 
a place in a single cell. The size of the matrix image was fixed at 4.5 × 
4.5 square inches. Letters have been normalized in size to avoid the influ-
ence of font size. Six common Arabic nouns of three letters, which is the 
basic word structure, and with positive meanings have been assigned to 
each matrix. One and only one word can be generated from each matrix 
in some specific directions. The six remaining cells in each matrix were 
filled with random letters. Figure 6 shows an example of the matrix used in 
this experiment. Numbers and symbols are excluded in this study. Direc-
tions for words assigned in each matrix are limited to right-left, top-down, 
and diagonals from right to left only. All other directions are discarded 
from this study due the nature of Arabic language. Figure 7 illustrates the 
allowed and eliminated directions.
Two Apple iPads and one iPad mini OS 6.1.3 devices with retina dis-
play were used to conduct the experiment. Each device was set to full 
bright display, however, subjects were able to adjust the brightness setting 
as they prefer. Also, landscape mode and auto correction and completion 
were turned off. Furthermore, an Apple application named ‘i3arabi’ was 
designed and coded using Xcode and Objective-C programming language 
to implement the experiments. 
Figure 6: Matrix sample for letter legibility experiment.
Figure 7: Allowed directions (left) and eliminated directions (right).

257
Legibility and readability of Arabic fonts on Personal Digital Assistants PDAs
1.4.2.2   Design and procedure
Three participants at a time took part using the three available PDAs. 
At the beginning, general instructions were given. Then, the six matrix 
samples were shown respectively. Each matrix image was located in the 
fixation point on which subjects had been asked to focus. The distance 
between participants and devices was flexible according to their personal 
preferences. Once the start button is pressed, a matrix is exposed for 1000 
millisecond which is equal to the time we used in a pilot study to expose 
a single character multiplied by nine and added to 550 millisecond for di-
rection complexity. Next, a mask of black dots is exposed too for the same 
period of time to remove the afterimage effect on the retina. After that, 
multiple choices were given including three different words of the same 
number of letters to choose from or choose ‘I cannot recognize the word’. 
Each participant got six exposures in the same order in which each one 
represents a font involved in this study. There were six words assigned to 
six matrices, each one represented in a single font. Although the partici-
pants received matrix samples in order (font1, font2, font3,…, font6), they 
still got them in random order of words, i.e. word1 may be presented in 
font4 to one participant, but in font6 to another. 
1.4.2.3   Results and discussion
In the M-Short-Exposure method of Arabic isolated letters, 80 results were 
recorded for iPad devices and 58 results for iPad mini for each font. So, 
we employed independent samples and got the Z -score-table, and it pre-
sented no differences between iPad and iPad mini at p>0.01. Therefore, 
if the participant correctly identified the word from the presented letters 
on any device, the trial was counted as correct. The mean values for all 
fonts on the two devices are shown in Figure 8. It is obvious that Geeza 
Pro and Hasan Enas fonts were the most legible fonts in isolated letter 
presentation. Moreover, Almohanad and Badiya Reg fonts showed better 
performance on the smaller device (iPad mini) which may be due to their 
larger design on smaller preview.

258
Digital fonts and reading
1.4.3   Experiment 2: word legibility
This experiment is an extension to the previous experiment to promote 
M-Short Exposure method considering connected Arabic letters.
1.4.3.1   Material
Three text material groups were prepared for this experiment. A collection 
of 18 common Arabic nouns of different complexity were chosen. The 
complexity is measured by the number of letters in the word. Least com-
plex: three letters; medium complex: four letters; and most complex: five 
or six letters. Words were scattered among the three groups with the same 
balance of complexity. Then, fonts were assigned to words in which each 
font appears once only within a group, but three times at three different 
complexity levels within all groups. Hence each font got the chance to 
appear three times in each level of complexity but with different words. 
For each group, words were scattered randomly in a bounded area of size 
3 × 1.7 square inches. Figure 9 shows a sample of the text material for the 
first group.
Figure 8: The mean values of letter legibility test on iPad and iPad mini.

259
Legibility and readability of Arabic fonts on Personal Digital Assistants PDAs
1.4.3.2   Design and procedure
General instructions were given at the beginning so that the participants 
had a trial sample to absorb the idea, then three samples were displayed 
sequentially in the fixation zone they were asked to focus on. Once the 
sample is triggered, it lasts for 1000 millisecond which is the same pe-
riod used in the previous experiment. As done before, a mask of black 
dots is displayed after for the same duration to control the after-image 
impact. Next, participants were asked to fill six text boxes using a virtual 
touch keyboard with words they remember. Although abilities of short-
term memory in participants may differ, it has been found that the average 
number of items people may remember after a short appearance is four 
[Machizawa, Goh and Driver, 2012]. By this way, we ensure that the most 
recognizable font among six words will catch the participant’s attention 
first. So, there is no problem at all if participants could not remember all 
the words. Although spelling mistakes could lead to incorrect results, the 
selected words had been chosen to be easy to spell and commonly used. 
Therefore, the possibility of a typo was expected to be low.
1.4.3.3   Results and discussion
First of all, the results have been gathered for the six tested fonts based 
on participants’ correct answers in each group over both PDAs. Then, the 
mean value of all groups for each font was calculated. When the results 
were analyzed using ANOVA among the three groups to see the impact of 
complexity levels on participants’ answers, a significant difference within 
each font reached the F value critical at 99%. That means, words’ com-
plexity level had their impact on fonts legibility. Therefore, we took the 
mean of all three groups for both devices as shown in Figure 10 to deduce 
Figure 9: A sample text material for word legibility experiment.

260
Digital fonts and reading
the most legible font in this study. Hence, Uthman SH was observed to 
be the most legible font regarding connected letters (words) while Yakout 
Reg font was the least.
1.4.3.4   Final legibility results and discussion
Integration between the two experimental results was needed to get legi-
bility result as a single component. In particular, the average results com-
ing from the three groups of words experiment have been calculated and 
then added to the letter legibility results. Figure 11 demonstrates the com-
bined results for the examined fonts. Legibility of Geeza Pro, Uthman SH 
and Almohanad fonts in order was the highest while the remaining fonts 
showed lower legibility with large differences.
Figure 10: The results of word legibility experiment.
Figure 11: The combined results of legibility experiments.

261
Legibility and readability of Arabic fonts on Personal Digital Assistants PDAs
1.5   Readability experiment
1.5.1   Material
Text passages for the readability experiment were taken from Qiyas test 
[National center for assessment in higher education, 2001]. However, we 
slightly modified them to bring them to the same level of difficulty with a 
mean number of 113 words. Six passages of different general topics were 
randomly assigned to each font we tested. The contents do not contain 
extremely rare words or technical terms. The size for all used texts was 
fixed at 18 pt. For each passage of each font, two multiple choice compre-
hension questions were picked.
1.5.2   Design and procedure
Participants were instructed to read at normal speed as they usually do, 
and informed in advance that reading speed will be automatically record-
ed. Furthermore, participants were told to read with concentration because 
if they passed the passage to the question page, they could not go back. 
Post-reading comprehension test may lead participants to scan text rather 
than reading it and looking for the answers [Darroch, Goodman, Brewster 
and Gray, 2005]. They began reading when the ‘Start Reading’ button was 
pressed to display a passage and trigger the timer. Upon completing the 
passage, a ‘Done’ button was pressed and reading speed was recorded. 
Figure 12 demonstrates the button strategy used in this application. Then, 
the comprehension questions page was displayed. Participants kept read-
ing the passages displayed in order of the appearance of different fonts, 
and answered the related questions.
1.5.3   Results and discussion
For each font, the results of two comprehension questions were used to 
measure the comprehension level. Furthermore, reading speed (RS) was 
calculated by dividing the total number of words included in the passage 
by the total time elapsed to finish reading in seconds. To analyse these 
results, we tried to find the correlations between these two factors. The 
correlation coefficient value of all fonts showed negligible value between 
comprehension and reading speed. 

262
Digital fonts and reading
With respect to devices, the effect of device display size has been 
studied statistically. For both factors: reading comprehension and reading 
speed, we employed two independent samples regarding device type with 
a different number of observations to all the tested fonts. At p>0.01, there 
is no significant difference for comprehension factor of all fonts. However, 
some fonts showed significant differences in reading speed. In particular, 
Almohanad, Geeza Pro, and Yakout Reg fonts showed a positive impact 
when devices were varied. To be specific, the reading speed increased 
when the size of display becomes smaller. That could suggest awareness 
of font usage based on the targeted display type. This might have hap-
pened because these fonts have thicker strokes compared to the others. 
Thus, their similar design may feature them on iPad mini with a clearer 
view. Figure 13 and Figure 14 illustrate comprehension and reading speed 
means for all tested fonts. Almohanad and Yakout Reg fonts produced the 
highest levels of comprehension. In addition, the fonts which achieved the 
highest reading speed were Yakout Reg and Uthman SH. 
Figure 12: Sample of readability experiment.

263
Legibility and readability of Arabic fonts on Personal Digital Assistants PDAs
1.6   Conclusion
Several studies have been published regarding fonts’ legibility and read-
ability using different screen types. Yet, with the abrupt change in screen 
size and the advance of e-reading features, the demand of testing new 
devices has been raised. Arabic fonts were tested from the legibility and 
readability point of view on PDAs. From our results, some deductions, 
recommendations, and suggestions have been proposed: Arabic e-reading 
becomes more popular among Arab communities using Apple devices; 
recommendations could be provided for Uthman Script Hafs and Geeza 
Pro fonts to be used in e-books which require high legibility; it is recom-
mended for Almohanad, Geeza Pro, and Yakout Reg fonts to be used when 
Figure 13: Mean values of reading comprehension for all tested fonts.
Figure 14: The mean values of reading speed for all tested fonts.

264
Digital fonts and reading
displays are similar to the size of iPad mini due to their better performance 
at a smaller size.
In the future, we can enhance the study to examine other types of 
tablets and smart phones. Moreover, we can improve the functionality of 
M-Short-Exposure method by: reducing the allowed directions in isolated 
letters matrix to one direction only (right-to-left), and by fixing the level 
of word complexity in connected letters, in part to keep the focus on fonts’ 
performance. 
References
Abubaker, A. and Lu, J. (2012), The optimum font size and type for students 
aged 9-12 reading arabic characters on screen: A case study,” Journal of 
Physics: Conference Series, 364, p. 012115. 
 Al-Wabil, A. and George, R. (2010). An eye tracking study of arabic typography 
readability, IHCI Interfaces and Human Computer Interaction,  
pp. 309–312, IADIS. 
Beier, S. (2012) Reading Letters designing for legibility. (BIS Publishers, 1057 
DT Amsterdam) pp. 10-20.
Beier, S. and Larson, K. (2010). Design improvements for frequently misrecog-
nized letters, Information Design Journal, 18,  pp. 118-137. 
Beymer, D., Russell, D. and Orton, P. (2008). An eye tracking study of how 
font size and type influence online reading, Proc. 22nd British HCI Group 
Annual Conference on People and Computers, 2, pp. 15-18. 
Chaparro, B. et al. (2013). Reading online text: A comparison of four white 
space layouts, Usability News, Available:
          http://psychology.wichita.edu/surl/usabilitynews/62/whitespace.htm. [Ac-
cessed 22 Oct. 2013].
Chaparro, B., Shaikh, A. D. and Chaparro, A. (2006). Examining the legibility of 
two new ClearType fonts, Usability News, 8. 
Darroch, I. et al. (2005). The effect of age and font size on reading text on hand-
held computers, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 3585, pp. 253–266. 
Gibbs, P. (2013), Can a human see a single photon? Available: http://math.ucr.
edu/home/baez/physics/Quantum/see_a_photon.html. [Accessed 17 Jun 
2013]. 
 

265
Legibility and readability of Arabic fonts on Personal Digital Assistants PDAs
Machizawa, M., Goh, C. and Driver, J. (2012). Human visual short-term mem-
ory precision can be varied at will when the number of retained items is 
low, Psychological Science, 23, pp. 554–559. 
National center for assessment in higher education (2001). Available: http://
www.qiyas.sa/Sites/English/Pages/default.aspx. [Accessed 6 Jun 2013].
Nemeth, T. (2009). Complex Dutch Arab Complex. TYPO, 36. 
Nikfal, S. (2011) English and Arabic typeface personas and arabic typefaces de-
sign charactersitics. Master’s thesis, Department of Computer Science and 
Software Engineering, Concordia University, Montreal, Canada.
Ramadan, M. Z. (2011). Evaluating college students’ performance of Arabic 
typeface style, font size, page layout and foreground/backgroujnd color 
combinations of e-book materials, Journal of King Saud University -  
Engineering Sciences, 23, pp. 89-100. 
Shaikh, A. D. (2007) Psychology of onscreen type: investigations regarding 
typeface personality, appropriateness, and impact on document perception. 
PhD thesis, Department of Psycology, Wichita State University, U.S.A.
Smitshuijzen, E. (2009) Arabic Font Specimen Book, (Uitgeverij de Buitenkant, 
Amsterdam). 
Suen, C. Y. (1986). Human recognition of handprinted characters and distance 
measurements, Graphonomics: Contemporary Research in Handwriting, 
Elsevier Science Publishers B. V.,  pp. 213-223.
Tracy, W. (1986) Letters of Credit: A View of Type Design. (David Godine, 
London) pp. 30-32.
Voorhees, G. (2011) Congeniality of reading on digital devices. School of Print 
Media, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, U.S.A.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

267
Typefaces are indicated in italic
accuracy, 14, 20, 29, 39–41, 44–46, 
48–52, 99, 128, 200, 202, 204, 207, 
249–250, 255; see also reading 
accuracy
accurate performance, 205
activity, 184, 193, 226, 228–229, 231, 
233–234, 240–241, 243–244
adjective pair, 227–229, 231
Advertisers Naskh, 168
age difference, 98, 104
Agency, 232, 234
Al Ittihad, 220
Alexander, Christopher, 173–174, 
176–177, 188–189
alignment, 100, 110, 123–124, 150, 152, 
156–157, 170
Almohanad, 253, 257, 260, 262–263
alternating case, 57, 64
Amharic, 161
Amplitude, 213–214
Andale Mono, 67
ANWB-C, 81–82
ANWB-E, 81–82
ANWB-U, 81, 83
appropriateness, 164, 226, 241; see also 
perceived appropriateness
Arabic, 151, 156–165, 168–170, 209, 
220–222, 224, 248–251, 254–258, 
263
Adobe, 170
Frutiger, 169–170
Simplified, 249
architecture, 173–174, 188
Arial, 6, 8, 9, 12, 65, 67, 232, 244
Armenian, 151
ascenders, 13, 24, 30, 41–42, 85, 154, 
180–181
BA Signs, 85–86
Badiya Regular, 253, 257
Baltimore Sun, 212, 214, 217–219
baseline, 110, 161, 168, 181, 255
Baskerville, 165, 231–232
Bauhaus 93, 232, 244
Berlin Sans, 232
Berthold Bodoni, 197 
Biao Kai Ti, 198
bilingual, 156, 160, 162–163, 193–194, 
197, 202, 205–206
bipolar adjective, 228–229, 231
blink, 58
Body Frame (BF), 111; see also 
ideographic em-box
bold typeface, 4, 9, 12, 15, 32–33, 37, 
40, 67, 85–87, 168, 170, 226, 234
boundary change paradigm, 60–62, 65
bounding box, 111, 122, 198
bowl, 146, 220
Bradley Hand, 232
Broadway, 232, 234
Brush Script, 232
Calibri, 231–232
Calisto, 232
Cambria, 70, 232
Caslon, 231–232
Centaur, 49–50, 232
center alignment, 39, 109, 123
central vision, 5
centroid, 110–111, 117, 124 
Century, 209
Gothic, 7, 12, 232, 234
character
density, 65–66, 109, 112, 123, 146, 
180–181, 183–184
grouping, 95
identification, see letter identification
Index

268
Index
misrecognition, see letter 
misrecognition
recognition, see letter recognition
Cheltenham Oldstyle, 87–88
Chiller, 232
Chinese, 55–59, 94–95, 96–101, 105, 
109–112, 115–120, 126–129, 146, 
167, 171, 193–207, 226
Christopher Alexander, 173–174, 
176–177, 188–189 
Chronicle Text, 211
ClearType, 58, 66–67, 227, 250
ClearviewHwy, 83, 88–89
cognitive, 19–20, 22–23, 63, 105, 
185–186
psychologist, see scientist
science, 19, 21
scientist, 19–20, 185–186
collision (avoidance), 109–110, 124, 
181, 221–222
column width, 161, 175, 180, 182–184, 
209, 216–217
common language, 174–175
comprehension, 2, 20, 55, 58, 94, 98, 
105, 209, 248–250, 261–263
condensed, 82, 87, 182, 184, 186, 212, 
215
congeniality, 249
congruency, 195, 204, 206–207, 243
congruent, 195, 197, 202–204, 226, 
241, 245
incongruent, 193, 195, 197, 202–204, 
206
connotative, 227–228, 230–231
Consolas, 65, 67, 70, 232, 234
constraint (design), 156–157, 160, 170, 
176, 182
continuous reading, 47, 160, 165, 
249–250
contour interaction, see crowding
contrast, 23–26, 30, 86, 90–91, 113, 143, 
145–146, 167–168, 170, 213–215; 
see also stroke contrast
convention, 23–24, 26, 29, 96–97, 
134–135, 144, 154, 158, 170, 178, 
186, 188, 220–221
Corbel, 232
counter, 4, 7, 12, 14–15, 79, 81–83, 87, 
91, 113, 148, 211, 215, 220–221
Courier, 65, 69–70
New, 232, 234
crowding, 3, 10, 14–15, 89, 91, 134, 186
Curlz, 232, 234
custom font, 212, 214
Cyrillic, 37–39, 42–43, 146, 151–152
Deco Type Naskh, 252–253
decoding, 19–20, 22, 29–30, 32, 34
denotative, 231, 240
descender, 24, 30, 41–42, 52, 85, 154, 
168, 180–181
design parameter, see parameter
design
iteration, 38, 47
specification, 109, 117
training, 193–194, 196, 207
Devanagari, 146, 151, 170
diacritic, 30, 52, 140, 161, 254
dictionary, 116, 156, 160
digit, see number
DIN, 49–50, 169
disappearing text, 62–63
discrimination, 194–195, 197, 202–203, 
205–207
display typeface, 48–49, 212–214, 
216–217, 220–221, 226, 234, 238, 
249
distance
legibility, 79–80, 82–87, 89–91
reading, 2, 39, 54, 79–81, 85–86, 
88–89, 91, 132–134, 138–139, 145
testing, 48, 81, 255, 257
threshold, 49, 84, 87
distinctiveness, 24, 30, 112, 114, 153, 
156, 160, 212, 241
distortion, 66, 132, 139–140, 146, 153, 

269
Index
167, 170, 184, 220
Droid Sans/Serif, 227
DTL Documenta, 23–24, 29–31
ease of reading, 2, 22, 62
e-book, 98–99, 248, 252, 263
economy, 175, 178, 179, 180, 182, 228
education, 20, 22, 149, 155, 185, 196
encoding, 62, 150–151, 227
evaluative, 226
expertise, 63, 193–197, 205–207
exposure time, 26, 85–86, 248, 250, 
253–255, 257–258, 264
eye movements, 54–58, 60, 63–70, 215, 
217, 251
eye tracking, 57–58, 63, 249, 251
factor analysis, 226, 228–229, 233, 240
familiarity, 5, 98, 101, 151, 158, 166–
167, 189, 193–194, 200, 206–207, 
212
FangSong, 109, 112, 114–115
FangZhengBaoSong,(FZ), 113
FangZhengBeiWeiKaiShu, (FZ), 115
FangZhengBoYaFangKanSong, (FZ), 
113
FangZhengDaWeiTi, (FZ), 115
FangZhengFangSong, (FZ), 115
FangZhengHei, (FZ), 127
FangZhengJianZhi, (FZ), 117
FangZhengJunHei, (FZ), 117–119
FangZhengJuZhenXinFang, (FZ), 115
FangZhengKaiTi, (FZ), 115
FangZhengKeBenFangSong, (FZ), 115
FangZhengLanTingHei, (FZ), 113, 
126–127
FangZhengSongKeBenXiuKai, (FZ), 115
FangZhengSongYan, (FZ), 117
FangZhengXiDengXian, (FZ), 127
FangZhengYuHei, (FZ), 129
FangZhengZhunYaSong, (FZ), 127
fatigue, 58, 249
feedback, 27, 50, 98, 200, 249
FF Info, 81
filter, 10–11, 13–15, 152–153
fixations, 47, 55–59, 61–62, 65–68, 
250–251, 255, 257, 259
fixed width, 65, 67, 70
flanking letters, 39, 45–47
font tuning, 194–195, 199, 202, 206–207
font design, see type(face) design
font-regularity effect, 193–194
formal characteristics, 132, 146
formation of originality, 109, 117
Fourier transform, 13–15
fovea, 54, 61, 64
Freight, 7, 10–12, 131
French Script, 232, 234, 244
Frutiger, 23–24, 27, 29–31 
Arabic, see Arabic
Astra, 83
Bold, 85–86
Roman, 85–86
Futura, 41, 154, 220
Garamond, 169, 210
Italic, 85–86
Stempel, 197
Geeza Pro, 253, 257, 260, 262–263
genre, 160, 165, 173, 178, 187–189
geometric, 14, 25, 111, 113–114, 144, 
220–221
Georgia, 42–43, 50–52, 65, 67–68, 70, 
131, 232
Gigi, 232, 234
glyph, 83, 87–88, 90–91, 110, 113, 134, 
140–144, 146, 151, 170
Greek, 37–39, 42–43, 50–51, 53, 146, 
151–152, 161, 163
grid, 143, 155, 157, 160–161, 171, 181
guideline, 1, 23, 100, 187–188
halation, 87–88, 90, 141, 180
harmonization, 43, 125, 150–153, 
155–157, 160, 165, 167–171, 215, 
221–222, 224 

270
Index
Harrington, 67
Hasan Enas, 253, 257
Hebrew, 59, 151–152, 161, 170
Hei, 109, 112–113, 128, 198
Helvetica, 21, 68, 129, 168–169, 220
heterogeneous, 19, 24–26, 29, 32–33
High Tower Text, 232
Highway Gothic, 81–83, 85–90 
hinting, 143–144
Hoefler Text, 181
holistic processing, 194–195
homogeneous, 19, 25, 29, 33, 165, 
169–170
hot-metal, 160, 164–165
HuaWenFangSong (STFangsong), 115
hyphenation and justification (H&J), 
209, 216
Ideographic Character Face, 198
ideographic em-box, 198
Impact, 232, 234, 244
Incised 901 Lt BT, 232, 234
Inconsolata, 240-241
Informal Roman, 232
ink trap, 140, 213, 221
inking, 211, 213 
inkwell, see ink trap
interaction design, 173–174, 187–189
interletter spacing, 3, 14, 47, 68–70, 
88–91 
interline, interlinear spacing, see leading
Interstate, 90
interword space, 94–97, 99, 101–106
unspaced, 96–97, 99–105
semi-spaced, 99–104
fully-spaced, 99–104, 106
Ionic No. 5, 209
iPad, 251–253, 256–258, 262–263
iPhone, 145, 253
irradiation, see halation
ITC Avant Garde, 153
Ittihad Text, 221–222
join, 146, 178, 184–185
Juice, 232
Ju Zhen Fang Song, 114
Kai, 109, 112, 115
kerning, 7, 88
Kindle, 249, 253
Kristen, 232
Kufi, 220
large print, 1, 6–7, 15, 20
Latin, 6, 37, 42–43, 52, 110, 116, 134, 
146, 151–152 155–161, 163–171, 
193–207
leading, 1–4, 7, 10, 13, 15, 63, 160–162, 
165, 179–181, 216–217, 221, 250
legibility, 1, 2, 7, 9–12, 19–23, 25, 
27–29, 32–34, 37–38, 40, 48–52, 57, 
63, 65, 67, 71, 79–80, 82–91, 124, 
148, 152–153, 161, 168, 175, 181, 
186, 211, 213–215, 217, 221–222, 
226–227, 233, 241, 243, 245, 
248–250, 253–256, 258–260, 263
letter
frequency, 38, 44
identification, 2–3, 12, 39, 69, 85–86, 
89, 193–195, 249–250, 254
misrecognition, 39–40, 44–47
recognition, 1–3, 12, 20, 26, 38–39, 
41–48, 50–52, 97–98, 105, 158, 193
shape, 25–26, 82, 87, 91, 141, 220
spacing, see inter-letter spacing
superiority effect, 46
terminal, 30, 50, 146, 198
letterform, 26, 38–39, 80, 148, 154, 
156–158, 168, 170, 175, 178, 
182–185, 213, 220
letter width, 21, 23–24, 30–32, 38, 85, 
91, 180
narrow letter, 44–46, 51, 55, 81–83, 
85–86, 146, 156, 180–181, 186, 
211, 215
wide letter, 10, 30, 44–45, 47, 55, 79, 

271
Index
81–82, 85–87, 89, 91, 146, 148, 
156, 182, 184
logographic script, 167
low vision, 12, 19–23, 25, 27, 29–30, 
32–34, 69
lowercase, 6, 37–42, 44, 51, 83, 199
Lucida, 68
Bright, 232
Console, 232, 234
Handwriting, 232
Sans, 68
Sans Unicode, 150–152, 155, 166, 171
luminance, 86–87, 143
macular
degeneration, 5, 9
disease, 70
mask, 26, 39–40, 59, 65, 200, 255, 257, 
259
Matilda, 19, 30–34
media, 131–132, 135, 140, 142, 
145–146, 149, 178
Mencken, 212–216
Merriweather, 140–141, 143–144
Microsoft YaHei, 113
monolingual, 193, 197, 205–206
Monotype Corsiva, 232, 234
Monotype Baskerville, 165; see also 
Baskerville
moving window paradigm, 59–60, 62, 
65
Mrs Eaves, 181
multilingual, 155, 161
multi-script, 152, 156–158, 160–162, 
165–166, 168, 170–171, 251
myopia, 5
Naskh, 220, 222
newspaper, 29, 112, 173, 175–181, 
183–184, 209–215, 217, 220–222, 
224
Nimrod, 175, 181
noise, 9–12, 152–153
non-designer, 193–194, 196–197, 
204–207
normalization, 252, 256
number, 40, 79, 82–83, 86–87, 116, 222, 
224, 230, 250, 256 
numeral, see number
oblique axis, 215, 271
Old English, 64, 66
Open Sans, 227
OpenType, 14, 222
optical scaling, see size specific 
adjustments
Optima, 7, 12
optimization, 1–3, 38, 47–48, 79, 
131–135, 137–139, 144–147, 149
outline, 48, 61, 66, 120–121, 144
Ovink, 84, 228
Palatino, 7, 12, 169
Papyrus, 232
parafovea, 54, 60–61, 64
parallel setting, 160, 162–163, 165, 168
parameter, 19, 21, 23–24, 26–27, 29–30, 
32–33
participants
pattern language, 173–174, 176–178, 
183–189
pattern name, 174, 177
PDA, see Personal Digital Assistant
perceived appropriateness, 226–227, 
240–241
perception, 32, 97, 111, 123, 125, 132–
133, 160, 180, 193, 206, 226–227, 
234, 244
perceptual span, 59, 61, 65
peripheral vision, 3, 5
Perpetua, 187, 210, 232
Persian, 160–161
Personal Digital Assistant (PDA), 248, 
251, 253, 257, 259, 263
personality, 49, 209, 226–229, 231, 234, 
240, 243–245

272
Index
Playbill, 232, 234
Poor Richard, 232, 234
potency, 226, 228–229, 231, 233–234, 
240–241, 243–244
practitioner, 154, 170, 174, 183, 188
preference, 3, 56, 65, 99, 165, 184, 217, 
248–249, 251, 253, 256–257
printing process, 186, 211
proportional font, 65, 70
proximity principle, 97, 105
pseudoword, 26–27
psycho-
linguistic 54, 67
linguist, 64–65, 68
Pyke, 84
qualitative research, 2, 25, 28
quantitative research, 2, 15, 25, 28
rank, 27, 29, 249–250
reaction time (RT), 69, 195, 202
readability, 1–3, 6, 9, 11, 15, 63, 160, 
179–181, 209, 248–250, 255, 
261–263
reader 
characteristic, 3, 197
experience, 5, 222
skill, 20, 25, 106, 249
reader (type of)
adult, 68, 149
beginning, 19–20, 22, 29, 59
child, 19–23, 25–27, 29–30, 32–33, 
62, 94–99, 102–106, 115
expert, 149, 194–197, 205–207
faster, 59, 102
native, 39, 42, 50, 68, 96, 255
non-native, 68, 97
novice, 56, 194
older, 59, 62, 66, 149
partially sighted, 2, 3, 5, 7–8, 
sighted, 2, 3, 7–8, 10, 12, 15, 26 
skilled, 59
slower, 59
visually impaired, 1–3, 6, 8, 10–12, 
15, 19–21, 25–26, 29–30, 32
younger, 59, 66, 149
reading
accuracy, 20, 29, 39–41, 44–46, 
48–52, 99, 200, 202, 204, 207, 
249–250
aids, 1, 20
distance, see distance reading
ease, see ease of reading
expertise, see reader (type of) expert
habit, 1, 11, 215, 253
performance, 2, 10, 12, 44, 50, 69–70, 
79–81, 85–86, 94, 98–99, 102–106, 
195, 200, 202, 205, 207, 249–251, 
253, 257, 263
rate, 1, 2, 8, 10–12, 57–58, 65, 69–70, 
199, 253 
speed, 2–5, 9, 20, 49, 52, 94, 96–98, 
102, 248–250, 261–263
rhythm, 19, 24–26, 29, 32–34, 153, 215
Roboto, 227, 231–232
Rotis, 155
Sabon, 151
saccade, 10, 13, 55–56, 62, 64–65
sans serif typeface, 3, 6, 10–11, 13, 19, 
23–26, 29–30, 67–68, 80–81, 89, 91, 
113, 128, 166, 178, 198, 234, 237, 
244, 249, 251
Script MT, 67
script typeface, 226, 234, 244, 249
semantic differential scale, 226–228, 
232, 249
serif, 1–3, 10–11, 21, 25–26, 30, 59, 
67–68, 79–80, 90, 114, 178, 180, 
184, 187, 198, 211, 234
typeface, 10–11, 19, 25–26, 29–30, 
210, 226, 234, 236
short exposure method, 85–86, 248, 250, 
253–255, 257–258, 264
sign, 79–81, 83, 85, 87–90, 113, 117, 
147–148, 156, 166–169, 171, 227

273
Index
signage, see sign
SimHei, 198, 207
Simplified Chinese, 199
Simplified Arabic, see Arabic
SimSun, 198, 207
Sitka, 37–38, 41–45, 48–53, 145, 227
size specific adjustments, 37, 47–49
size (of type), 1–4, 6–10, 15, 22, 37–39, 
41, 47–49, 65, 80–84, 87, 91, 98–
100, 105, 109, 111, 117, 120–123, 
127–129, 145, 149, 154, 156–160, 
162, 165, 167, 170, 175, 178–180, 
182–183, 193, 197–199, 209, 214–
216, 221, 249–252, 254–256, 261
optical, 38, 145 
perceptual, 83
physical, 48, 65, 132–134, 139 
visual, 121, 123, 125–126, 128, 144, 
153, 198 
software engineering, 174, 189
Song, 109, 112–114, 128 
spatial frequency, 13, 33–34
staircase procedure, 39, 200
Stempel Garamond, see Garamond
stem, 9, 13, 90, 146
STFangsong, 115 
STHeiti Light, 198
stroke, 7, 14, 24–25, 40, 47–48, 81, 
87–88, 110–118, 122–126, 128–129, 
140, 147, 170, 175, 184, 195, 198, 
213–215, 222, 262
contrast, 79, 85, 87, 134, 170, 211, 
214
density, 109, 111, 123
thickness, 1–2, 4, 9, 12, 113–114
STSong, 198
STXihei, 198 
style (of type), 4, 11–12, 67, 88, 
109–110, 112–117, 119–120, 128, 
134, 137, 145, 148, 155, 170, 178, 
182, 185, 187, 193, 213, 215, 220, 
249–251
subjective, 25, 27–29, 123, 229
substituted words, 61, 94, 100, 102–103, 
105
Surface Frame (SF) 111; see also 
Ideographic Character Face (ICF)
Syriac, 161
Systemzwang, 159, 164
Tanseek, 170
Modern pro, 253
Tempus Sans, 232
terminal, 30, 50, 146, 198
test font, 23–24, 26–27, 248, 253
text font, 209–216, 220–221
Thai, 151, 167, 170–171
Thesis, 155
third order approximation of English, 
233, 241
Times New Roman, 6, 8–12, 21, 41, 
64–67, 69–70, 175, 187, 198, 210, 
232, 249 
Tiresias, 7, 9–12
tonos, 50–52
trade-off, 38, 40–41, 177, 185, 189
Traditional Chinese, 126, 200–202
Trebuchet, 232
type(face)
design, 1, 7, 14, 23, 33, 37, 46, 54, 
60, 62–63, 79, 91, 99, 105, 109, 
112, 116–120, 131–132, 142–144, 
146, 150, 152, 154–155, 165, 173, 
175–177, 183–184, 186, 189, 220, 
227 
designer, 19, 27, 38, 40, 80–81, 83, 
89, 111, 116, 128, 131–132, 138, 
145, 152, 155, 186–187, 211, 213
practice, 37, 152, 155, 157, 165; see 
also typographic practice
typeface
appropriateness, 220, 226–228, 
240–241, 243–245
connotation, 227–228, 230; see also 
connotative
typesetting, 1–3, 6–7, 15, 63, 111, 114

274
Index
typographic
knowledge, 19–20, 30, 79, 91, 169, 
186–187, 189
practice, 22, 153, 166, 171, 173, 186, 
189
Unicode, 150–151; see also Lucida Sans 
Unicode
Univers, 148, 154–155, 169
Uthman Script Hafs, 252–253, 260, 
262–263
validity (internal and external), 21–23, 
33
Verdana, 40–41, 49–50, 67, 131, 198, 
232
Vialog, 85–86
Viner Hand, 232
visual 
acuity, 2–3, 5, 11, 54, 134, 149
angle, 39, 55, 133–135, 139
balance, 109, 120, 122–123, 125–126, 
159, 162, 165, 167, 179–181, 183
cue, 94, 105–106
Vivaldi, 232, 234, 240–241, 244
word
shape, 60–61
spacing, see inter-word space
superiority effect, 46
word frequency, 44, 57–58, 61–62, 
66–67, 70
writing system, 42, 110, 112, 193–196, 
199–200, 202–207
x-height, 6–7, 13, 23–24, 30, 38, 40–43, 
47–48, 79, 83–85, 91, 128, 154, 
168, 170, 180–181, 197–199, 211, 
214–215, 217, 240
Yakout Regular, 253, 260, 262–263
ZhongGong, 112, 128

