
DIGITAL ADVERTISING
Digital Advertising offers a detailed and current overview of the field that draws 
on current research and practice by introducing key concepts, models, theories, 
evaluation practices, conflicts, and issues. With a balance of theory and practice, 
this book helps provide the tools to evaluate and understand the effects of digital 
advertising and promotions campaigns. New to this edition is discussion of big 
data analysis, privacy issues, and social media, as well as thought pieces by leading 
industry practitioners. This book is ideal for graduate and upper-level under-
graduate students, as well as academics and practitioners.
Shelly Rodgers is Professor of Strategic Communication at the Missouri School 
of Journalism. With more than $18.5 million in grant support, her research focuses 
on advertising, health, and new technology.
Esther Thorson is Professor of Journalism at the College of Communication 
Arts and Sciences at Michigan State University. She spent 23 years as Associate 
Dean of Journalism at the University of Missouri.


DIGITAL ADVERTISING
Theory and Research
Third Edition
Edited by
Shelly Rodgers
Esther Thorson

Third edition published 2017
by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
and by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2017 Taylor & Francis
The right of the Shelly Rodgers and Esther Thorson to be identified 
as the authors of the editorial material, and of the authors for their 
individual chapters, has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 
78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced 
or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, 
now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, 
or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in 
writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or 
registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation 
without intent to infringe.
First edition published by Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 1999
Second edition published by Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 2007
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Rodgers, Shelly (Shelly Lannette), 1965– editor. | Thorson, Esther, 
editor.
Title: Digital advertising : theory and research / edited by Shelly Rodgers, 
Esther Thorson.
Description: Third edition. | New York, NY : Routledge, 2017. | Includes 
bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016043446 | ISBN 9781138654426 (hardback : alk. 
paper) | ISBN 9781138654457 (pbk. : alk. paper) | ISBN 9781315623252 
(ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Internet advertising.
Classification: LCC HF6146.I58 A38 2017 | DDC 659.14/4—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016043446
ISBN: 978-1-138-65442-6 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-138-65445-7 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-62325-2 (ebk)
Typeset in Bembo
by Apex CoVantage, LLC

To my mother- and father-in-law, June and Joe,  
who always inspire.
—Shelly
To my grandchildren, Madeline, Dominic,  
Will, and Liliana Lynn.
—Esther


About the Contributors
xi
Foreword
xvii
Ronald J. Faber
Preface
xx
Acknowledgments
xxix
PART I
Research Foundations
1
1	
Revisiting the Interactive Advertising Model (IAM) after 
15 Years: An Analysis of Impact and Implications
3
Shelly Rodgers, Sifan Ouyang, and Esther Thorson
2	
Network Advertising Model (NAM)
19
Esther Thorson and Shelly Rodgers
3	
Trends and Opportunities for Digital Advertising 
Research: A Content Analysis of Advertising Age, 2000–2015
31
Samuel M. Tham, Shelly Rodgers, and Esther Thorson
4	
A Systematic Analysis of Interactive Advertising Research 
through a Paradigm Funnel
45
Terry Daugherty and Vanja Djuric
CONTENTS

viii  Contents
PART II
Theory Breakthroughs
67
  5	 Digital Advertising Clutter in an Age of Mobile Media
69
Louisa Ha
  6	 Using Theory of Interactive Media Effects (TIME) to 
Analyze Digital Advertising
86
S. Shyam Sundar, Jinyoung Kim,  
and Andrew Gambino
  7	 Personalization, Perceived Intrusiveness, Irritation, and 
Avoidance in Digital Advertising
110
Mariko Morimoto
  8	 The Role of Reversal Theory in Digital Advertising
124
Jae Min Jung, Kyeong Sam Min, and Drew Martin
  9	 Advertising (In)attention in the Digital Environment
138
Brittany R. L. Duff and Yuliya Lutchyn
PART III 
New Approaches to Research
167
10	 Digital Advertising in a New Age:  
The Power of (Tele)Presence
169
Matthew Lombard and Jennifer Snyder-Duch
11	 Using Digital Media to Improve Public Health  
Communication
188
Marla B. Royne, Kathrynn Pounders, Marian Levy, and Amy 
Rebecca Jones
12	 Consumers’ Motivations for Lurking and Posting in 
Brand Communities on Social Networking Sites
207
Marijke De Veirman, Verolien Cauberghe, Liselot Hudders, and 
Patrick De Pelsmacker
13	 Assessing the Financial Value of Digital Advertising:  
An Event Study Approach
222
Chan Yun Yoo and Tae Hyun Baek

Contents  ix
14	 Between an Ad Block and a Hard Place:  
Advertising Avoidance and the Digital World
243
Louise Kelly, Gayle Kerr, and Judy Drennan
PART IV
Digital Media—Radiating Voices
257
15	 Who Creates Brand-Related Content, and Why?  
The Interplay of Consumer Characteristics and  
Motivations
259
Daniël G. Muntinga, Marjolein Moorman, Peeter W. J. Verlegh, 
and Edith G. Smit
16	 Social Media Advertising: Unraveling the Mystery Box
285
Saleem Alhabash, Juan Mundel, and Syed Ali Hussain
17	 Targeted Digital Advertising and Privacy
300
Heather Shoenberger
18	 Exploring Player Responses toward In-Game  
Advertising: The Impact of Interactivity
310
Laura Herrewijn and Karolien Poels
19	 New Methods for Measuring Advertising Efficacy
327
Daniel McDuff
PART V 
Evaluating Digital Advertising
343
20	 International Digital Advertising: Lessons from Around  
the World
345
Charles R. Taylor and John P. Costello
21	 A Review of Internet and Social Network Advertising  
Formats
362
Francisco Rejón-Guardia and Francisco  
J. Martínez-López
22	 Measuring the Efficiency of Digital Advertising
382
Albena Pergelova and Fernando Angulo-Ruiz

x  Contents
23	 Health Advertising in the Digital Age: Future Trends  
and Challenges
398
Tim K. Mackey and Bryan A. Liang
PART VI
Future Research Trends and Opportunities
419
24	 The Role of Culture in Electronic Word-of-Mouth  
Communication
421
Shu-Chuan Chu
25	 Immersion in Games Exemplifies Why Digital Media 
Create Complex Responses to Ads
427
Mike Schmierbach
26	 The Advent of Virtual Direct Experience (VDE) 
Research in Video Games: Integrating, Augmenting, and 
Informing Brand-Communication Strategies in Digital/
Interactive Media
431
Frank E. Dardis
27	 Advertising in Video Games: An Overview and Future 
Research Considerations
435
Anthony M. Limperos
28	 Easy Loving: Understanding Affect in Social Media
439
Attila Pohlmann and Qimei Chen
29	 Considerations for Application of Computational  
Social Science Research Approaches to Digital  
Advertising Research
446
Jisu Huh
Index
455

Saleem Alhabash is an Assistant Professor of Public Relations and Social Media, 
Department of Advertising + Public Relations, Michigan State University. He 
researches persuasive effects of new and social media.
Fernando Angulo-Ruiz is an Associate Professor in the Department of Interna-
tional Business, Marketing, and Strategy, School of Business, MacEwan University. 
His research examines marketing capabilities, marketing performance, and inter-
national entrepreneurship.
Tae Hyun Baek is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Integrated Strategic 
Communication at the University of Kentucky. His research focuses on digital 
strategies and advertising.
Verolien Cauberghe is an Associate Professor in the Department of Communi-
cation Sciences, Faculty of Political and Social Science, Ghent University (Bel-
gium). Her research focuses on advertising effectiveness and social marketing.
Qimei Chen is a Professor of Marketing, Jean E. Rolles Distinguished Professor, 
and Associate Dean for Academic Affairs, Shidler College of Business, University 
of Hawaiʻi at Ma¯noa. Her research examines consumer empowerment.
Shu-Chuan Chu is an Associate Professor of Advertising and Program Chair at the 
College of Communication at DePaul University. Her research interests include 
social media, electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM), and cross-cultural consumer 
behavior.
ABOUT THE CONTRIBUTORS

xii  About the Contributors
John P. Costello is a Graduate Research Fellow at Villanova University. Previously, 
he was an Associate Planner for Saks Fifth Avenue and a Merchandise Analyst for 
American Eagle Outfitters.
Frank E. Dardis is an Associate Professor at Penn State University. His research 
interests include in-game advertising, brand-communication message factors, and 
interactive advertising effects.
Terry Daugherty is Chair and Associate Professor of Marketing in the Depart-
ment of Marketing, The University of Akron. He is Editor-in-Chief of the Journal 
of Interactive Advertising.
Vanja Djuric is Associate Instructor in the Department of Marketing and the 
Director of Analytics for the Taylor Institute for Direct Marketing, College of 
Business Administration, The University of Akron.
Judy Drennan is a Professor of Marketing at QUT Business School. Her research 
expertise is in digital technology and its influence on consumer behavior.
Brittany R. L. Duff is an Associate Professor of Advertising, Charles H. Sand-
age Department of Advertising, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. She 
researches attention to advertising, especially selective attention (ignoring ads) and 
divided attention (multitasking).
Ronald J. Faber is a Professor Emeritus of Mass Communication, School of Jour-
nalism and Mass Communication, University of Minnesota. His research includes 
compulsive buying, political advertising, cross-cultural advertising, and consumer 
socialization.
Andrew Gambino is a doctoral candidate at Penn State University. His research 
focuses on the human-technology relationship, artificial intelligence, and psycho-
logical aspects of communication technologies (http://comm.psu.edu/people/
individual/andrew-gambino).
Louisa Ha is a Professor in the School of Media and Communication at Bowling 
Green State University and Editor of Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly. 
Her research examines online advertising and mobile media.
Laura Herrewijn is a Post-Doctoral Researcher at Ghent University, Belgium. 
Her research focuses on the effectiveness of persuasive content in digital games.
Liselot Hudders is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Communication 
Sciences, Faculty of Political and Social Science, Ghent University (Belgium). 
Her research examines consumption and happiness, and advertising effectiveness.

About the Contributors  xiii
Jisu Huh is Professor and Raymond O. Mithun Chair in Advertising, School of 
Journalism and Mass Communication, University of Minnesota. Her research 
examines DTC prescription drugs and interactive/digital/social advertising, 
among others.
Syed Ali Hussain is a doctoral student at the School of Journalism, Michigan 
State University. His research focuses on visual illness narratives on social media 
(photographs on Tumblr and Instagram).
Amy Rebecca Jones is a doctoral student in the Department of Marketing and 
Supply Chain Management at the University of Memphis. Her research focuses 
on sensory marketing.
Jae Min Jung is a Professor of Marketing at the California State Polytechnic Uni-
versity, Pomona. His research focuses on advertising and consumer psychology 
related to goals, judgment, persuasion, and cultural values.
Louise Kelly is a Lecturer in Advertising, Media and Digital at QUT Business 
School and researches in the area of advertising engagement and avoidance, online 
privacy, and social media platforms.
Gayle Kerr is a Professor of Advertising, IMC and Digital at QUT Business 
School. She researches consumer empowerment, engagement, and avoidance, 
examining it across platforms and in the context of advertising self-regulation.
Jinyoung Kim is a doctoral student at Penn State University. Her research focuses 
on psychological effects of communication technology and how technological 
affordances change health-related attitudes/behaviors via interactive messages.
Marian Levy is an Assistant Dean and Associate Professor in the School of Public 
Health at the University of Memphis. Her research focuses on social and environ-
mental support for healthy lifestyles.
Bryan A. Liang is a Professor Emeritus at University of California, San Diego, 
School of Medicine and Special Advisor, Global Health Policy Institute. The focus 
of his work is on the systematic impact of health policy and law on providers, 
patients, and patient safety.
Anthony M. Limperos is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Communi-
cation, University of Kentucky. His research includes psychology of video games, 
media effects, new communication technology, and health communication.
Matthew Lombard is an Associate Professor in the Department of Media Studies 
and Production at Temple University in Philadelphia, PA. His research centers on 
psychological processing of media.

xiv  About the Contributors
Yuliya Lutchyn is a Consumer Behavior and User Experience Researcher at 
Microsoft. Her interdisciplinary work spans the fields of consumer psychology, 
mediated communication, and human-computer interaction (HCI).
Tim K. Mackey is an Assistant Professor at UC San Diego School of Medicine, 
Associate Program Director, UC San Diego Masters Health Policy & Law Pro-
gram, and Director of the Global Health Policy Institute (www.ghpolicy.org).
Drew Martin is a Professor of Marketing at the University of Hawaii, Hilo. His 
research explores consumer decision-making and tourism behavior and focuses 
on psychological, social, and cultural influences.
Francisco J. Martínez-López is a Professor of Business Administration, Depart-
ment of Business Administration, Business School, University of Granada and 
Open University of Catalonia (Spain). His research includes e-business, consumer 
behavior, and management.
Daniel McDuff is Director of Research at Affectiva. He completed his Ph.D. at 
the MIT Media Lab in 2014 and has a B.A. and Masters from Cambridge Uni-
versity. His research examines psychology and computer science.
Kyeong Sam Min is the Sidney Baron Associate Professor of Marketing at the Uni-
versity of New Orleans. His research examines consumer judgment and decision- 
making, marketing communication, and cross-cultural psychology.
Marjolein Moorman is an Associate Professor in political communication in 
the Communication Science department at the University of Amsterdam. Her 
research examines advertising effect measurement, among others.
Mariko Morimoto is an Associate Professor of Marketing in the Faculty of Liberal 
Arts at Sophia University, Tokyo, Japan. Her research includes cross-cultural adver-
tising, source credibility, and consumers’ online privacy concerns.
Juan Mundel is a doctoral student at the Department of Advertising + Public 
Relations, Michigan State University. His research extends marketing practices to 
social media communication for vulnerable populations.
Daniël G. Muntinga is an Assistant Professor of Persuasive Communication at the 
University of Amsterdam. He studies historical development of advertising and 
branding in digital contexts.
Sifan Ouyang is a Media Executive at Neo@Ogilvy, Shanghai, China. He 
received his Masters degree at the Missouri School of Journalism. His research 
focuses on digital advertising in social media.

About the Contributors  xv
Patrick De Pelsmacker is a Professor of Marketing at the University of Antwerp 
(Belgium). His research includes advertising in new media, cross-cultural brand-
ing and advertising, and sustainable consumption.
Albena Pergelova is an Associate Professor at the School of Business, MacEwan 
University. Her research centers on “interactiveness” and consumer empower-
ment, as well as entrepreneurship.
Karolien Poels is an Associate Professor of Strategic Communication at the 
Department of Communication Studies, University of Antwerp. Her research 
includes advertising and consumer psychology, and digital games and social media.
Attila Pohlmann is a consumer behavior researcher and instructor in the Shidler 
College of Business, University of Hawaiʻi at Ma¯noa. He studies social identities 
and dynamics involved in food consumption.
Kathrynn Pounders is an Assistant Professor of Advertising and Public Relations, 
Stan Richards School at the University of Texas at Austin. Her research examines 
consumer behavior in social marketing.
Francisco Rejón-Guardia is an Assistant Professor of Marketing in the Depart-
ment of Business & Economics at the University of Balearic Islands, Spain. His 
research includes social media and online consumer behavior.
Marla B. Royne is the Great Oaks Foundation Professor of Marketing and Chair 
of Marketing & Supply Chain Management at the University of Memphis. Her 
research examines social marketing related to health messages.
Mike Schmierbach is an Associate Professor at Pennsylvania State University. His 
research explores how prior media use shapes evaluations of and reactions to 
media, particularly video games.
Heather Shoenberger is an Assistant Professor of Strategic Communication at 
University of Oregon. Her research focuses on consumer decision-making and 
privacy issues relating to digital media.
Edith G. Smit is Dean of the Graduate School of Communication and Profes-
sor of Persuasive Communication at the Amsterdam School of Communication 
Research, University of Amsterdam.
Jennifer Snyder-Duch is an Associate Professor of Communication at Carlow 
University in Pittsburgh, PA. Her teaching, research, and community engagement 
focus on diversity and advocacy in traditional and digital media.

xvi  About the Contributors
S. Shyam Sundar is Distinguished Professor and founding Director of the Media 
Effects Research Laboratory (http://www.psu.edu/dept/medialab) at Penn State 
University. His research investigates psychological aspects of new communication 
technologies (http://comm.psu.edu/people/individual/s.-shyam-sundar).
Charles R. Taylor is the John A. Murphy Professor of Marketing at the Villanova 
University of Business and Senior Research Fellow at the Center for Marketing 
and Consumer Insights. His research examines marketing and society issues.
Samuel M. Tham is a doctoral student at Michigan State University with research 
interests in advertising, decision-making, and communication technology. Prior to 
academia, he was a 360-degree advertising professional for over seven years.
Marijke De Veirman is a Teaching Assistant and doctoral candidate in the Depart-
ment of Communication Sciences, Faculty of Political and Social Science, Ghent 
University (Belgium). Her research examines social media marketing.
Peeter W. J. Verlegh is a Professor of Marketing at Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam. 
He studies word-of-mouth, social media, and marketing communication, with a 
consumer focus.
Chan Yun Yoo is an Associate Professor of Integrated Strategic Communication 
at the University of Kentucky. His research examines digital advertising. His book 
is titled: Preattentive Processing of Web Advertising.

Someone who knew me well once described me as being “an analogue person 
in a digital world.” It may, therefore, be somewhat ironic for me to be writing the 
foreword for this book. However, having spent a long career studying advertising 
and mass communication, I can recognize when a seismic change in advertis-
ing is occurring and appreciate the need for insight and direction to help guide 
advertising theory and research through this transition. This is clearly such a time 
in the development of advertising, and Digital Advertising promises to be a book to 
provide some of the needed guidance.
Although some trace the beginning of mass media back as far as the develop-
ment of movable type in 1440, it wasn’t until the advent of the penny press in 
the 1830s and 40s that the media could truly be called a mass medium (Rog-
ers, 1986). Since that time we have experienced a major change in the nature 
of mass media and media advertising at the rate of only once or twice in every 
lifetime. Radio and radio networks came into prominence in the late 1920s and 
early 1930s, changing the nature and focus of advertising messages and a blurring 
the lines between entertainment and advertising (Fox, 1985). Television became 
the dominant medium in the early 1950s (Dominick, 1983) and brought with 
it an increased importance on image and visual messages and the realization of 
the value of achieving brand recall (Samuel, 2001; Sivulka, 2012). In the past 
15–20  years, digital media have begun to revolutionize communications and 
advertising. Beginning in 2016 or 2017, digital advertising is expected to overtake 
television in terms of advertising spending (Ember, 2015; Kroll, 2016).
With each dynamic shift in media dominance, we have seen a corresponding 
change in where advertising dollars are allocated, and this was eventually fol-
lowed by a major change in the focus of advertising and communication research 
and theory. Typically, with the start of any new medium, researchers re-examine 
FOREWORD

xviii  Foreword
previous questions and issues to see if they still hold for the new medium. It is 
typically only after this that we begin to develop new questions and theories 
based on crucial characteristics of the new medium. We are now at this time in 
developing our understanding of digital advertising, and this book, Digital Adver-
tising, is perfectly positioned to begin this effort by identifying what we currently 
know and suggesting directions for future research and theory.
The editors of Digital Advertising, Shelly Rodgers and Esther Thorson, are 
among the leading scholars in advertising and are well qualified to help us iden-
tify the changes needed to improve and expand research and theory in these 
changing times. I have had the pleasure of knowing them both for many years 
and have seen how highly regarded they are by their peers. Shelly was elected 
and served as President of the American Academy of Advertising (AAA), and Esther 
was named as a Fellow of AAA, the organization’s most prestigious honor. Both, 
together and independently, have already produced many important works in 
driving our understanding of digital advertising and promoting scholarly under-
standing of advertising in general. Together, they co-edited Advertising Theory, 
which has played an important role in updating and advancing theory building in 
advertising (Rodgers & Thorson, 2012). Esther also co-authored one of the first 
important volumes exploring digital advertising (Schumann & Thorson, 1999), 
while Shelly has authored or co-authored numerous groundbreaking articles on 
various aspects of digital advertising. Together they also co-authored “The Inter-
active Advertising Model: How Users Perceive and Process Online Advertising” 
(Rodgers & Thorson, 2000). This work has served as an important framework for 
research on digital advertising, and an updated version of this model serves as a 
useful starting point for this book.
In Digital Advertising, they have once again brought together an excellent group 
of prominent advertising researchers to explore, expand, and direct the develop-
ment of advertising research and theory. Contributors to this volume include 
several current and past editors of the top journals in advertising and mass commu-
nication such as Terry Daughtery ( Journal of Interactive Advertising), Marla Royne 
( Journal of Advertising), Ray Taylor (International Journal of Advertising), and Louisa 
Ha ( Journalism  & Mass Communication Quarterly). Many other chapter authors 
have been among the leaders of research on digital advertising since its inception, 
while others represent some of the best up-and-coming minds in the field.
The development and growth of digital advertising will call for many changes 
in the models, critical concepts, and methods we use to understand the impact 
of advertising on consumers and society. The growth of Instagram, Twitter, Face-
book, Google, YouTube, Snapchat, and numerous other vehicles is highlighting 
and altering the notion of who creates, distributes, and controls advertising and 
brand messaging. Donald Trump’s 2016 presidential campaign has demonstrated 
how a new two-step flow from Twitter or Instagram to media outlets and then 
on to the public can be every bit as effective, or more so, than traditional media 
advertising. These changes may enhance the importance of concepts such as trust, 

Foreword  xix
message/brand salience, and strength of belief. Emerging technologies such as 
virtual reality and holographic imaging may increase our focus of concepts like 
presence and emersion. They are also likely to alter our reliance on various meth-
ods of analysis, increasing the importance of tools like multi-level modeling and 
network analysis. The ability of digital media to provide seamless feedback on 
media use, advertising exposure, and purchase behavior provides huge amounts 
of information for exploration, enhancing the importance of techniques such as 
database management, web analytics, and data mining, making information and 
computer science more integral to advertising.
It is an interesting and exciting time for advertising theory and research. How-
ever, we are still in the early stages of this media evolution. Digital advertising is 
likely to grow in ways still unimagined and with it, our theories and models will 
also need to change. Digital Advertising is a book to help start us on this journey.
Ronald J. Faber
Professor Emeritus
University of Minnesota
References
Dominick, J. R. (1983). The dynamics of mass communication. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley 
Publishing Company.
Ember, S. (2015, December 7). Digital ad spending expected to soon surpass TV. New York 
Times, B-6. Retrieved May  28, 2016 from http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/07/
business/media/digital-ad-spending-expected-to-soon-surpass-tv.
Fox, S. (1985). The mirror makers: A history of American advertising and its creators. New York, 
NY: Random House.
Kroll, S. (2016, May 12). European digital ad spend surpasses TV; 57% ads in-view in Q1 2016.  
Exchange Wire. Retrieved May 28, 2016 from https://www.exchangewire.com/blog/ 
2016/05/12/european-digital-ad-spend-surpasses-tv-57-ads-in-view-in-q1–2016.
Rodgers, S., & Thorson, E. (2000). The interactive advertising model: How people perceive 
and process interactive ads. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 1(1), 42–61.
Rodgers, S., & Thorson, E. (2012). Advertising theory. New York, NY: Routledge.
Rogers, E. M. (1986). Communication technology: The new media in society. New York, NY: 
The Free Press.
Samuel, L. R. (2001). Brought to you by: Postwar television and the American dream. Austin, TX: 
University of Texas Press.
Schumann, D. W., & Thorson, E. (1999). Advertising and the world wide web. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Sivulka, J. (2012). Soap, sex, and cigarettes: A cultural history of American advertising. Boston, 
MA: Wadsworth.

Digital Advertising
With an almost infinite number of digital possibilities, communication fields 
are in chaos. There’s a lot that brands can do, but how do brands decide which 
avenues to pursue? Our response is to begin with sound theory about targeted, 
intentional messages combined with the recognition that customers have become 
extremely active in this process.
Building on this premise, Digital Advertising—co-edited by Shelly Rodgers and 
Esther Thorson—updates two previous editions:
Schumann, D., & Thorson, E. (2007). Internet advertising: Theory and research (2nd 
Ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Schumann, D., & Thorson, E. (1999). Advertising and the World Wide Web. Hills-
dale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Our primary objective was to offer a wide-ranging text that draws on current 
research and practices in digital advertising by introducing key concepts, models, 
theories, evaluation practices, conflicts, and issues for individuals interested in this 
area.
So what prompted this 3rd edition? For starters, the prior editions of the text 
were written during a time when internet advertising was synonymous with ban-
ner ads and pop-ups, and interactivity consisted of connecting with consumers via 
email, instant message, or blogs. And much of the scholarly research at that time 
focused on testing traditional concepts online, such as segmenting or using clicks 
to determine the effectiveness of internet ads.
A lot has changed since then, starting with the terminology and, to some 
degree, the metrics used. Digital Advertising provides a detailed and current view 
PREFACE

Preface  xxi
of what might be considered digital advertising theory. The book provides readers 
with a working knowledge of the primary theoretical approaches and will help 
readers synthesize the vast literature on digital advertising. The book also helps to 
provide the critical tools necessary to evaluate and understand the effects of digital 
advertising with emphasis on mobile and social media. Chapters are authored by 
leading scholars from around the globe, and several leading industry practitioners 
provide their thoughts about theory, metrics, and a host of other issues related to 
digital advertising. To put theories into action, practical examples are provided.
Who will benefit from this book? Given our focus is on scholarly research, 
Digital Advertising is intended to address the need for a current scholarly text that 
spans the digital advertising literature. Thus, the book is an essential reading for 
graduate and upper-level undergraduate students, as well as academics and practi-
tioners wanting to understand how to carry out effective digital advertising.
Theoretical Premise
To better orient the reader, the theoretical premise of Digital Advertising is that 
the crucial mechanism is a network of message movements across platforms, with 
frequent message curation, manipulation, and even creation (e.g., user-generated 
advertising) by participants (formerly known as the audience).
The current media landscape is moving at such a fast pace, fueled by digital 
technologies and media, one might question whether it is possible to document 
this dynamic environment in a thorough and detailed manner. We believe it is not 
only possible, but with the right theoretical premise, such a book may get ahead of 
the debate by articulating a forward thinking research agenda with staying power, 
even within a fast-changing digital environment.
Many of the strategies and tactics of advertising are understood in the limited 
theoretical perspective of message distribution to individuals (e.g., targeted behav-
ioral advertising) or to aggregates (TV primetime audiences).
However, most brand campaigns now employ combinations of paid, earned, 
social, and owned media tools. Further, advertising agencies and advertising research-
ers have long considered their main task to be distributing television, print, or digital 
ads, and then measuring how consumers respond to them. More and more, how-
ever, the movement of advertisements through what Henry Jenkins (2008) calls a 
“spreadable media model” has become the central focus for advertising campaigns.
We call this process “promotional radiating.” Indeed, radiation through a net-
work involves many examples of message functionalities significantly different 
from those intended by message creators. This large and complex movement and 
development involves participants passing along or endorsing messages, viral phe-
nomena in which reach skyrockets, and what promotion professionals call elec-
tronic word-of-mouth (eWOM).
Big data analysis tools have made it possible to track and analyze brand-
related activities in this complex network of message movement. This is critically 

xxii  Preface
important to professional persuaders because it is a new view of consumer 
response, and because that flow and patterning itself can be joined and influenced 
by persuaders.
Brand “fandom,” trans-media branding, image recognition, real-time social 
media analysis, and content marketing are tools that have become crucial for effec-
tive brand campaigns. Many of these concepts are relatively new. Digital Advertising 
aims to fill a void in the literature by bringing together an elite group of “forward 
thinkers,” who lay the groundwork for these and other current issues in digital 
advertising scholarship. And each chapter provides suggestions for future research.
How the Book is Organized
Drawing from the book’s theoretical premise, Digital Advertising is organized 
into six main parts: 1) Research Foundations, 2) Theory Breakthroughs, 3) New 
Approaches to Research, 4) Digital Media—Radiating Voices, 5) Evaluating Digi-
tal Advertising, and 6) Future Research Trends and Opportunities.
To add cohesion throughout the text, each section draws from and builds on 
Chapters 1 and 2, which provide a theoretical premise for the book.
Part I—Research Foundations 
Part I sets the stage for the entire book by providing four chapters that lay a foun-
dation for understanding key theories and concepts presented in the book.
Chapter 1
To demonstrate the utility of the original IAM and to illustrate uses of the new 
IAM, Chapter 1, by Rodgers, Ouyang, and Thorson, provides the findings of 
a content analysis of 385 articles that cite the IAM. The purpose was twofold: 
1) show how the original IAM has been used by scholars worldwide, 2) set the 
stage for an updated version of the IAM that accounts for changes in emerging 
technology since the introduction of the original IAM.
Chapter 2
Building on Chapter  1, Chapter  2, by Thorson and Rodgers, presents a new 
model that encapsulates and extends the IAM. Called the Networking Advertis-
ing Model, or NAM, Chapter 2 provides the beginnings of a theory that takes 
networking and “spreadability” into account, and suggests examples that help to 
illustrate how the new model may operate with regard to advertising.
Chapter 3
The purpose of Chapter 3, co-authored by Tham, Rodgers, and Thorson, is to 
map industry trends in digital advertising. The primary question to be addressed 

Preface  xxiii
is which areas of industry could provide further advancement by scholars? The 
chapter involves a close analysis of trends as identified in the last few years of the 
industry publication Advertising Age.
Chapter 4
Chapter 4, by Daugherty and Djuric, report the results of a systematic analysis of 
interactive advertising research using the paradigm funnel and based on the Journal 
of Interactive Advertising. The results provide a useful starting point for scholars want-
ing to understand what research has been conducted—as witnessed through the 
pages of JIAD—and where their research may fit into this growing body of research.
Part II—Theory Breakthroughs  
To help readers navigate the vast literature on digital advertising and pro-
motion, Part II articulates current breakthroughs in theories. Chapters are 
written on a broad range of topics ranging from psychological processing 
of message types (e.g., video ads, native ads, user-generated content), digital 
channels (e.g., social media, mobile), and advertising clutter.
Chapter 5
Ha’s Chapter 5 reviews the evolution of research on advertising clutter in three 
different contexts: traditional media, online media, and mobile platforms.
Chapter 6
Chapter 6, by Sundar, Kim, and Gambino, presents the theory of interactive media 
effects (TIME) and analyzes seven recent trends in digital advertising via two pro-
posed theoretical routes, i.e., cue route and action route.
Chapter 7
Using the theory of psychological reactance, Morimoto (Chapter 7) examines 
the relationship between consumer privacy online and negative responses to 
digital advertising. This includes perceived intrusiveness, irritation and avoidance, 
and the role of advertising personalization in easing negative responses to digital 
advertising.
Chapter 8
Jung, Min, and Martin, in Chapter 8, draw on reversal theory to offer a compel-
ling approach to explain complex consumer behaviors that fluctuate between 
meta-motivational states in consumers’ cyber journeys. The authors review the 

xxiv  Preface
digital advertising literature on reversal theory and conclude by providing possible 
avenues for future research.
Chapter 9
Chapter 9, by Duff and Lutchyn, looks at how consumers exert control over their 
media and ad environment by limiting their exposure to advertising through avoid-
ance, engaging with other content simultaneously, or meta-engaging with ads by 
being aware that those ads are supporting the media content that the ad is placed in.
Part III—New Approaches to Research 
Part III drills down into the various approaches to digital advertising. Research-
ers and practitioners have always been concerned with how to get people to 
pay attention to, and how to keep attention focused on advertising—and digital 
advertising is no different. YouTube’s attempt to get people to watch ads by forc-
ing an ad prior to the viewing of a video is one example. Digital advertising has 
also influenced the way in which people view advertising in traditional media. As 
shown in Part II, competing ad clutter in digital advertising environments neces-
sitates research to determine how or what researchers and practitioners can do 
to enhance attentiveness and persuasion in digital and traditional environments. 
Thus, this section is devoted to highlighting key factors that can influence digital 
advertising strategies.
Chapter 10
Chapter 10, by Lombard and Synder-Duch, introduces the concept of presence 
(or telepresence) and offers a theoretical framework and research paradigm that is 
relevant to advertising in the digital age.
Chapter 11
With the changing nature of the healthcare environment, Chapter 11, by Royne, 
Pounders, Levy, and Jones, provides an overview of some of the pressing healthcare 
issues and discusses various digital media that may be used to provide health infor-
mation, followed by a discussion of how message strategies may be used to more 
fully engage with consumers who require a deeper knowledge of health issues.
Chapter 12
De Veirman, Cauberghe, Hudders, and De Pelsmacker (Chapter 12) discuss social 
networking sites (SNS) brand communities and provide an overview of previous 

Preface  xxv
research and an empirical study on how people interact with brands on SNSs and 
what motivates them to do so.
Chapter 13
Yoo and Baek, in Chapter 13, present the event study method and demonstrate 
how it can be used to explain digital advertising’s accountability. The authors then 
examine the effect of digital advertising on a firm’s financial value to demonstrate 
the method’s utility.
Chapter 14
Kelly, Kerr, and Drennan (Chapter 14) examine advertising avoidance by building 
on the theoretical premise of promotional radiation and applying an approach/
avoidance framework to define advertising avoidance and identify types of 
antecedents.
Part IV—Digital Media—Radiating Voices
Now, more than ever, consumers in a digital environment actively participate 
in the message creation/dissemination process. The world is changing, and the 
continued growth of global commerce and the advertising industry in emerging 
markets will increasingly change the ways that global marketers do business (Tay-
lor, 2013). Part IV examines digital promotional techniques and channel selection 
with a focus on current research and literature on social media, the role of search, 
segmenting and targeting, mobile, in-game advertising, and emerging markets, to 
name a few.
Chapter 15
Chapter 15, by Muntinga, Moorman, Verlegh, and Smit, demonstrates why brand-
related content creation is the consequence of various factors working in concert. 
Different consumers are shown to have different motivations to create brand-
related content, and the influence of consumer characteristics on brand content 
creation is mediated by intrinsic motivations.
Chapter 16
With the proliferation and prevalence of social media and social networking sites, 
Chapter 16, by Alhabash, Mundel, and Hussain, provides the landscape of social 
media usage patterns in advertising, marketing, and public relations. The chap-
ter draws on classical advertising/persuasion theories to better understand social 
media’s fit in the chain of processes leading to persuasion.

xxvi  Preface
Chapter 17
In Chapter 17, Shoenberger reviews the concept of privacy in the digital context 
and outlines the privacy paradox.
Chapter 18
Herrewijn and Poels (Chapter 18) discuss in-game advertising, provide a defini-
tion of the practice, and give an overview of its benefits and drawbacks. They 
present the results of a case study that examines how players respond to different 
types of ads in digital games.
Chapter 19
McDuff’s chapter (Chapter  19) illustrates how measurement of emotion, in 
addition to cognitive responses to advertising, are not only possible with digital 
technology but necessary, and shows how these practices have been applied to 
evaluating digital advertising effectiveness.
Part V—Evaluating Digital Advertising 
Measuring the impact of advertising efforts has been the focus of advertising 
researchers and practitioners for decades. New approaches in social media enable 
advertisers to target consumers with highly personalized content, product place-
ments are used to enhance gaming experiences, and the integration of traditional 
with digital advertising has changed the way that people interact with and use 
traditional media. Advertisers are challenged to create new and novel ways to 
compose a seamless brand experience, changing the way that people engage with 
brands. But do these novel approaches work? As our authors demonstrate in this 
section, more studies are needed that examine the effectiveness of various evalua-
tion approaches, including the use of new metrics designed to capture meaningful 
brand experiences and advertising value.
Chapter 20
Chapter 20, by Taylor and Costello, discusses factors that have led to the rise of 
digital advertising internationally. The authors examine digital advertising research 
from three perspectives, propose general principles related to digital advertising 
internationally, and conclude by summarizing major findings and outlining future 
areas to guide international digital advertising research.
Chapter 21
In Chapter 21, Rejón-Guardia and Martínez-López provide an extensive litera-
ture review on online advertising, emphasizing traditional forms of internet ads 
and social network ads. The chapter concludes with recommendations for manag-
ers and academics for improving the efficacy of online advertising.

Preface  xxvii
Chapter 22
Pergelova and Angulo-Ruiz (Chapter  22) synthesize the digital advertising  
effectiveness literature and propose a model that incorporates a broader set 
of metrics, including consumer empowerment, and outlines an efficiency 
methodological measurement approach that captures a diversity of input and 
outputs.
Chapter 23
Mackey and Liang (Chapter  23) review the health advertising literature as it 
relates to digital advertising and identify trends and challenges, such as health and 
pharmaceutical advertising, direct-to-consumer advertising, the growing role of 
social networking in health, and the need for reliable data on health marketing 
expenditures.
Part VI—Future Research Trends and Opportunities
The majority of the book is devoted to updating what has changed in the 
digital realm since the first and second editions of this text. Our final section, 
Part VI, is devoted to projecting ahead about what else may change or what we 
might expect to see coming down the proverbial pipeline. Thus, the final section 
draws on the collective wisdom of veteran and beginning scholars, who pro-
vided “think pieces” about where research on digital advertising and promotion 
has been and where it might be headed. Our purpose in this final section is to 
leave readers with tangible ideas for their own studies and research on digital 
advertising.
Chapter 24
Chu, in Chapter 24, examines the role of culture in electronic word-of-mouth 
(eWOM), noting that the majority of studies on eWOM have been conducted 
in the U.S. and Western contexts, leaving a lot of questions regarding the role of 
eWOM in cross-cultural settings.
Chapter 25
Schmierbach (Chapter 25) presents and defines the concept of immersion, argu-
ing that the term is vague, and findings do not yet account for how this relation-
ship may be nonlinear or moderated by the content of the ad.
Chapter 26
Dardis (Chapter  26) discusses in-game advertising and argues there are many 
under-examined variables that can affect brand-related outcomes, specifically 
related to virtual direct experience (VDE).

xxviii  Preface
Chapter 27
Limperos (Chapter  27) also examines advertising in video games but with a 
focus on understanding key factors that may affect how people process and recall 
ads that appear in video games, followed by suggestions about how researchers 
might continue to study the effectiveness and overall value of this form of digital 
advertising.
Chapter 28
Chapter 28, by Pohlmann and Chen, explores how social media has disrupted 
traditional measurement of affect. They discuss challenges with the traditional 
hierarchy of effects models and propose a new interactive response model to bet-
ter understand and manage consumers’ interactions with social media advertising.
Chapter 29
Chapter 29, by Huh, argues that computational social science research that uses big 
data has great potential for examining consumers’ interactions with and responses 
to digital advertising, and for contributing to advertising theory building. She 
presents important considerations for multidisciplinary computational advertising 
research and provides several new directions for future research in this area.
References
Jenkins, H. (2008). Convergence culture: Where old and new media collide. New York, NY: New 
York University Press.
Taylor, C. R. (2013). Editorial: Hot topics in advertising research. International Journal of 
Advertising, 32(1), 7–12.

We are so deeply indebted to all our contributors, without whom this book 
would not be possible. Your creative and forward-thinking chapters have inspired 
us, and we feel lucky to have the privilege to edit your works!
A huge thanks goes out to our two detailed and highly organized editorial 
assistants—Frances Gordon and Dani Myers. Thank you!
We also thank our publisher friends, Christina Chronister and Julie Toich, 
for their organization and assistance—you were a sheer delight to work with 
throughout the entire process.
There were many, many colleagues who were kind enough to discuss the 
book with us in preparing the proposal, identifying potential contributors, and 
finalizing chapters—you know who you are—thank you for your great ideas and 
generosity!
Shelly is glad to have another chance to work with her long-time friend and 
colleague, Esther.
Esther thinks that Shelly is the most organized human she knows, and as always, 
learns so much working with Shelly!
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


PART I
Research Foundations


Introduction
The Interactive Advertising Model (IAM), developed by Rodgers and Thorson 
(2000), was one of the first models that theorized about the interactions between 
internet users and online advertisements. In the 15+ years since its inception 
and initial publication, the model has been widely referenced by scholars from 
various academic disciplines (advertising, marketing, IT, etc.), and is recognized as 
an effective model for understanding how interactive advertising “works” (Kim, 
Hayes, Avant, & Reid, 2014).
Despite the growing number of scholarly publications and articles citing the 
IAM, it is both necessary and beneficial to evaluate the IAM’s impact and influ-
ence on scholarship by examining how scholars have used and critiqued the IAM 
over the past 15 years. This examination allows quantification of the impact of the 
IAM and enhances further understanding of the explanatory power of the model 
in digital advertising, as well as other contexts. This analysis also sheds insights 
on how the IAM may be revised and adapted to the fast-changing landscape of 
digital advertising.
The objectives of the present chapter are two-fold: First, we quantitatively 
assess the impact of the IAM by analyzing all peer-reviewed articles citing the 
IAM over a 15-year period (2000 to 2015). Second, we use the content analy-
sis findings to identify themes, trends, and potential challenges associated with 
the IAM. Chapter 2 then builds on the results of this chapter by presenting an 
extended version of the IAM that attempts to fill gaps identified by research 
reported in Chapter 1.
The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows. First, we briefly review 
the IAM and its various components. Next, we provide an explanation of the 
methodology used to analyze articles that cite the IAM. Then, results of our analysis 
1
REVISITING THE INTERACTIVE 
ADVERTISING MODEL (IAM) 
AFTER 15 YEARS
An Analysis of Impact and Implications
Shelly Rodgers, Sifan Ouyang, and Esther Thorson

4  Rodgers, Ouyang, and Thorson
are provided, followed by a discussion of theoretical implications going forward. 
Based on our results, we conclude that the IAM remains useful for understanding 
how people perceive and process advertising in a Web 1.0 environment; however, 
the model may need to be revised and updated to reflect the current and dynamic 
Web 2.0 and even Web 3.0 technologies.
Overview of the IAM
Rodgers and Thorson (2000) conceptualized the Interactive Advertising Model, 
or IAM, as an integrative process, based on three dominant paradigms or schools 
of thought: functional, structural, and information processing (see Figure 1 from 
Rodgers & Thorson, 2000). The authors argued that a theoretical integration of 
multiple paradigms could serve to better understand and interpret the complex 
nature of the interactive environment, as the internet itself was an “integrated 
medium” (Rodgers & Thorson, 2000, p. 43).
Both function and structure could determine the internet users’ informa-
tion processing of advertising in cyberspace. The functionalist view explains how 
(mode) and why (motive) users use the internet, as well as the various stages of 
information processing (attention, brand liking, etc.), consumer’s attitudes (e.g., 
form attitudes toward the ad), and behaviors (e.g., click on the ad) as outcomes 
influenced by online ads. The structural view, on the other hand, helps to under-
stand the basic components (ad types, formats, and features) of the stimulus envi-
ronment primarily controlled by advertisers at the time of the model’s inception.
Function
From a functionalist perspective, the IAM proposed that internet users control 
the initiation of internet activity, as they enter cyberspace with specific goals in 
mind and constantly adjust to the interactive environment to fulfill these goals. 
Internet motives, the inner drive to carry out the internet activity, can explain 
why individuals use the internet. Four categories of reasons were identified as the 
primary motives for entering cyberspace (Rodgers & Sheldon, 2002): research-
ing, communicating, surfing, and shopping. The categories of internet motives 
were suggested to not only influence consumer responses to online ads differently, 
but also to help advertisers determine the most effective ad appeal and ad type. 
However, users could have more than one internet motive in mind before enter-
ing cyberspace and switch motives during their online activities when seeing an 
unexpected stimulus, or for some other reason.
Mode, the extent of a user’s goal-directedness of internet activities, conjointly 
determines the level of ad processing with motive, as internet motive will influ-
ence the mode in which users use the internet. For example, researchers tend to 
be “serious” with a highly goal-directed mode, while surfers tend to be “playful” 
without a specific goal in mind.

Interactive Advertising Model  5
As discussed, individuals are also expected to experience several stages of 
information processing of online ads: attend to, remember, and develop attitudes 
toward internet ads, as well as actions taken in response to internet ads. In terms 
of evaluating consumer responses to online ads, almost all measures used in tra-
ditional advertising could be applied to interactive advertising, such as attitude 
toward the ad or purchase intention. In addition, new types of measures were 
available to examine effects of online ads, e.g., hits, click-through rates, and time 
spent on websites.
Structure
The IAM argued that information processing of online ads would be influenced 
by the presentation of the interactive ad, as well as characteristics of the stimulus 
environment. Thus, the structural view was provided to complement the func-
tional view in terms of understanding how physical features could interact with 
users’ motive or mode. As a result, the IAM provided a classification of all the 
“then available” ad types and formats 15+ years ago and discussed some common 
ad features at that time.
Ad Type
Ad type represents the general structure of any advertisement and was classi-
fied into five main categories according to Thorson (1996): product/service, PSA, 
issue, corporate, and political. The IAM argues that ad type can predict whether, 
or how much, cognitive effort is involved in processing online ads and how dif-
ferent ad types can often indicate consumer responses to the ad.
Ad Format
Ad format is the manner in which the online ad appears. The IAM argued that 
different formats would result in differential processing and outcomes. Several 
then-popular interactive ad formats were examined using the IAM model: ban-
ners, interstitials (pop-ups), sponsorships, hyperlinks, and websites.
Ad Feature
The internet was conceptualized as having more ad features than broadcast or 
print media because the medium itself was more complex than traditional media. 
The IAM provides a comprehensive list of two subjective ad features, structures 
based on consumer responses (e.g., “attitude towards the website” and “interest”), 
and objective ad features (e.g., color, size, or typeface) across print, broadcast, and 
the internet. The IAM suggests that both objective and subjective ad features 
would have an impact on consumer responses and would interact with users’ 

6  Rodgers, Ouyang, and Thorson
motives as well. In addition, interactivity was seen as the most salient ad feature 
made possible by the internet, and it would allow users to be involved in the per-
suasion process by changing the structural elements.
Methodology
Now that the basic components of the IAM have been reviewed, the next step 
was to conduct a search of the literature to collect scholarly articles that cite the 
IAM. This was accomplished with a literature search on Google Scholar with 
the aim to collect peer-reviewed literature citing the IAM. Compared to other 
databases, Google Scholar not only has relatively accurate citation counts, but also 
covers a larger collection of conference proceedings and international journals 
(Meho & Yang, 2007). A total of 385 citing articles were found, at the writing of 
this chapter, using a “cited-by” search in Google Scholar, and the citation details 
(i.e., author, publication, title, and year) were exported using Zotero for further 
content analysis.
Of the 385 articles identified by a Google Scholar search, 243 were schol-
arly journal articles (63.1%), 71 were theses or dissertations (18.4%), 39 were 
book chapters or sections in books (10.1%), and 32 were conference proceedings 
(8.3%). We report results from all sources citing the IAM, as presented; however, 
several sources were not read for this analysis because they were written in lan-
guages other than English.
A codebook was then developed for a content analysis of all 385 cited articles. 
There were five main coding categories, adapted from Kim et al. (2014, p. 1):  
1) basic information (title, item type, publication, year, author, university, and 
locale); 2) methodology (research approach, reasoning, method type, method, the-
ory presence, and theory); 3) data collection (sampled population, unit of analysis, 
data collection method, big data, and technology); 4) research details (independ-
ent variables, dependent variables, phenomenon, topic area, media effect type, ad 
format examined, and social media examined); and 5) IAM contribution (IAM 
use, IAM citing aspect, IAM citing detail, implications of broader research, and 
implications of IAM).
Two graduate students were the coders. Inter-coder reliabilities were taken at 
the beginning and ending of the content analysis, and an overall intercoder reli-
ability of .788 (Scott’s pi) was achieved.
Results
IAM Citation Trends
As shown in Figure 1.1, the past five years have seen an increase in citations of the 
IAM, particularly between 2011 and 2014, during which more than 160 articles 

Interactive Advertising Model  7
3
14
11
19
28
9
31
29
27
31
42
39
39
40
22
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
FIGURE 1.1  Number of Journal Articles Citing the IAM Since 2000 (Total N=385)
TABLE 1.1  List of Journals that Frequently Referenced the IAM
Publication
No. Of Citing Articles
Journal of Interactive Advertising
23
Journal of Advertising
9
International Journal of Advertising
9
Int. Journal of Internet Marketing and Advertising
5
Journal of Marketing Communications
3
Advances in Consumer Research
3
Journal of Current Issues & Research in Advertising
3
were published citing the IAM. The number of citing articles appears to peak in 
2011 (42 articles).
Three journals that contributed the most in terms of the number of published 
citing articles include Journal of Interactive Advertising (23 articles), Journal of Adver-
tising (9 articles), and International Journal of Advertising (9 articles). In addition, the 
IAM appeared three or more times in the following advertising journals: Interna-
tional Journal of Internet Marketing and Advertising (5 articles), Journal of Marketing 
Communications (3 articles), Advances in Consumer Research (3 articles), and Journal 
of Current Issues and Research in Advertising (3 articles).
In terms of international impact, first authors affiliated with non-U.S. institu-
tions contributed to more than 65% of the 372 articles linked to a known uni-
versity. International scholars represent 75 countries and regions, among which 
scholars from Spain, South Korea, Germany, China, and Taiwan authored more 

8  Rodgers, Ouyang, and Thorson
than 100 citing articles combined. In addition, more than 50 journal articles citing 
the IAM were written in languages other than English.
Evaluation of the IAM’s Contribution
To accurately evaluate the contribution of the IAM, the content analysis exam-
ined the extent to which the articles referenced the IAM (IAM use), how other 
scholars used the IAM (IAM citing aspects), and what specific topics were dis-
cussed in reference to the IAM (IAM citing detail). Results showed that over 
35 percent of all citing articles used the IAM to provide evidence to support the 
discussion of two main aspects: hypothesis development and/or research results. 
About 12 articles (4.3%) applied the IAM as a theoretical framework to develop 
a hypothesis or test prepositions and make predictions from the original article 
(Rodgers & Thorson, 2000). For example, the study by Burns (2006) looked at 
how audience attitudes varied by six different digital ad formats, which was sup-
ported by a major implication of the IAM regarding the variation of processing 
outcomes of different ad formats. The rest of the articles (60.6%) briefly men-
tioned or referenced the IAM to inform the background or discussion of internet 
advertising.
Most Cited Aspects of the IAM
The original IAM model proposed two ways of looking at the interactive process-
ing of online ads: consumer-controlled aspects or advertiser-controlled aspects. 
The results from the content analysis suggest that about 35.3 percent of citing 
articles focused on consumer-controlled aspects, while 25.2 percent focused on 
advertiser-controlled aspects of online ads. The remainder of the articles did not 
have a clear emphasis on either consumer- or advertiser-controlled aspects.
Several citing aspects emerged as themes that were frequently referenced by the 
articles: internet motives and modes (30.3%), ad formats and ad features (23.0%), 
consumer responses and outcomes (21.1%), and interactivity (9.6%).
Internet Modes and Motives
The aspect of the IAM that has received the most scholarly attention relates to 
the functional aspects presented by the model, i.e., internet motives and modes. 
Among the 384 citing articles, “mode” was mentioned in 123 articles and “motive” 
was mentioned in 68 articles.
As discussed, motive and mode are two concepts dealing with “drive” and 
“goal-directedness” of web users’ surfing behavior, respectively, both of which 
can influence the information processing of advertising stimuli. Rodgers (2002) 
examined the moderating role of internet motives on processing of banner ads 
when there was a match of ad appeal and individuals’ motive. The same study also 

Interactive Advertising Model  9
TABLE 1.2  Primary Aspects of the Interactive Advertising Model
Primary Aspects of the IAM
Count of Adjusted 
IAM Citing Details
Percentage of Adjusted 
IAM Citing Details
Internet motive
61
23.37%
Consumer responses/outcomes 
(forget the ad, purchase the 
product, etc.)
55
21.07%
Ad formats
41
15.71%
Model
29
11.11%
Interactivity
25
9.58%
Ad features
19
7.28%
Mode
18
6.90%
Cognitive tools (attention, 
memory, attitude, etc.)
7
2.68%
Ad type
6
2.30%
Grand Total
261
100.00%
provided a review of the original concept of motive to complement the IAM 
and also suggested the necessity of looking at motives and modes conjointly to 
account for individual variation.
Following this study, scholars started to research how motives can impact con-
sumer behavior from various aspects upon receiving an advertising stimulus. For 
example, Yang (2006) examined how information versus entertainment motive 
can moderate search patterns of product information; Zanjani, Diamond, & Chan 
(2011) evaluated ad recall of congruent e-magazines by information seekers ver-
sus surfers. While the classification of the originally proposed four basic motives 
proved to be valid, a cross-cultural study suggested internet motives differed by 
country (Rodgers, Jin, Rettie, Alpert, & Yoon, 2005).
Other studies looked at mode, or the goal-directedness of the internet users. 
The IAM suggested that users with a higher level of goal-directedness would be 
more defensive against online advertising. Hupfer and Grey (2005) found that 
highly goal-directed individuals perceived banner ads with a sample offer as a 
distraction, while the same incentive generated positive attitudes from experien-
tial users. Other studies incorporated the IAM to examine some negative “side 
effects” of internet advertising, such as banner blindness, advertising avoidance 
(Duff & Faber, 2011), and advertising clutter (Ha & McCann, 2008). Likewise, 
goal-orientated users were found to be more responsive to website design ele-
ments and customized features (Kabadayi & Gupta, 2011).
Consumer Responses to Exposure of Different Ad Formats
The IAM provided a framework for understanding ad processing, which made it 
easier for researchers to compare consumer responses to different formats of digi-
tal advertising. Among different ad formats, banners (15.8%) and websites (24.8%) 

10  Rodgers, Ouyang, and Thorson
received the most extensive examination from scholars that cite the IAM. Atti-
tudes toward a specific ad format were not only found to significantly influence 
attitudes toward the ad (Burns & Lutz, 2006), but also could implicitly impact atti-
tudes toward the advertised brands due to the intrusive nature of some ad formats, 
such as pop-ups (Madhavaram & Appan, 2010). General attitudes toward online 
advertising were also found to influence behavioral intentions toward brands 
(Lee & Miller, 2006). More studies evaluated antecedents and consequences of 
processing online ads of different formats: social factors (Zeng, Huang, & Dou, 
2009), persuasion knowledge (Tutaj & van Reijmersdal, 2012), and advertising 
device or medium (Tutaj & van Reijmersdal, 2012) played a significant role in 
influencing reactions to different advertising formats. In addition to affective out-
comes, internet advertising credibility (Choi & Rifon, 2002) was also investigated.
Regarding types of media effects, the results of the content analysis showed 
that approximately 86.1 percent of citing articles (N = 251) evaluated one or 
more aspects of cognitive, affective, and behavioral effects to ad exposure. Attitudes 
toward ads, attitudes toward a specific ad format or ad medium, and attitudes 
toward brands were the most common affective measures examined in articles 
that cited the IAM (21.1%, N = 251); ad recall, recognition, and level of informa-
tion processing were among the measures of cognitive effects examined (7.1%, 
N = 251); purchase intention and intent to revisit the websites were examined 
frequently for behavioral aspects of ad effects (17.8%, N = 251).
New Ad Formats and Promotional Techniques
Some recent studies have examined several of the newer trends in digital advertis-
ing to better understand the underlying mechanism of ad processing, such as the 
investigation of brand recall of in-game advertising (Siemens, Smith, & Fisher, 
2015), attitudes toward branded flash mob video ads (Grant, Botha, & Kietzmann, 
2015), and psychological effects of ad-video congruency on YouTube (Konon-
ova & Yuan, 2015). Interactive television advertising was also examined from cog-
nitive, affective, and behavioral aspects (Benning & Ang, 2002; Levy & Nebenzahl, 
2007; Aymerich-Franch, Delgado, Reina, & Prado, 2010; Levy, 2010).
For new ad formats made possible by new technologies, social media advertis-
ing and mobile advertising were two emerging trends due to the widespread use 
of smartphones. Advertising on Facebook, YouTube, and Twitter received the most 
extensive scholarly attention.
While most citing articles examined the effects of exposure to online ads, an 
increasing number of recent studies have gone beyond the traditional defini-
tion of “advertising” and extended implications from the 2000 IAM to examine 
other interactive promotional techniques. For instance, approximately 10 percent 
of all citing articles that focused on media effects (N = 202) involved evalua-
tion of interactive applications. These studies examined both online and offline 
promotional techniques, such as an online product tour or demo (Gao, 2011; 

Interactive Advertising Model  11
Park, Park, & Rhee, 2013), public display applications (Alt, Schneegass, Girgis, & 
Schmidt, 2013), digital menu boards (Peters, 2011), and humanlike navigation 
(Yang, 2006). It should also be noted that the majority of the research in this 
stream came from outside the advertising discipline.
Evaluation of Interactivity and Other Ad Features and 
Technologies
Rodgers and Thorson (2000) argued that interactivity was a unique feature of 
internet advertising that added complexities beyond what traditional advertising 
experiences account for when examining processing of online ads, and that sub-
jective and objective interactivity should both be investigated thoroughly.
With the progress of web technologies over the years, there has been a call for 
a distinction of users’ perception of interactivity and what constitutes interactive 
features. Tremayne (2005) argued that functional aspects and perceptual aspects 
of interactivity should be examined independently, and that the users’ role, rather 
than technological manipulation, should be emphasized in terms of cognitive 
processing patterns and individual traits related to interactivity. Wu (2005) found 
that perceived interactivity mediated the role of actual interactivity on influ-
encing attitudes toward the websites. Broekhuizen and Hoffmann (2012) found 
perceived interactivity influenced low-skilled individuals more prominently in 
terms of information processing quality, despite the fact that high-skilled users 
were more involved with interactivity features on websites (Rodgers & Thorson, 
2000). Gender (McMahan, Hovland, & McMillan, 2009) and need for cognition 
(Sicilia, Ruiz, & Munuera, 2005) were also found to impact perceived interactiv-
ity. Animation is another ad feature that has received a lot of attention in articles 
citing the IAM, especially when animated banner ads were first popular. Scholars 
have looked at how animation speed (Sundar & Kalyanaraman, 2004) can posi-
tively impact recall and attention, as well as potential positive attitudinal outcomes 
resulting from animation (Yoo, Kim, & Stout, 2004).
Discussion
The purpose of the chapter was to assess the impact of the Interactive Advertis-
ing Model (IAM) on the literature by examining scholarly articles that cited the 
model over a 15-year period (2000 to 2015) with the goal to draw on results to 
update the model and improve the model’s utility. Citing articles were identified 
with a Google Scholar search, yielding 385 articles at the writing of this chapter. 
A content analysis was undertaken to understand who is citing the IAM, what 
aspects of the IAM are being cited, and what potential criticisms or gaps are 
apparent in the IAM.
The results of the content analysis show that the IAM has been widely cited 
by scholars as a conceptual framework to understand web users’ information 

12  Rodgers, Ouyang, and Thorson
processing of online advertising. Advertising researchers were the primary citers 
of the IAM, but researchers from disciplines other than advertising (e.g., market-
ing, consumer behavior, information technology, etc.) have also cited the IAM in 
their research. Although advertising journals were the primary outlets for articles 
that cited the IAM, peer-reviewed publications in marketing, business and man-
agement, psychology, and information technology have also published articles that 
referenced the IAM. The IAM received broad international citation from scholars 
overseas, and there were quite a number of articles citing the IAM that were writ-
ten in languages other than English.
The IAM presents a number of components, but the most cited component 
was the consumer-controlled aspects of the model, particularly related to inter-
net motives/modes (i.e., functionalist school of thought) and, to some extent, 
ad formats/features (i.e., structural school of thought). Consumer responses (i.e., 
information processing school of thought) were examined to a lesser degree, and 
interactivity aspects of the model were the least cited component of the IAM. 
Although most of the research that cited the IAM cited it “in passing,” a grow-
ing number of articles appear to use the IAM to develop or test theory, or to 
explain research results. Several “themes” arose in our analysis that deserve further 
discussion.
Mixed Motives
First, the analysis revealed that some scholars disagreed with the classification of 
four internet motives, arguing that the IAM failed to include phenomena like 
“mixed motives.” For example, some argued that “seeking information” can be 
a “fun” experience for some users (e.g., Huang, 2003) or that an individual who 
starts off seeking information may stop to shop after seeing an ad related to the 
information being sought.
Of course, internet motives were initially proposed by the IAM to deal with 
how a specific type of internal drive, or reason, for surfing the internet can impact 
the integrative processing of online ads. Motives are neither the consumer evalu-
ation of the activity or ads (e.g., “fun experience”) or the appeals or purposes 
associated with an ad (e.g., using humor to promote a product). The IAM, instead, 
was concerned with the motivated state containing energy and direction (Deci & 
Ryan, 1985) that drives users to switch on the computer and surf the web. So by 
identifying basic motives, we can better predict web-related attitudes and other 
consumer responses. In other words, the basic classification of internet motives 
does not intend to isolate nor simplify the dynamic process of users’ encounters 
with ads, but serves to provide predictions of differential processing patterns that 
can lead to different consumer responses.
Moreover, what scholars in our analysis seemed to be interested in learning was 
how to interpret motives when people had several goals or purposes in mind dur-
ing or before an internet activity. Based on the foregoing discussion, it is perhaps 

Interactive Advertising Model  13
better to conceptualize this phenomenon as “multiple agenda” rather than mixed 
motives, as a motive deals with the primary motivation to surf the internet at the 
specific moment instead of a careful deliberation about why to surf. This was part 
of the reason why “motive-switching” was included in the IAM to better reflect 
the process. In this sense, motive-switching was meant to capture the dynamic and 
interactive process that occurs between consumers and advertisers in an online 
environment (for a new interactive response model specific to social media, see 
Chapter 28).
Fortunately, several of our authors expound upon this idea. For example, draw-
ing on reversal theory, Chapter 8 describes metamotivational states that range 
from telic (serious-minded) to paratelic (playfulness) to explain how complex 
consumer behaviors fluctuate in digital environments. Chapter 12 elaborates on 
the relationship between motivations and brand-related activities and then illus-
trates how this relationship works by sharing the results of a very interesting 
empirical study. Chapter 15 focuses on consumers who are motivated to create 
content about products and brands using three characteristics (mavenism, connec-
tivity, and persuasiveness) and five types of intrinsic motivations. They present the 
results of an empirical study using 2,495 respondents on SNSs and 100 brands to 
illustrate how brand-related content creation is the consequence of various fac-
tors working in concert, painting a much more complex picture than originally 
proffered by the IAM.
Control of the Online Environment
Second, our analysis revealed that more research citing the IAM has focused on 
the consumer-controlled (versus the advertiser-controlled) aspects of the IAM. 
Perhaps this is because internet users were once suggested as the “control center,” 
as they were able to more easily avoid internet advertising compared to blocking 
traditional mass advertising on TV, radio, or print media. However, new technolo-
gies have enabled advertisers to intrude into consumers’ online territory by using 
contextual targeting and geo-targeting to place ads according to users’ interests, 
preferences, and purchase history. Additionally, new technologies can exert new 
pressures on online audiences to ensure the delivery of ads, such as inserting 
multiple forced viewing ads inside one episode of a TV show. Additionally, and as 
shown in Chapter 2 and the subsequent chapters of this book, new technologies 
have added extra complexities to the advertising delivery process, which may sig-
nificantly influence the processing of digital advertising (and maybe even change 
the very meaning of what constitutes a “digital ad”).
Several authors in our review brought up an excellent point: the original IAM 
did not account for social media. That is true because social media—in their cur-
rent form—did not exist when the IAM was first published. The closest things we  
had to social media in 2000 were online discussion boards and chat rooms, though 
social networking services were beginning to surface, such as classmates.com,  

14  Rodgers, Ouyang, and Thorson
which helped people find former school classmates (Digital Trends Staff, 2016). 
To fill this gap, Chapter 16 offers a systematic review of best uses of social media 
for persuasive brand-related communication, and Chapter 21 explores the main 
aspects of advertising effectiveness in an SNS setting and provides a theoretical 
framework for understanding ad effects in SNSs as well as other digital contexts. 
As shown in Chapter 12, SNSs allow brands to interact with consumers, and this 
interaction is considered beneficial to brands. Some of the by-products of this 
interaction include strengthening the brand’s online visibility, enhancing brand 
equity, and ultimately leading to better brand performance.
New Measures of Advertising Effectiveness
Third, the content analysis revealed reliance on traditional advertising effective-
ness measures with a call for new measures that were unique to digital spaces. For 
instance, Russell (2009) argued that there should be more creativity of metrics to 
adapt to the increasingly complex environment of digital ads. While most tradi-
tional measures in advertising may be valid for measuring psychological processes of 
web advertising such as memory, recall, and attention (Rodgers & Thorson, 2000), 
industry measures such as click-through rates (CTRs) could provide unexpected 
results perhaps taken for granted in the traditional realm. For example, design char-
acteristics of banner ads like size, color, and message length were found to positively 
impact CTRs, while animation did not have a significant effect on CTR (Rob-
inson, Wysocka, & Hand, 2007; Khalifa, 2014). Chapter 22 provides a new way to 
measure efficiency of digital advertising that incorporates a broader set of metrics, 
including consumer empowerment, and proposes an efficiency model that captures 
inputs and outputs that are relevant to digital advertising campaigns. Chapter 19 
outlines measures related to physiological response and behaviors that are highly 
scalable due to internet-based frameworks and computer vision technology.
Additionally, as Chapter 8 argues, most measures available today are focused 
on positive performance with little attention devoted to understanding what may 
harm performance measures. Chapter 14 applies an approach/avoid framework to 
define ad avoidance and investigates antecedents to avoidance. A number of our 
authors discuss the effectiveness of in-game and video advertising; for example, 
Chapter 18 provides an introduction to in-game advertising, outlines its benefits 
and drawbacks, and highlights what may constitute “effective” in-game advertis-
ing. The authors then provide the results of a case study to illustrate the impact 
that interactivity (defined in terms of in-game brand placements) can have on 
ad effectiveness. Several of our chapters on in-game advertising or video adver-
tising are brief “think pieces” that present some of the most pertinent factors 
being explored. For example, Chapter 25 examines immersion and argues that 
the vague use of the term has resulted in findings that do not account for a 
nonlinear relationship or one that is moderated by ad content. Chapter 26 is on 
virtual direct experience (VDE) in video games, and Chapter 27 outlines some 

Interactive Advertising Model  15
common types of in-game ads and reviews video game advertising research that 
is sure to spark new research ideas for those interested in advancing the gaming 
and advertising literature.
As Chapter 20 notes, much of the reported measures on digital advertising 
have been based on U.S. samples, yet digital advertising has become increasingly 
important for brands globally. Thus, Chapter 20 argues that consumers from dif-
ferent countries may have different consideration sets and executional factors 
related to digital advertising, which researchers must account for. Likewise, a lot 
has been written and researched on electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM) but, as 
Chapter 24 points out, few studies have examined eWOM in an international 
context. The author goes on to demonstrate how eWOM research from a cross-
cultural perspective is necessary since different countries may have different cul-
tural values that can have varied effects on eWOM outcomes. With more than 
3.2 billion people online searching for health information, there is enormous 
opportunity to explore the role of advertising in this unique and highly important 
context. Chapters 11 and 23 are devoted to doing just that.
New Ways to Spread Information
Fourth, and finally, when the IAM was introduced more than 15 years ago, adver-
tising was a much more clearly defined process of persuading people to pay for 
branded products using professionally designed messages and paying to have the 
messages placed in a variety of media, like television, radio, or newspapers. To 
put this into perspective, the model was designed in a world without Facebook, 
Google, LinkedIn, Snapchat, Pinterest, or Twitter. There was email, and one could 
forward messages via email. There was, however, “interactivity,” meaning consum-
ers could go to brand websites and make comments or participate in games, etc. 
So this was truly one of the earliest stages of advertising in which it was easy for 
a consumer to provide feedback to marketers about their messages. Of course, 
prior to the birth of the interactive world, one could call or write marketers or 
even write comments that would appear in news media about marketers and their 
messages, but the effort and time required for this was great, and few consumers 
bothered with it.
But once advertising messages became common via the internet, there came 
to be lots of ways for consumers to respond to them. This was the Web 1.0 tech-
nology world into which the IAM was proffered. Ads, however, no longer need 
paid media to be “spread.” There are now thousands of ways ads can reach people, 
and there are thousands of ways people can “use” ads. Targeting is presumed to 
enhance the opportunity for “spread” of brand-related content, but as Chapter 17 
illustrates, targeting is a double-edged sword, as consumers can sometimes see it as 
an invasion of privacy. Chapter 2 presents a new model—the Network Advertis-
ing Model, or NAM—that builds on the IAM and uses the results reported in 
Chapter 1. The idea of “spreadability” is a central feature of NAM. As argued in 

16  Rodgers, Ouyang, and Thorson
Chapter 2, the IAM can be extended into Web 2.0 and even Web 3.0 technolo-
gies by taking the findings of Chapter 1 as well as other factors into consideration.
Conclusion
The Interactive Advertising Model (IAM) (Rodgers & Thorson, 2000) has been 
widely referenced by scholars from various disciplines around the world. The 
IAM offers an integrated way to evaluate advertising effects from both consumer- 
controlled and advertiser-controlled viewpoints; however, despite the seeming 
utility of the model, our analysis revealed several shortcomings that need to be 
addressed by future scholars if the model is to be kept current. While the IAM’s 
initial purpose was to serve as a general model to examine information process-
ing of ad exposures online, the implications of the results of this review also shed 
light on research related to interactivity-related phenomena outside the scope of 
advertising. Several themes with regard to the model’s use were identified, while a 
number of challenges for using the model also emerged among the citing articles. 
While this is by no means an exhaustive review, this examination of and reflection 
on the IAM after 15+ years supports an important notion proposed by Rodgers 
and Thorson in 2000: that methodologies and theories applied to traditional adver-
tising can be adapted to interactive advertising, regardless of changes in advertising 
technologies, as long as the unique characteristics of users and ads are taken into 
consideration.
References
Alt, F., Schneegass, S., Girgis, M., & Schmidt, A. (2013). Cognitive effects of interactive pub-
lic display applications. In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM International Symposium on Pervasive 
Displays (pp. 13–18). ACM.
Aymerich-Franch, L., Delgado Reina, M., & Prado, E. (2010). Actitud y motivación hacia 
la publicidad interactiva en televisión: Influencia de la complejidad de la aplicación y 
del tip de incentivo. Questiones publicitarias, 1(15), 1–18.
Benning, P. E., & Ang, L. (2002). Interactive advertising: The development of a model for 
interactive television. In ANZMAC 2002 Conference Proceedings.
Broekhuizen, T., & Hoffmann, A. (2012). Interactivity perceptions and online newspa-
per preference. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 12(2), 29–43. doi: 10.1080/15252019. 
2015.1021432.
Burns, K., & Lutz, R. (2006). The function of format: Consumer responses to six on-
line advertising formats. Journal of Advertising, 35(1), 53–63. doi: 10.2753/joa0091– 
3367350104.
Choi, S., & Rifon, N. (2002). Antecedents and consequences of web advertising credibility. 
Journal of Interactive Advertising, 3(1), 12–24. doi: 10.1080/15252019.2002.10722064.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985). The general causality orientations scale: Self-determination  
in personality. Journal of Research in Personality, 19(2), 109–134. doi: 10.1016/0092– 
6566(85)90023–6.

Interactive Advertising Model  17
Digital Trends Staff. (2016, May 14). The history of social networking. Digital Trends. Retri­
eved from http://www.digitaltrends.com/features/the-history-of-social-networking.
Duff, B., & Faber, R. (2011). Missing the mark. Journal of Advertising, 40(2), 51–62. doi: 
10.2753/joa0091–3367400204.
Gao, Y. (2011). An experimental study of the effects of interactivity and humor in e- 
commerce. Review of Business Information Systems (RBIS), 15(1), 9–14.
Grant, P., Botha, E., & Kietzmann, J. (2015). Branded flash mobs: Moving toward a deeper 
understanding of consumers’ responses to video advertising. Journal of Interactive Advertis-
ing, 15(1), 28–42. doi: 10.1080/15252019.2015.1013229.
Ha, L.,  & McCann, K. (2008). An integrated model of advertising clutter in offline 
and online media. International Journal of Advertising, 27(4), 569–592. doi: 10.2501/
S0265048708080153.
Huang, M. H. (2003). Designing website attributes to induce experiential encounters. 
Computers in Human Behavior, 19(4), 425–442. doi: 10.1016/S0747-5632(02)00080-8.
Hupfer, M. E., & Grey, A. (2005). Getting something for nothing: The impact of a sample offer 
and user mode on banner ad response. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 6(1), 149–164.
Kabadayi, S., & Gupta, R. (2011). Managing motives and design to influence web site 
revisits. Journal of Research in Interactive Marketing, 5(2/3), 153–169. doi: 10.1108/ 
17505931111187785.
Khalifa, A. (2014). Measuring the effectiveness of online advertising: The Tunisian context. 
International Journal of Management Excellence, 3(1), 354. doi: 10.17722/ijme.v3i1.139.
Kim, K., Hayes, J. L., Avant, J. A., & Reid, L. N. (2014). Trends in advertising research: A lon-
gitudinal analysis of leading advertising, marketing, and communication journals, 1980 
to 2010. Journal of Advertising, 43(3), 296–316.
Kononova, A.,  & Yuan, S. (2015). Double-dipping effect? How combining YouTube 
environmental PSAs with thematically congruent advertisements in different for-
mats affects memory and attitudes. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 15(1), 2–15. doi: 
10.1080/15252019.2015.1009524.
Lee, K., & Miller, K. (2006). Internet users’ attitude and behavioural intention on ebrand-
ing. International Journal of Internet Marketing and Advertising, 3(4), 335–354. doi: 10.1504/
ijima.2006.012687.
Levy, S. (2010). ITV viewers’ attitudes towards iTV advertising and their influence on 
interactive behavior. Innovative Marketing, 6(2), 82–90.
Levy, S., & Nebenzahl, I. D. (2007). The influence of product involvement on consumers’ 
interactive processes in interactive television. Marketing Letters, 19(1), 65–77.
Madhavaram, S., & Appan, R. (2010). The potential implications of web-based marketing 
communications for consumers’ implicit and explicit brand attitudes: A call for research. 
Psychology & Marketing, 27(2), 186–202. doi: 10.1002/mar.20326.
McMahan, C., Hovland, R., & McMillan, S. (2009). Online marketing communications: 
Exploring online consumer behavior by examining gender differences and interac-
tivity within internet advertising. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 10(1), 61–76. doi: 
10.1080/15252019.2009.10722163.
Meho, L. I., & Yang, K. (2007). Impact of data sources on citation counts and rankings of 
LIS faculty: Web of Science versus Scopus and Google Scholar. Journal of the American 
Society for Information Science and Technology, 58(13), 2105–2125.
Park, J., Park, W., & Rhee, C. (2013). Perceived vividness and consumers’ perception in 
e-commercial websites. In Proceeding of Thirty Fourth International Conference on Informa-
tion Systems.

18  Rodgers, Ouyang, and Thorson
Peters, A. N. (2011). The role of dynamic digital menu boards on consumer decision-making 
and healthy eating (Order No. 1505962). Available from ABI/INFORM Complete; Pro-
Quest Dissertations & Theses A&I; ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global. (920300336). 
Retrieved from http://search.proquest.com/docview/920300336?accountid=14576.
Robinson, H., Wysocka, A.,  & Hand, C. (2007). Internet advertising effectiveness: The 
effect of design on click-through rates for banner ads. International Journal of Advertising, 
26(4), 527–541. doi: 10.1080/02650487.2007.11073031.
Rodgers, S. (2002). The interactive advertising model tested: The role of motives in ad process-
ing. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 2(2), 22–33. doi: 10.1080/15252019.2002.10722059.
Rodgers, S., Jin, Y., Rettie, R., Alpert, F., & Yoon, D. (2005). Internet motives of users in the 
United States, United Kingdom, Australia, and Korea: A cross-cultural replication of the 
WMI. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 6(1), 79–89. doi: 10.1080/15252019.2005.10722108.
Rodgers, S., & Sheldon, K. M. (2002). An improved way to characterize internet users. 
Journal of Advertising Research, 42(5), 85–94.
Rodgers, S., & Thorson, E. (2000). The interactive advertising model: How people perceive 
and process interactive ads. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 1(1), 42–61.
Russell, M. G. (2009). A call for creativity in new metrics for liquid media. Journal of Interac-
tive Advertising, 9(2), 44–61. doi: 10.1080/15252019.2009.10722155.
Sicilia, M., Ruiz, S.,  & Munuera, J. (2005). Effects of interactivity in a web site: The 
moderating effect of need for cognition. Journal of Advertising, 34(3), 31–44. doi: 
10.1080/00913367.2005.10639202.
Siemens, J., Smith, S., & Fisher, D. (2015). Investigating the effects of active control on 
brand recall within in-game advertising. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 15(1), 43–53. 
doi: 10.1080/15252019.2015.1021432.
Sundar, S. S.,  & Kalyanaraman, S. (2004). Arousal, memory, and impression-formation 
effects of animation speed in web advertising. Journal of Advertising, 33(1), 7–17. doi: 
10.1080/00913367.2004.10639152.
Thorson, E. (1996). Advertising. In M. B. Salwen & D. W. Stacks (Eds.), An integrated approach 
to communication theory and research (pp. 211–230). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Tremayne, M. (2005). Lessons learned from experiments with interactivity on the web. 
Journal of Interactive Advertising, 5(2), 40–46.
Tutaj, K., & van Reijmersdal, E. (2012). Effects of online advertising format and persuasion 
knowledge on audience reactions. Journal of Marketing Communications, 18(1), 5–18. doi: 
10.1080/13527266.2011.620765.
Wu, G. (2005). The mediating role of perceived interactivity in the effect of actual inter-
activity on attitude toward the website. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 5(2), 29–39. doi: 
10.1080/15252019.2005.10722099.
Yang, K. C. (2006). The influence of humanlike navigation interface on users’ responses to 
Internet advertising. Telematics and Informatics, 23(1), 38–55.
Yoo, C. Y., Kim, K., & Stout, P. A. (2004). Assessing the effects of animation in online banner 
advertising: Hierarchy of effects model. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 4(2), 49–60. doi: 
10.1080/15252019.2004.10722087.
Zanjani, S. H., Diamond, W. D., & Chan, K. (2011). Does ad-context congruity help surfers 
and information seekers remember ads in cluttered e-magazines? Journal of Advertising, 
40(4), 67–84. doi: 10.2753/JOA0091–3367400405.
Zeng, F., Huang, L., & Dou, W. (2009). Social factors in user perceptions and responses to 
advertising in online social networking communities. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 
10(1), 1–13. doi: 10.1080/15252019.2009.1072215.

Introduction and Background
Advertising today exists in a multiple channel (or “source”), multiple media, multi-
ple device interactive communication network—a massively interconnected set of 
nodes and a variety of “connections” among those nodes. This reality implies major 
changes in how advertising can influence people to buy brands (or vote for a can-
didate, or think more highly of a corporation, or adopt better health habits). Before 
the creation and expansion of the digital communication network, advertisers often 
turned to theories of “integrated marketing communication” (IMC), where a num-
ber of media (e.g., radio, TV, newspapers) were combined to bring integrated mes-
sages about a brand to people, thus reaching customers with different frequencies, at 
different times, and under different circumstances. IMC carried with it the assump-
tion that paid media (advertising) would integrate with unpaid ways of reaching 
people, like public relations tools, e.g., brands being featured in news stories, brands 
seen as sponsors of events, and brands being linked with games and contests (e.g., 
Schultz, Tannenbaum, & Lauterborn, 1993). An advertisement or PR event that led 
people to talk about the ad or the brand (word-of-mouth) was also considered to be 
one of the “voices” of the integrated effort (Thorson & Moore, 1996).
But in the mid-1990s the internet started to come of age, and as its structures 
and functions developed over the next 20 years, scholars came to realize that com-
munication was moving toward being less “mass” and more “network” oriented. 
Because culture is mediated and enacted through communication, a networked 
culture came into dominance (Castells, 2000, p. 356).
The model introduced here—called the Network Advertising Model, or 
NAM—is quite different from the Interactive Advertising Model (IAM) (Rodg-
ers & Thorson, 2000) as described in Chapter 1, although, in fact, the NAM sub-
sumes significant components of the IAM. In the new model, we continue to 
2
NETWORK ADVERTISING  
MODEL (NAM)
Esther Thorson and Shelly Rodgers

20  Thorson and Rodgers
use the word “advertising”—a decision motivated because we are maintaining 
the central idea of creatively and intentionally structured messages that would 
be called “ads” as opposed to messages that have different names and kinds of 
structures, e.g., tweets, shares, press releases, Facebook sites, events. Ads, however, 
no longer need paid media to be spread. There are now thousands of ways ads can 
reach people, and there are thousands of ways people can “use” ads and spread 
them into more nodes of the communication network, but now linked with the 
consumer’s own unique “input” attached. That is, ads “spread” into the digital 
communication network are not the same as when they were initially constituted, 
if only because now some individual has “liked,” “shared,” or “posted” them so 
they arrive at the next node with that addition. Note that we refer to consumers 
“using ads,” instead of “responding to ads.” This is purposeful, meant to indicate 
the high degree to which consumers can control and influence what happens to 
ads as they spread throughout the network. Of course, consumers can be directly 
persuaded by ads (Thorson, 1996), but they can also turn them into memes, post 
them in any number of social media, email them, make fun of them, screen them 
out, or make their own “ads” (user-generated ads or sometimes “mash-ups” of ads).
The reason for the massive increase in what can be done with ads is due to 
what has been called “spreadability” (Jenkins, 2008; Jenkins, Ford, & Green, 2013). 
In a network characterized by spreadability, movement of messages continues to 
include what is traditionally known as “distribution,” that is, the placement of mes-
sages into media sites that are consumed by people (e.g., old media like television 
and newspapers, but now also new media like Google searches or Facebook posts). 
And the internet itself involves many media. It includes online sites of old media 
(CNN Online), social media like Facebook and Twitter, as well as sites built by 
individuals (e.g., blogs) or corporations (e.g., brand sites). Many devices including 
laptop computers, tablets, smartphones, and smartwatches can access all of these 
sites. What this complex structure means is that there can be huge spin or spread 
of messages once they enter the network space. And messages that “look like ads” 
can enter the space from any source, not just via professional distribution. At almost 
any point of encounter with a message, people or organizations can curate, that 
is, decide what to do with the message—pass it along, critique it, mash it up into 
something else, recommend it, etc. And of course, people can still be “persuaded” 
by the message, as posited by the original IAM (Rodgers & Thorson, 2000). But 
let us review for a moment the historical context into which the IAM evolved.
When the IAM was published in 2000, only about 50 percent of Americans 
owned a smartphone; Google was three years old (founded 1998); there was no 
Facebook (founded 2004), no Twitter (founded 2006), no Instagram (founded 
2010), and no Snapchat (founded 2012). Most digital advertising was located on 
websites that brands owned or on news websites. The major feature that digital 
ads shared was that people could interact with them (Coyle & Thorson, 2001). 
Indeed, it was the powerful feature of “interactivity” that led to the IAM’s con-
struction, and as seen in the pages of this book, interactivity remains a central 
concept to digital advertising as noted so persuasively by our chapter authors.

Network Advertising Model  21
However, what was present in 2000 is what Castells (2000) refers to as an 
“electronic communication system characterized by its global reach, its integra-
tion of all communication media, and its potential interactivity” (p. 329). In 1999, 
the internet connected 63 million computer hosts, contained 3.6 million websites, 
and was used by 179 million people in more than 200 countries (Castells, 1996,  
p. 375). This was the “network” in its infancy. Along with the internet, the net-
work brought integration of different communication platforms where written, 
oral, audio, and visual communication became part of the same system; now peo-
ple could interact in a variety of ways (Castells, 1996). The internet was to com-
pletely change communication, and along with it, all communication industries: 
news, advertising, marketing, business, health, and politics. The internet created 
the concept of digitally networked communication, but the next 15 years would 
bring mass changes to how that network operated and the influence it had.
In 2000, certainly in terms of advertising expenditures, but also in terms of 
audience size, media culture was TV-dominated, meaning advertising operated in 
a mass communication system, where there was largely one-way flow of messages 
from producers to a mass audience. There had already occurred a proliferation of 
channels, such that people had lots of sources to choose from, but only when they 
went to the internet for content could they interact with sources and content 
immediately and fairly extensively (see Rodgers, Thorson, & Jin, 2009;  Thorson &  
Rodgers, 2012). Therefore, when the IAM first appeared, it conceptualized even 
interactive advertising in a basically mass communication world, not as Castells 
(2000) puts it, a “networked world” (p. xxxix).
Figure 2.1 shows a simple diagram of advertising in a mass communication 
world. An advertiser created a message, media experts designed a combination 
of media channels to employ to distribute the message, and legacy media were 
Advertisers
Brand ads, political ads, PSAs, 
corporate ads, etc.
• For websites, formats include
   banners, pop-ups, interstitials 
Newspapers, TV, Radio, 
Magazines, Websites
Consumers
Motives
• Attention, Memory, Attitudes
Cognitive 
Tools
FIGURE 2.1  Advertising Processes in a Mass Communication System

22  Thorson and Rodgers
paid for the time and space to run the ad. Payment for advertising’s appearance 
in digital media varied. Working from a primarily nonlinear perspective, the IAM 
(see Figure 2 in Rodgers & Thorson, 2000) focused on digital media and posited 
that five categories of variables should be taken into account when the goal was to 
predict the efficacy of the ad. First, what motivations (information, entertainment, 
etc.) led the consumer to go to the internet in the first place (recall that the only 
way to access the internet was with a computer as there were no smartphones 
and no tablets)? The consumer possessed long theorized psychological processing 
modes (attention, memory, and attitudes) and encountered an ad designed by the 
advertiser. The ad could have different persuasive intentions (like promoting a 
corporation, selling a brand, or selling a political candidate), and it could be of the 
various structural types available to digital professionals at that time (e.g., banners, 
interstitials, pop-ups, or a brand website). Responses from the consumer might 
include the usual ones of processing the ad (remembering it, paying attention to 
it, liking it), but the big change was that the consumer could interact with the 
ad—click on it, explore the website it was located on, leave a message, or email 
the advertiser—and sometimes even make a purchase. Scholars have explored the 
attribute of interactivity in many and important ways, as exemplified in Chap-
ter 1. At the same time, however, much advertising research continued to attend 
to the performance of advertising in legacy media and mostly assumed a mass 
communication process.
In the 15+ years since the IAM was published, mass communication has fast 
become over-shadowed by digital communication networks of great complexity 
and range. Figure 2.2 shows some of the processes involved in network-based 
advertising, where an n-dimensional graph is used to represent the communica-
tion networks of today (although this representation is vastly less extensive and 
populated than the real digital network of today). People receive input and pro-
vide output, which then becomes input to others carried by a host of digital 
sources, devices, and message types.
Let us think about a Macy’s ad spreading through the digital communication 
network. It can appear in a newspaper, magazine, or on television, that is, non-digital  
devices, but then can be inserted into the digital network in all kinds of forms by 
consumers—email, blogs, tweets, Facebook posts, etc. It is likely to also appear on 
websites of the legacy media where advertisers place it—or the media may publish 
a QR Code so that consumers can scan a link with their smartphones, going from 
print to digital. The ad can appear as a tweet or a Facebook advertisement. It can 
be part of Macy’s website. It can be in a smartphone app. Or it can be used by 
anyone as something they share with others, that they like or that they use as raw 
material for producing something creative of their own—a UGA ad, or part of a 
meme, or something they insert into a YouTube video or post in a blog.
Furthermore, the consumer who is exposed to any of these Macy’s ads is him/
herself broadly interconnected in the digital communication network. The person 

Network Advertising Model  23
magazine.com)
TV.com, radio.com,
(newspaper.com
etc.
FIGURE 2.2  Advertising Processes in the Communication Network
may be a Macy’s digital Fanclub member and may be connected to everyone else 
in the Fanclub, along with Macy’s employees who create the content of that web-
site. The person may follow many Twitter accounts and has many followers of his/
her own, and thus is connected to all of those people, plus all of the followers of 
the people they are connected to. The person is likely to have a Facebook account 
where he/she is connected to hundreds of friends, colleagues, and family mem-
bers, plus links with any other Facebook dwellers chosen. For example, he/she 
may have Liked a Macy’s ad for athletic shoes and, as a result, now receives Macy’s 
ads on his/her news feed. Or he/she may have Macy’s ads follow him/her around 
through the internet because somewhere, sometime, he/she showed an interest 
in a product sold by Macy’s and, thus, is being targeted with behaviorally targeted 
ads. Individuals may receive Macy’s ads in their mailboxes or email accounts. Or 
they may have an ad forwarded to them by a friend—who actually received the 
ad from a friend who had received it from Macy’s.
In a network communication system, the possible ways of linking with a 
piece of information—like “Macy’s carries a brand of athletic shoes”—are almost 

24  Thorson and Rodgers
endless. Furthermore, there are so many ways that a person can respond to each 
of those links—sharing, liking, going to Macy’s website and purchasing, going to 
a retail Macy’s store, and there, getting an in-store message on his/her cellphone. 
Of course, a person can—in spite of all this connectivity—still avoid the ad, (see 
the approach/avoid framework in Chapter 14), react negatively to the ad (see 
Chapter 7 on reactance theory), or block the ad and/or not even have it enter 
his/her conscious attention (see Chapter 10 by Lombard and Snyder-Duch and 
Chapter 17 by Shoenberger).
As a result of the network approach, there are both desirable and undesirable 
consequences, such as negative brand reviews and ad avoidance that digital adver-
tising theories must account for. As Chapter 22 shows, a networked perspective 
also requires a very different, albeit complex metric or set of metrics, involving 
mindset metrics; consumer empowerment appears to be a crucial factor, along 
with identification of long-term performance outputs.
In short, we have attempted to represent the complexity of how advertising 
processes look in a digital community network in the diagram in Figure 2.2. 
We have not attempted to put all the players in the diagram because the dia-
gram would quickly become unreadable. At the top of the diagram are advertisers 
who, as always, have messages they wish consumers to receive. Note the outgoing 
arrows, to YouTube, search engines (primarily Google), legacy media and their 
dot-com versions, the brand’s own website, consumers’ emails, and social media. 
Note that many of the arrows are bi-directional, representing interactivity, that is, 
two-way flow. Just as in the IAM (Rodgers & Thorson, 2000), consumers have 
many psychological or behavioral responses they can make to the ads, and of 
course, these will vary by how they encountered the ad in the digital network or 
whether they encountered it in legacy media. Also note that the consumer has 
many tools for spreading the ad (or news of their attitudes about the brand, or 
their shipping experience, or how much they like their new athletic shoes). They 
can like, share, create a mash-up, tweet or re-tweet, and so on. This means that for 
every single consumer, the opportunity to spread advertising content is massive. 
And everyone they share with has exactly the same opportunities. The number of 
possible contact nodes in a digital communication network is, therefore, poten-
tially astronomical. Further, the content “spread” can be a plus for the advertiser 
(Likes) or they can be damaging (low star-ratings, bad consumer comments, boy-
cotting and encouragement of others to do so).
So how does conceiving of advertising as operating in a digital communication 
network help us theorize about how digital advertising works? First, many of the 
chapters of this volume can be seen to fit closely into this conception (as noted in 
the discussion below). Second, the Network Advertising Model (NAM) has some 
important features that are critical for both understanding how advertising will 
operate in the future, and how it will have to adjust as the network continues to 
change in important ways. We explore these aspects next.

Network Advertising Model  25
Articulating Aspects of the NAM
In spite of the massive complexity and extensiveness of the digital communication 
network, there are some important, common denominators about ad encounters 
and consumer uses of them. First, unlike in the pre-digital communication world, 
the advertiser has a lot less control over where its messages go. Indeed, once ad 
messages are released into the network, they can, as we have seen, go absolutely 
anyplace in the network—and the advertiser has little or no control over that 
activity. This means that development of network “listening processes” is critical. 
And those listening processes are often where “big data” come into relevance, e.g., 
tracking Tweet mentions of a brand through millions of Tweets, tracking move-
ment of brand messages through millions of Facebook postings, and observing 
trending Tweets about topics of relevance to an advertising campaign (see Huh’s 
Chapter 29). Listening to relevant messages travel and observing as they are trans-
formed as they go allows the advertiser to get ahead of problems before the cost to 
the brand becomes damaging, and to measure how much added value is accruing 
to the advertising as a result of its travels and manifestations in the network.
Second, as two enormous companies, Google and Facebook have come to rule 
much of the digital communication network. However, the algorithms that are 
so influential in determining what and where information is spread are hugely 
challenging to advertisers. Because advertising is so important to the development 
of the Google/Facebook “duopoly” (Levy, 2015, n.p.), we look closely at recent 
statistics and behaviors concerning the two companies and what those statistics 
suggest for understanding advertising in the digital communication network.
First, we do this in the context of how money is being spent today for adver-
tising and what projections look like for future spending. In 2015, in the U.S., 
$180 billion was spent on advertising: $73 billion on television, $24 billion on 
newspapers, and $67  billion on digital advertising. Of the digital $67  billion, 
$13 billion (19%) was spent on social media, and of that $13 billion, Facebook 
absorbed fully 45 percent of it (Statista, 2016). Indeed, in 2015 Google and Face-
book together accounted for 75 percent of all digital advertising spending. Digital 
advertising spending is expected to overtake television in the next year or so, with 
accompanying large increases in the proportion that goes to social media. It is 
clear that to remain relevant to advertising, research must focus on digital adver-
tising and its operation in the communication network, specifically as that net-
work is dominated by Google and Facebook. What this means is that considerable 
attention must be paid to how advertising operates within the context of Google 
and Facebook algorithms for advertising venues, and their costs. For example, an 
advertiser can buy space for an ad on Facebook, either in people’s news feeds or 
as a sponsored ad on the periphery of the feed. But Facebook has algorithms that 
determine what consumers will be exposed to with those ads, and that informa-
tion is not shared with advertisers. Indeed, the nature of both Google search and 
Facebook posting algorithms is proprietary.

26  Thorson and Rodgers
In June 2016, Facebook published a list of priorities for how it will post mes-
sages in news feeds. The posting algorithm will put top priority on the posts of 
consumers’ friends and family. Only after those posts will come paid news and 
advertising posts. This suggests that Facebook has data that indicates people do not 
like getting a lot of news and advertising in their feeds, and when they do, they 
are probably lessening or even curtailing use of those feeds. So although Facebook 
makes more money with more posting of stories and advertising, they nevertheless 
must operate as a “platform,” i.e., an organization that serves a number of different 
customers, and must balance the desires of those customers against each other to 
maximize revenues (Sridhar, Mantrala, Naik, & Thorson, 2011). That is, Facebook 
must maintain and grow its 1.65 billion monthly active users (Facebook, 2016) by 
keeping them happy, even though their revenues derive from news organizations 
and advertisers who are vying to fill news feeds with their own postings.
Google similarly determines where advertisements and news stories go in the 
order of what comes up from a search. Advertisers can buy sponsored ads that 
link with search words and appear at the top of search content, but Google’s 
algorithms determine to whom and where they appear in searches. Thus, for 
both Google- and Facebook-based advertising, there is limited control by adver-
tisers over where their advertising goes and to whom. Furthermore, as noted, 
Google and Facebook consider detailed information collected about Google and 
Facebook users proprietary. Although some consumer information is shared with 
advertisers, both companies claim that maintaining the privacy of individuals who 
use their services is a fundamental priority (Google, 2016; Facebook, n.d.). Of 
course, many advertisers suggest that the privacy argument is just a cover for 
maintenance of full data control (Rutenberg, 2016).
Thus, when we think about the network of digital communication in which 
advertising must operate, we need to keep in mind—and do research on how—
advertising is represented by these two very different companies (and, of course, 
search and social media companies in general, even though Google and Facebook 
are the most powerful). The Network Advertising Model (NAM) suggests that 
search and social media environments set up very different challenges for advertis-
ing and must be examined separately. For Google, the key variable appears to be 
“the intent of the consumer” that does the search (Cox Target Media, 2016). For 
example, when a person initiates a search, if an advertiser can suggest a brand that 
might fulfill that search needed at the time of the search, there is a greater likeli-
hood of purchase, or at least the development of stronger purchase intent. For this 
type of situation, much of the “marketing funnel,” or “consumer decision jour-
ney,” of effects is missing. Usually the funnel consists of consumer processes like 
a build-up of brand awareness, development of a brand consideration set, evalu-
ation of competing brands, and finally a brand choice and subsequent purchase. 
But under circumstances of detailed, personal targeting, stimulating desire for the 
product is skipped, and sometimes size of brand sets has already been reduced. 
At other times, a brand has already been chosen, so the only job for advertising  

Network Advertising Model  27
is to provide price and place information. Given behavioral targeting methods 
available today, data about what the person has already been looking at can be 
used to determine at just what point he/she is in the decision-making funnel and 
deliver an ad appropriate to that of the decision-maker (see Chapter 6 by Sundar, 
Kim, & Gambino). Also, when searching for a product or a brand begins, the 
person is most likely operating cognitively rather than emotionally or impulsively. 
And ads designed to accommodate central processing of ad arguments (Petty & 
Cacioppo, 1986) and systematic processing (Chaiken, 1980) would seem most 
appropriate. Indeed, there is already a large existing literature on rational process-
ing of ads that may be a particularly useful theoretical guide.
The situation is much different for advertising via social media. Because the 
primary objective for most Facebook users is a social one, all the variables of 
social norms, injunctive norms, and descriptive and subjective norms may be par-
ticularly important to understanding how the consumer processes the ad. When 
you Like a brand ad or Share it, you are not only expressing yourself, but you are 
deciding whether those in your network will approve of the product in general 
or the brand specifically. If the product is a designer handbag, will you be seen as 
a high status person of excellent taste, or a person who is superficial and selfish 
enough to spend $5000 on such a bag? In social networks, the kind of theoriz-
ing that Alhabash and his co-authors (Chapter  16) do would appear particu-
larly important. Further, in this kind of environment, virality and word-of-mouth 
(WOM) may become particularly important (e.g., Wang & Rodgers, 2011). While 
on Facebook, it is easy to check with others about a brand—and just as easy to 
share with others that you are making or have made the purchase decision, so 
again the literature on eWOM becomes highly relevant. It should be noted that 
that “influencer marketing” (Adweek, 2016, n.p.) becomes much more important 
when social media are essential components of the advertising plan. As Chap-
ter 20 by Taylor and Costello and Chapter 24 by Chu note, culture also plays an 
important role in this regard.
Of course, there is digital advertising that does not depend directly on Google 
and Facebook. Categories of such advertising include locations such as brand 
websites, news websites, and email, and types of ads like banners, sponsorships, 
interstitials and superstitials, pop-ups, and hyperlinks, among others (see Chap-
ter 21 by Rejon-Guardia and Martinez-Lopez that does an excellent job detail-
ing these and other types of digital advertising). As a result, there will continue to 
be a need to determine how efficacious and efficient these modes of advertising 
are—a subject that is undertaken in a number of our chapters, such as McDuff’s 
Chapter 19 that looks at new ways of measuring digital advertising efficacy, and 
Pergelova’s Chapter 22 that proposes a new way to think about digital advertising 
efficiency.
Another insight the NAM provides is that, in the digital communication net-
work, the distinctions among paid, owned, and earned media become more fluid. 
Purchase of Google or Facebook ads is clearly “paid advertising,” but once the 

28  Thorson and Rodgers
content of those ads spreads into the network, being exposed to and influenc-
ing people beyond what was “paid for,” it becomes “earned.” By the same logic, 
the impact of a brand’s website (owned media) can also become transformed 
as it spreads into the network. If advertising is mostly one-way communication 
between advertiser (i.e., message sender) and consumer (i.e., message receiver), 
mediated via a paid channel and designed to enhance attitude and purchase of 
a brand, then what is a re-tweeted ad? Is a user-generated ad (UGA), which is 
created by the consumer and not the advertiser, an advertisement? Is a banner 
that connects a brand with a social cause an advertisement? Is a company that 
specializes in designing Twitter and Facebook presences for a brand an advertising 
company or a public relations company? So much of what message designers and 
media planners/buyers do continues to look at the beginning of the process like 
they would advertising; however, as illustrated in Figure 2.2, as the messages spread 
throughout the network, they are transformed into other persuasive entities. Thus, 
perhaps theories of network advertising will need to be considered theories of 
networked messaging or networked persuasion.
Another result of moving to a digital network communication model of 
advertising is that it provides a framework for understanding how the processing 
of multiple channels or devices during the same sitting provides opportunities and 
challenges for advertisers. There is evidence (Nagy & Midha, 2014) that process-
ing of television programs, including both entertainment and live programming 
like sports, political debates, and contests, is enhanced when people use social 
media and search engines while they watch live TV. If ads during the TV programs 
are commented on in social media, or relevant search activity is engaged in, it is 
more likely the ads will yield an impact. Indeed, in a related effort at creating 
theory, Chapter 12 looks at how entertainment programming itself can influence 
people to be interactive with the embedded ads and experience telepresence.
Another insight provided by conceptualizing advertising operating in a com-
munication digital network is that it vastly increases the complexity and uncer-
tainty for advertisers to engage in integrated marketing communication (IMC). 
First, of course, there are just so many more “voices” that can be employed. While 
some work has been done on such IMC topics as combining public relations 
and advertising tools (Rose  & Miller, 1994; Duncan  & Caywood, 1996), and 
with combining traditional media channels (e.g., advertising with print or radio 
advertising), there has been little examination of how digital strategies can best 
be combined with non-digital ones, or how digital strategies themselves are best 
combined to produce impact. The uncertainty in IMC work in the digital com-
munication network is due to the fact that, as discussed, so much of what hap-
pens with an advertising campaign depends on what consumers do with the ad. 
Chapter 9 by Duff and Lutchyn articulates this nuance in terms of inattention 
toward advertising.
And where is mobile advertising in the terms of the network? Mobile advertis-
ing today can come via text messages, embedded in apps, or occur in social media 

Network Advertising Model  29
or news sites. Further, mobile advertising can appear in smartphone searches. 
At a recent gathering of advertising professionals, it was discussed that how to 
deliver advertising on mobile platforms has not yet been solved. In early 2016, 
fully 80 percent of Facebook’s advertising revenue came from mobile. In thinking 
about the impact of advertising in mobile, it is important to consider how the dig-
ital network, along with access to it via smartphones, has so completely changed 
communication. With additional access points comes additional clutter, which Ha 
in Chapter 5 argues is one of the key challenges affecting digital advertising spaces.
As Wellman and Rainie (2012) point out, before the mid-1990s, nearly all 
phones were place-bound. Today, 90 percent of Americans have a smartphone 
(Wellman & Rainie, 2012), and they are the key way that people participate in 
networked communication. At first, cell phones were mostly about talking, but 
between 2006 and 2011, texting went from being common for 31 percent to 
59 percent of Americans. In 2012, a Pew study reported that American teens 
texted an average of 50 texts a day (Lenhart, 2012), and now that number is far 
greater. Thus, a very significant challenge to an overall networked theory of adver-
tising will be an understanding of when and in what format people will accept 
advertising messages on their smartphones—and privacy is certainly part of the 
theorizing (see Chapter 17). Beyond that, which kind of mobile delivery will be 
the most efficient for what brands? As addressed in Chapter 11 by Royne et al., 
and Chapter 23 by Mackey and Liang, health and pharmaceutical advertising fur-
ther complicate these and other issues presented here.
In short, digital network communication is a social science area that itself 
has much to offer the advertising field. The Network Advertising Model (NAM) 
articulated here is but a “baby step” toward thinking about the fundamental prob-
lems that advertising faces as an industry, and for guidance to scholars about how 
to think about the problem and what kinds of studies to engage in. The chapters 
in this book provide excellent progress toward understanding the role of theory 
as it relates to digital advertising. In the next chapter, we again try to place adver-
tising into the larger societal changes that have led us to today’s digital network.
References
Adweek. (2016). Topic: Influencer marketing. Retrieved from http://www.adweek.com/
topic/influencer-marketing.
Castells, M. (2000). The rise of the network society (2nd ed.). Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
Chaiken, S. (1980). Heuristic versus systematic information processing and the use of 
source versus message cues in persuasion. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 39(5), 
752–766.
Cox Target Media. (2016, March 15). A day in the life of your customer: Understanding the 
new path to purchase. Retrieved from http://www.coxtarget.com/insights/a-day-in-
the-life-of-your-customer-understanding-the-new-path-to-purchase/
Coyle, J., & Thorson, E. (2001). The effects of progressive levels of interactivity and vivid-
ness in web marketing sites. Journal of Advertising, 30(3), 65–77.

30  Thorson and Rodgers
Duncan, T. R., & Caywood, C. L. (1996). The concept, process, and evolution of integrated 
marketing communications. In E. Thorson & J. Moore (Eds.), Integrated communication: 
Synergy of persuasive voices (pp. 13–34). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Facebook. (2016). Stats. Retrieved from http://newsroom.fb.com/company-info/
Facebook. (n.d.). How to keep your account secure. Retrieved from https://www.facebook.
com/about/basics/how-to-keep-your-account-secure/how-youre-protected/
Google. (2016, June  28). Privacy  & terms. Retrieved from https://www.google.com/
policies/privacy/
Jenkins, H. (2008). Convergence culture: Where old and new media collide. New York, NY: New 
York University Press.
Jenkins, H., Ford, S., & Green, J. (2013). Spreadable media: Creating value and meaning in a 
networked culture. New York, NY: New York University Press.
Lenhart, A. (2012). Teens, smartphones and texting. Pew Research Center: Internet, Science & Tech. 
Retrieved from http://www.pewinternet.org/2012/03/19/teens-smartphones-texting/
Levy, A. (2015, April 17). In online ads, it’s Google, Facebook and then who? Retrieved from 
http://www.cnbc.com/2015/04/17/after-google-and-facebook-the-fight-to-be-no-3.html.
Nagy, J.,  & Midha, A. (2014). The value of earned audiences: How social interactions 
amplify TV impact. Journal of Advertising Research, 54(4), 448–453.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). The elaboration likelihood model of persuasion. 
Advances in Experimental Psychology, 19, 123–205.
Rodgers, S., & Thorson, E. (2000). The interactive advertising model: How people perceive 
and process interactive ads. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 1(1), 42–61.
Rodgers, S., Thorson, E., & Jin, Y. (2009). Social science theories of traditional and internet 
advertising. In D. W. Stacks & M. B. Salwen (Eds.), An integrated approach to communication 
theory and research (2nd ed., pp. 198–219). New York, NY: Routledge.
Rose, P. B., & Miller, D. A. (1994). Merging advertising and PR: Integrated marketing com-
munications. Journalism & Mass Communication Educator, 49(2), 52.
Rutenberg, J. (2016, May  22). Facebook’s troubling one-way mirror. Retrieved from 
http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/23/business/facebooks-troubling-one-way-mir 
ror.html?_r=0.
Schultz, D. E., Tannenbaum, S. I., & Lauterborn, R. F. (1993). Integrated marketing communica-
tions: Putting it together and making it work. Chicago, IL: NTC Business Books.
Sridhar, S., Mantrala, M. K., Naik, P. A., & Thorson, E. (2011). Dynamic marketing budget-
ing for platform firms: Theory, evidence, and application. Journal of Marketing Research, 
48(6), 929–943.
Statista. (2016). Digital market outlook: Digital advertising. Retrieved from https://www.
statista.com/outlook/216/109/digital-advertising/united-states#
Thorson, E. (1996). Advertising. In M. B. Salwen & D. W. Stacks (Eds.), An integrated approach 
to communication theory and research (pp. 211–230). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Thorson, E., & Moore, J. (1996). Integrated communication: Synergy of persuasive voices. Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.
Thorson, E., & Rodgers, S. (2012). A theory of advertising as a field. In S. Rodgers & 
E. Thorson (Eds.), Advertising theory (pp. 3–17). New York, NY: Routledge, Taylor & 
Francis Group.
Wang, Y., & Rodgers, S. (2011). Electronic word of mouth and consumer generated con-
tent: From concept to application. In M. S. Eastin, T. Daugherty, & N. M. Burns (Eds.), 
Handbook of research on digital media and advertising: User generated content consumption (pp. 
212–231). Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference.
Wellman, B., & Rainie, L. (2012). Networked: The new social operating system. Cambridge, MA: 
The MIT Press.

In this chapter, we map the digital trends within the advertising industry since the 
inception of Rodgers and Thorson’s (2000) Interactive Advertising Model (IAM). 
The digital advertising landscape has evolved dramatically over the last decade and 
a half, both in terms of technology and infrastructure influences. To understand 
how these changes have influenced the development of digital advertising, we will 
examine the emergent and dominant interactive advertising trends from 2000 to 
2015 juxtaposed with major technological milestones. As we have seen in recent 
years, the rise of social media and mobile advertising has greatly impacted the 
development and direction of digital advertising. By understanding the role of 
society and the evolution of technology, we can better understand how society is 
shaped by technology, and how technology is influenced by society.
The relationship of modern society and technology is interesting in itself. 
Technological determinists have long suggested that society is shaped and con-
trolled by the evolution of technology. On the other hand, social determinists 
have argued that society itself determines what forms of technology becomes 
popular and useful. The concept of mutual shaping has emerged as a hybrid of 
both deterministic viewpoints—acknowledging the impact of technological and 
social influences, which embraces the notion that both viewpoints mutually shape 
one another (Quan-Haase, 2013). The concept of mutual shaping suggests that the 
adoption and usage of technology is an intricate process that involves complex 
human communication systems and decision-making processes within a social 
system. Put simply, the evolution of technology will impact peoples’ lived experi-
ences. This, in turn, will change and reshape society. Advertising sits in the wake of 
these technological and societal changes and adapts to new challenges.
The evolution of interactive advertising over the years is a result of push-
ing the technical and creative boundaries of web browsing, digital platforms, 
3
TRENDS AND OPPORTUNITIES 
FOR DIGITAL ADVERTISING 
RESEARCH
A Content Analysis of Advertising Age, 
2000–2015
Samuel M. Tham, Shelly Rodgers, and Esther Thorson

32  Tham, Rodgers, and Thorson
and infrastructure limitations to which consumers were bound. As technologi-
cal adoption advanced, the role of advertising adapted to be relevant within the 
societal framework. To understand these major components of development and 
change and how they fit together, we break this chapter into three parts. The first 
part highlights technological milestones by examining various industry trends 
and digital innovations over the past 15 years. The second part reviews the major 
digital advertising types, followed by the third part, which provides a discussion 
that attempts to combine both elements in the context of social and technologi-
cal determinisms as well as highlights some key areas pertaining to the future of 
digital advertising.
Industry Trends and Digital Innovations
The new millennium saw unprecedented and precarious growth in the technol-
ogy industry, with companies such as Amazon and Google cementing their place 
in the dotcom era, despite initial losses. The first half of the decade saw signifi-
cant investment and expenditure, with a growing number of investors focusing 
on the future payoff of the industry. This was quickly stifled when the dotcom 
bubble burst in March 2000, with many businesses taking on a more pragmatic 
and focused approach toward online advertising, striving to be more efficient and 
effective when spending in the realm of digital advertising.
The dotcom crisis, along with the Sept. 11, 2001 terror attacks, forced the 
industry to address two growing concerns: consumer privacy and audience meas-
urement. The newness of the technology sparked a furor of privacy issues as 
cookie tracking data led to discussions over what forms of consent were needed 
by those whose information and browsing habits were being accessed. Ethical 
concerns aside, companies also began to debate the best way to measure audience 
engagement. While click-through rate (CTR) was the dominant form of meas-
urement, industry insiders began to propose new ways of measurement due to the 
abuses and inaccuracies of CTR.
The early 2000s also saw the introduction of several well-known companies 
that changed the landscape of the internet. Early social media sites, Friendster and 
MySpace, were created, Apple introduced the world to the iTunes store, and Skype 
revolutionized video chatting for those with a fast enough internet connection. 
As a result of these new innovations, digital advertising also improved with rich 
media in the form of ultramercials, skyscraper advertisements, and advergames.
By the end of 2003, the number of users on the internet rose to 719 million 
from 248 million at the end of 1999 (Internet World Stats, 2016). The wide-
spread growth of users led to advancements in the infrastructure to efficiently deal 
with growing bandwidth issues. As a result, new infrastructure allowed internet 
companies to provide consumers with high-speed internet access. This evolution 
continued as the functionality of web use transformed. Online shopping became 
a common practice and search engines dominated. Google became a leader in 

A Content Analysis of Advertising Age  33
the industry with the launch of AdWords, leading to Google fetching $85 a share 
when it went public in 2004 (La Monica, 2004).
This era, coined Web 2.0, was characterized by video advertising, user-generated  
content (UGC), and the proliferation of high-speed broadband connections 
(Pew Research Center, 2016). Video advertising gained popularity as streaming 
technology became more efficient; YouTube was founded in February 2005 as a 
result of this growing phenomena. UGC in the form of personal blogs and social 
media also became more commonplace and grew in popularity, with social media 
becoming particularly popular after the creation of Facebook in 2004 and Twitter 
in 2006. The social nature of the web also led to an explosive start toward online 
gaming with the opening of the massive multiplayer online role playing game 
World of Warcraft in 2004.
The mid-2000s saw the first serious consideration of mobile as a source of 
advertising. Despite picking up the moniker “third screen,” mobile services were 
dominated by an oligopoly of phone companies that had mixed feelings when 
it came to advertising on their networks. While mobile advertising was touted 
to have tremendous potential as the next big thing, there were concerns due to 
lack of capabilities for video streaming, as well as small screen sizes. Instead, video 
streaming became a mainstay of online advertising in spite of UGC issues sur-
rounding intellectual property and copyright infringement.
The end of the decade saw two key trends: the rise of search, and the domi-
nance of mobile and social media. Developments in search engines had seen an 
increase in functionality, including the creation of Google’s video search after its 
acquisition of YouTube. At the same time, mobile and social media also grew 
exponentially. Apple launched its first iPhone in 2007 (Apple Press Information, 
2007), and it followed up with the Apple App Store in 2008. By 2008, 19 percent 
of cell phone owners had gone online with their phones (Pew Research Center, 
2008). Despite the popularity of social media, advertisers struggled to adapt to it 
and were unsure how best to use it. Some advertisers used it as a tool for broadcast 
and some as a form of initiating two-way communication with consumers. As 
social media rose in popularity, so did the prevalence of UGC (e.g., wiki websites, 
podcasts, YouTube videos). The increase in UGC encouraged speculation and con-
cerns about the effectiveness of earned media versus paid media on the internet.
The issue of privacy again came to the forefront as data mining became openly 
available for advertisers. The over-proliferation of organic Facebook ads on users’ 
feeds led to consumer fatigue, resulting in blocking, unfriending, and unfollow-
ing brands. Facebook and other social media websites have had to balance the 
interests of advertisers and consumers ever since. As a result, Facebook decided to 
reduce the number of organic articles for brands that showed up on their users’ 
pages. Consequently, there was a backlash from advertisers, who did not want to 
pay more for the same amount of reach they previously had before.
By 2013, 56 percent of Americans were owners of smartphones (Pew Research 
Center, 2013). This was mirrored in digital advertising, with 5.5 percent of total 

34  Tham, Rodgers, and Thorson
advertising dollars being spent on mobile platforms. Bigger screens, video stream-
ing, and updated infrastructure all led to greater usability for consumers. The rise 
of mobile advertising saw a larger growth in the number of advertisements than 
in the rate of prices.
Types of Digital Advertising
Since the goal of the present chapter is to understand the evolution of interac-
tive advertising in the industry from 2000 to 2015, one way to go about this is to 
conduct a content analysis by reviewing one of advertising industry’s top publi-
cations, Advertising Age. However, Advertising Age over these 15 years changed its 
publication frequency from a weekly publication from 2000 to 2007 to just 45 to 
47 issues per year from 2008 to 2013. To account for an uneven distribution of 
content for the 15 years, stratification was employed in the sampling of the issues. 
A monthly, 12-issue-per-year stratified sampling strategy was deemed the most 
effective and was employed in this study (Riffe, Lacy, & Drager, 1996). Subse-
quently, a total of 184 weeks of Advertising Age issues were randomly selected for 
analysis from January 2000 to April 2015.
Articles were systematically selected from each issue based on two main cri-
teria. First, the articles had to be of editorial content (i.e., not an advertisement, 
headline, or blurb) and longer than one paragraph. Second, articles had to be in 
the interactive or digital advertising section of the issue or employ keywords that 
referred to “digital advertising.” Based on these criteria, 592 articles were selected. 
The three main categories of these articles were opinion pieces, case studies, and 
industry trends.
Each article was then further analyzed to determine the specific type of inter-
active advertising discussed. These were then sorted into data “bins” for further 
analysis. Other information—such as the characteristics of the type of interac-
tive advertising, the organization that was involved, authorship, and impact of the 
advertising—was also recorded. This analysis resulted in seven key trends in digital 
advertising: banner advertising, advergames, video advertising, search advertising, 
mobile advertising, social media advertising, and native advertising. Each will be 
discussed briefly below.
Banner Advertising
While banner advertising was one of the major types of digital advertising early 
on, it soon had to adapt as rich media became popular. Rich media allowed users 
to click, drag, scroll, and interact in multiple ways. In 2000, Microsoft’s MSN 
tested and reported that the CTR for Unilever’s Dove brand’s rich media banner 
ad—featuring an enhanced version of a banner ad that unfurled, after a two-
second rollover, to resemble a print ad—was twice the number of regular ban-
ner ads (Elkin, 2000). However, the introduction of superstitials featuring Flash 

A Content Analysis of Advertising Age  35
technology, greater interactivity, and less static graphics was thought to lead to 
the decline of regular banner ads. Additionally, as metrics evolved, it was thought 
that CTR was not a good measure, because awareness was thought to be a more 
important metric that could not be measured by clicks alone. While banner ads 
did not completely die down, they were carefully cultivated for effective use in 
promotions such as Samsung’s 2008 Olympic gold medal treasure hunt campaign 
that had consumers look for clues in emails, banner ads, and text messages in order 
to have a chance to win prizes.
Advergames
The advergame format started in 2000 with the intent to allow consumers to 
engage within a game while learning more about the advertised product as they 
play. Companies like McDonalds, the U.S. Army (with its America’s Army game), 
and Coca-Cola (Championship Run game) are examples of companies that used 
advergames to increase traffic and online subscriptions for their websites. On 
some occasions, advertisers used games to get followers to go to specific websites 
for more information. In 2005, a study identified that women were avid gam-
ers, and several womens’-interest websites used advergames as a tactic to target 
women to visit their sites (see Oser, 2005). By the mid-2000s, advergames had 
gained tremendous traction, with executive vice president of Wild Tangent, Dave 
Maden, observing that marketers needed a videogame strategy (Oser, 2005).
Video Advertising
Video advertising had steadily risen and is now the mainstay of online advertising. 
While recognized for its early potential, there were technical concerns in the early 
2000s due to the general populace mostly having only a dial-up connection that 
could not effectively handle video feeds. By 2005, with technological improve-
ments to allow better video quality compression and high-speed internet, videos 
playing online became more common. This led to short video ads progressively 
becoming longer since they no longer needed to be preloaded and could be 
streamed efficiently. While online video ads initially were made identical to the 
television spots, creative executives realized that to set the online environment 
apart, unique video clips needed to be created. Video ads were initially thought as 
the most effective way to reach teenagers. However, they were quickly adopted by 
other industries, such as automakers, which used video to showcase the function-
ality of their vehicles to adults. Advertisers also teamed up collaboratively online 
in video advertising, such as when Pontiac and Maxim magazine partnered for 
cross-promotional purposes to reach an adult target audience.
With the introduction of sharing on social media, advertisers have sought to 
reach viral status with their messages and videos. At the time, the number of views 
thought to indicate campaign success was “one million” (Cutler, 2009, n.p.). To 

36  Tham, Rodgers, and Thorson
do this, advertisers employed metrics to analyze how the videos were received 
and shared. However, advertisers had noted that even though a campaign may 
have achieved virality, it might not mean commercial success since it did not 
guarantee viewers being customers. An example cited was Miller’s TV channel 
that was largely popular, but the channel’s popularity did not convert into alcohol 
sales. Additionally, commentators have noted that the chase for virality had also 
resulted in a slew of low-quality ads that sought to win consumers’ attention and 
achieve viral status.
Video ads were monetized in different ways. On websites like Hulu, users got 
to watch a free episode in return for watching a few advertisements. As video 
advertising became more popular, advertisers had started to create their own spots, 
with the belief that brands should not rent entertainment but should own it 
(Hampp, 2008).
The success of video advertising had seen YouTube sell video ad space on a real 
time exchange. Sites like Buzzfeed had switched to video ads and greatly reduced 
banner ads, while Facebook launched its own video ads and noticed a 360 percent 
increase in video news feeds in 2014.
Search Advertising
Search advertising was developed when search engines and portal sites (e.g., MSN, 
AOL, Yahoo!) were used as the starting points during a user’s web session. In order 
to get information or go to a specific web destination, users typed what they were 
looking for in the search bar. The search results were accompanied by ads to offer 
the consumer various purchase options that might complement their search term. 
While this quickly became a popular option for advertisers due to its effectiveness, 
it has faced criticism due to the lack of rich media support. The earliest and most 
well-known company to utilize search advertising was Google.
One of the earliest ethical concerns was the inability to differentiate between 
what was paid and unpaid content. By 2004, search advertising was a $2.6 billion 
market with the biggest players being Google and Yahoo! search engines. With the 
advancement of video advertising, the concept of video search was thought to be 
an avenue in which search could grow beyond just text. By 2007, with the advent 
of mobile devices, Google, Yahoo!, and Microsoft all announced mobile search 
products on the horizon. Social media had also joined the fray, with Facebook 
announcing a social graph search that had, to that point, received mixed reviews.
Mobile Advertising
While mobile’s potential was recognized from the early onset, it never truly took 
off until the latter part of 2000 in part due to the lack of agreement from advertis-
ers, carriers, and consumers as to what advertising on this platform should look 
like. In the early days, it was thought that mobile marketing was not a strategy in 

A Content Analysis of Advertising Age  37
itself but was part of the media mix (Cuneo, 2003). Part of the reason for this was 
because of the challenges faced by advertisers with the technological affordances 
of mobile devices in 2005, which typically had smaller screen sizes and limited 
bandwidth.
The mobile ascendency saw the experimental development of apps that 
became widely adopted. Each app served a unique purpose and was primarily 
used on mobile phones. However, in 2009, the primary feature for smartphones 
was still talking, followed by text and email. As a medium for digital advertis-
ing, mobile was continually growing, particularly alongside the growth of video 
streaming and social media usage.
Social Media Advertising
Social networking sites (SNSs) were developed in 2003. The earliest forms, such 
as Tribe, allowed users to build networks mixed with Craigslist-style classifieds. By 
2005, social media and music collided through the creation of MySpace. One of 
the hallmarks of social media sites was the creation of UGC in the form of posts, 
videos, and likes or product promotion.
One of the reasons for using social media for advertising was that opinions 
generated by peers were thought to be the most influential form of recommenda-
tions (Hanlon, 2008). However, there were still concerns from advertisers over the 
best way to use the medium. In 2008, social media campaign advertising became 
highly popular and was thought to be more effective than advertising in a legacy 
medium (e.g., TV, newspapers, magazines, and radio). Typical campaigns attempted 
to get users to share ads through various forms on social media in hopes of 
tapping into more consumers’ social networks. Advertising on Facebook looked 
quite different from advertising in legacy media since Facebook advertising, at the 
time, allowed brands to sponsor channels or take over a homepage (Lee, 2011).
One of the foundational building blocks of such campaigns was to build com-
munities for advertisers as a way to engage with their consumers. An effect of 
building a base of loyal customers was the belief that their love for the brand 
would see these customers organically recommend the product by sharing and 
spreading the word online. Social media advertising was also thought to be effi-
cient in connecting with hard-to-reach groups that may not see most ads but 
could be reached through their friends. It provided a way for advertisers to reach 
niche markets and consumers to find such products based on keyword searches 
and interests. Despite its utility, CPM (Cost Per Thousand) for social media ads 
in 2010 were revealed to be much lower compared to other online media ($0.56 
versus $2.43). Additionally, in 2009, there were plans to develop a brand social 
score—a social media metric that provided a magnitude score (e.g., 0–10) indi-
cating the level of chatting about your brand in a given week, which shared traits 
of the then-popular Net Promoter Score but was easier to understand (Klaassen, 
2009). The original users of Facebook as of September 2006 were U.S. college 

38  Tham, Rodgers, and Thorson
students, but news of the SNSs quickly spread worldwide (Phillips, 2007) and, 
as of January 2009, more than 50 percent of Facebook users and 44 percent of 
MySpace users in the United States were over 35 years of age. In 2011, Google 
joined the social media bandwagon by announcing the launch of Google +. That 
same year, Twitter reached its own milestone, celebrating 200 million registered 
accounts.
Native Advertising
In 2012, native advertising started gaining popularity. Much like advertorials in 
print, native advertising utilized similar principles for online advertising. Web-
sites started featuring sponsored content disguised in the form of editorials or 
sponsored created content. Essentially, different models of reinforcement to the 
advertisement were used within a page in a non-obvious manner. This has created 
ethical issues in terms of identifying what content was editorial and what content 
was sponsored. Social media subsequently has adopted similar styles of native ads 
due to its presumed effectiveness.
Evolution of Interactive Advertising/Impact of Digital 
Innovations
Reviewing the last 15 years of technological evolution and the development of 
interactive advertising, we see three major advertising trends and innovations that 
stood out as key players. These three major digital innovations are search, social 
media, and mobile.
Search
Search engines began as a way for users to seek out content online. The original 
purpose of search allowed users to quickly and easily find content online through 
clever use of keywords using Boolean logic. As the web grew and more content 
became available, the importance of search increased, and companies sought to 
find ways to monetize this digital innovation. In 2000, Google started to monetize 
search using a CPM model, where it allowed advertisers to display ads based on 
keyword searches. This model eventually evolved into Google AdWords, where 
advertisers on average spent $1 for every $2 of revenue they earned (Gabbert, 
2012). In a time where traditional advertisements were dominated primarily by 
banner advertisements, advertising appearing in the form of searches highlighted 
a picture of the flexibility of advertising adapting to a digital milestone.
Social Media
The growth of social networking sites, from Friendster to MySpace to Facebook, 
highlights a period of online interactivity between users in an online virtual space. 

A Content Analysis of Advertising Age  39
This virtual connectivity created a series of networks for individuals to commu-
nicate with each other using the web. The social aspect of the web also led to a 
rise of virtual online games that helped connect users. Advertising in this space 
had taken many twists and turns. For example, early versions of online gaming led 
many advertisers to believe that the future of advertising lay in product placement 
within virtual worlds. As the user experience of social media evolved, developers 
found new ways to best monetize their product. Through a combination of build-
ing on stepwise technological innovations, such as the success of search, social 
media combined previous search successes with behavioral advertising targeting 
models.
Mobile
Mobile as a form of digital advertising was recognized early on in the articles we 
read and was viewed by industry as the “up and coming” technology. The idea 
behind the name, “the third screen,” alludes to the amount of time users would 
spend on their phones just like they would on television and computers. However, 
many factors such as technology (e.g., bandwidth, screen size), government regu-
lations, and the desire for phone companies to protect their interests inhibited the 
anticipated growth explosion of advertising on mobile. However, as those chal-
lenges were overcome, at least in part, mobile transitioned from part of a meta-
media to one that stood by itself. The development of apps and digital browsing 
created new avenues in which advertising was presented to users. In addition to 
how mobile dovetails with social media and different applications, it allowed users 
to turn to their mobile devices throughout the day for entertainment, informa-
tion, and socialization. This, in turn, brought new avenues for advertising as users 
engaged in those activities.
Summary of Content Analysis
The results of our 15-year content analysis of Advertising Age reveal a number of 
trends involving advertising types and technological changes (that are, incidentally, 
inextricably linked) including emphasis on traditional forms of online advertising, 
as well as mobile and social advertising. The primary types of digital advertising 
that surfaced in the articles included banners, advergames, video, search, mobile, 
social media, and native. These results share similarities with the results presented 
in Chapter 1’s content analysis of articles that cited the Interactive Advertising 
Model (IAM) over the past 15 years, and the analysis of articles from the Journal 
of Interactive Advertising cited in Chapter 4. Although scholars are sometimes criti-
cized for not keeping pace with industry, these results at least suggest that scholars 
are covering essentially the same topics (in terms of types of digital ads) that were 
highlighted by industry in the pages of Advertising Age.
However, much of the Advertising Age articles that focused on display advertis-
ing seemed to be concerned with how best to use the forms of advertising to get 

40  Tham, Rodgers, and Thorson
consumers to pay attention to the brands, products, and services being advertised. 
As Chapter 9 shows, increased control and consumer participation with digital 
media content has brought about new ways for people to engage with ads and 
brands so consumers are likely to pushback on digital advertising shown in tradi-
tional forms, which can affect basic exposure and attention.
Issues arose in our review of Advertising Age that have always interested both 
practitioners and scholars. For example, measurement of digital advertising 
efficacy has been a big issue of interest and concern. Industry is criticized for 
over-reliance on the tried and true “click-through rate” (CTR) to determine 
ad effectiveness for online display ads, which still comprise about 50 percent of 
digital advertising budgets in the U.S. (Rajeck, 2016). Several of our chapters 
offer alternative measures for ad effectiveness: Chapter 22 provides a new way to 
measure efficiency of digital advertising that incorporates a broader set of metrics, 
including consumer empowerment, and Chapter 19 outlines measures related to 
physiological response.
With the dizzying speed with which technology changes and innovates, there 
is a real need for well-established theories that can describe, explain, and predict 
outcomes, and that stand the test of time regardless of what new innovation comes 
down the proverbial pipeline. Numerous chapters in this volume present models 
and frameworks for understanding digital advertising, and paint a complex picture 
of important factors, how these factors operate under certain circumstances, and 
how various factors work in concert to influence common (and not so com-
mon) advertising outcomes. Advertisers are being blocked, ignored, flamed, and 
unfollowed, and consumers—as was true in 2000—are in charge of the digital 
space now more than ever before. Consumers are banning advertisers from their 
email, mobile phones, etc., and access to social media entrances and exits are 
being blocked too. To address this, Chapter 14 applies an approach/avoidance 
framework to help us understand potential antecedents to avoidance in an effort 
to overcome such hindrances.
Just as industry can learn from academics, academics can learn from industry. From 
the content analysis of Advertising Age, it was suggested that ad blocking or ad 
avoidance might occur as a result of consumer fatigue from receiving too many 
advertisements. Subsequently, to avoid receiving so many ads online, consumers 
may take additional steps to communicate their impatience (or irritation) with 
brands, such as “unfollow” a brand or “opt out” of email promotions. Here, the 
lesson is that scholars can learn something from industry, and industry can help 
scholars identify relevant concepts of study. Ad blocking seems to be a ripe area 
of study, as digital advertising takes on metrics and measurements that include 
cognitive, emotional, and behavioral outcomes that can occur when consumers 
receive too much advertising.
Additionally, we saw a lack of coverage in Advertising Age on what we con-
sider to be up and coming topics in digital advertising, such as 3D displays, vir-
tual reality, holographic product displays, and virtual shopping environments. As 

A Content Analysis of Advertising Age  41
Chapter 10 explains, it is critically important to understand virtual reality (VR) 
in the context of digital advertising, since VR offers advertisers a way to engage 
with consumers by transporting them to, for example, travel destinations where 
consumers can interact with brands via a range of technologies, such as an inter-
active head mount that can track motions made while engaged with the brand.
We have highlighted just a few of the chapters in this volume to give readers 
a sense of how examination of industry trends is a useful exercise in informing 
scholarship. To close out this chapter, we offer a brief explanation of what is meant 
by “mutual shaping of technology” and attempt to illustrate how this may play 
out based on examples seen in the articles we read in Advertising Age in preparing 
this chapter.
Mutual Shaping of Technology
With 15 years of technological milestones and advertising trends explained, we 
can start to better understand how advertising has been revolutionized by the 
technology that precedes it and the people that use it. In order to understand the 
implications of these technological milestones and the development of interactive 
advertising, we turn to the concept of technological and social determinism that 
is often combined today to form the concept of mutual shaping (Quan-Haase, 
2013). To better understand the mutual shaping of technology in the case of the 
World Wide Web, we need look no further than the early halcyon days of the 
internet where both users and developers were new to the industry.
One of the early issues that users faced was the credibility of the information 
on the websites they visited online. The modality, agency, interactivity, and navi-
gability (MAIN) model explains that in lieu of a standardized system for veracity 
of information online, users turn to cues and use heuristics as a way to determine 
credibility online. Take, for example, if a user found a web page easy to navigate, 
it could be perceived as benevolence from the part of the web site and made the 
information seem more credible (Sundar, 2008). The MAIN model also high-
lights how technology changed the way users think about using the web based 
on perceptions of credibility and heuristics. In doing so, users helped shape the 
environment of the online sphere through feedback. Feedback in turn became 
the drivers of what the public wanted and served a social function of the public’s 
desires. These social functions from using the technology based on the feedback 
from the users allow developers to customize and edit their content appropriately 
to conform to the demands of their users (Moschella, 2003). In this manner, we 
see both the adoption of certain technology and platforms even though they do 
not always necessarily invoke pragmatism.
Another example is the development of MP3 files. MP3 can be regarded as an 
innovation driven by both technological and social reasons. Technologically, the 
MP3 was a new form of sound compression that allowed audio files to be port-
ably contained on computers. As a result, this portability led to the social trend of 

42  Tham, Rodgers, and Thorson
music sharing (Sterne, 2006). MP3 files therefore initially changed the way people 
listened to music because users had to get MP3 players to open those music files. 
As a result of the device changing the way people listened to music, the listen-
ing habits of people changed as they moved away from traditional radio and CD 
listening. As habits change, advertising, too, adapts with the innovations. In the 
case of MP3, the Apple Store and other music streaming sites, like Spotify, were 
developed and enabled new forms of advertising.
The advancement of technological progress and adoption does not always guar-
antee sophistication in use. Social media is another example of mutual shaping of 
technology as users’ preferences lead to developers engaging their users through 
their feedback. Some have regarded social media as a regression in communica-
tion. For example, Twitter has a limitation of just 140 characters, and Snapchat only 
allows a photo to have an 80-character message. The argument is that this results in 
people becoming decoders of information and not interpreters of textual informa-
tion (Fuchs, 2009). Despite that, the popularity of social media has not only led to 
high adoption and technological changes, but also the way people use the media. 
Interactive advertising therefore has had to adapt appropriately with these changes.
Looking at the present day, we see a gradual increase and popularity of online 
streaming through major networks like Netflix and Amazon Prime (Gibbs, 2015). 
As users continue to make the switch from legacy media to on-demand services, 
such as Amazon Prime, Hulu, and Netflix, questions arise as to how advertisers 
will continue to stay relevant and reach consumers that are paying a premium 
price to avoid advertising (Forbes, 2015). For example, what theory or theories 
help to explain the need to empower consumers while protecting their privacy 
online? How can advertisers have flexibility and be proactive in becoming part of 
the digital landscape?
From this review, it is clear that practitioners are grappling with some of the 
same issues that scholars are grappling with, including consumer privacy, data 
management, mobile, social media, efficacy of display advertising, inappropriate ad 
placement, viewability, and standardized metrics (Rajeck, 2016). The contributors 
of this volume offer a diversity of theories, models, and approaches to tackle these 
and other issues and provide detailed explanations along with vivid and current 
(as well as historical) examples that bring the theories to life. As you read on, you’ll 
see how contributors reflect on where digital advertising research has been over 
the past 15+ years and project ahead to where it might be going.
References
Apple Press Information. (2007, January  9). Apple reinvents the phone with iPhone. 
Retrieved from https://www.apple.com/pr/library/2007/01/09Apple-Reinvents-
the-Phone-with-iPhone.html.
Cuneo, A. (2003, April 10). Mobile media chiefs’  pitch falls on death ears. Advertising Age. Retrieved  
from http://adage.com/article/news/mobile-media-chiefs-pitch-falls-deaf-ears/108406/

A Content Analysis of Advertising Age  43
Cutler, M. (2009, March 30). How to make your online video go viral. Advertising Age. Retrieved  
from http://adage.com/article/digital/digital-marketing-make-online-video-viral/ 
135629/
Elkin, T. (2000, October 30). Microsoft’s MSN fattens banners with rich media. Advertising 
Age. Retrieved from http://adage.com/article/focus-design/microsoft-s-msn-fattens- 
banners-rich-media/56376/
Forbes. (2015, August 20). Netflix saves users from watching 130 hours of commercials per 
year. Retrieved from http://www.forbes.com/sites/insertcoin/2015/08/20/netflix-
saves-users-from-watching-130-hours-of-commercials-per-year/#44f788ad38e0.
Fuchs, B. (2009, August 26). Is Twitter making you stupid? CNBC. Retrieved from http://
www.cnbc.com/id/32569284.
Gabbert, E. (2012, August 12). Google adwords facts and stats. Retrieved from http://
www.wordstream.com/blog/ws/2012/08/13/google-adwords-facts.
Gibbs, A. (2015). Awards season: The rise of streaming networks. CNBC. Retrieved from 
http://www.cnbc.com/2015/12/15/awards-season-the-rise-of-streaming-networks-
amazon-and-netflix.html.
Hampp, A. (2008, March 18). Ogilvy’s Scott: Brands should own entertainment. Advertis-
ing Age. Retrieved from http://adage.com/article/digital/ogilvy-s-scott-brands-enter 
tainment/125792/
Hanlon, P. (2008, January  7). Expand your brand community online. Advertising Age. 
Retrieved from http://adage.com/article/cmo-strategy/expand-brand-community- 
online/122867/
Internet World Stats. (2016). Internet growth statistics. Retrieved from http://www. 
internetworldstats.com/emarketing.htm.
Klaassen, A. (2009). What’s your brand’s social score? Advertising Age. Retrieved from  
http://adage.com/article/digital/razorfish-ogilvy-net-promoter-social-media-model/ 
137867/
La Monica, P. (2004). Google goes low. CNN Money. Retrieved from http://money.cnn.
com/2004/08/18/technology/googleipo/
Lee, E. (2011, June 20). Display’s new kingpin: Facebook’s No.1. Advertising Age. Retrieved 
from http://adage.com/article/digital/display-s-kingpin-facebook-s-1/228290/
Moschella, D. C. (2003). Customer-driven IT: How users are shaping technology industry growth. 
Boston, MA: Harvard Business Press.
Oser, K. (2005, April 11). Meridith rolls games on mag sites. Advertising Age. Retrieved from 
http://adage.com/article/digital/meredith-rolls-games-mag-sites/102846/
Pew Research Center. (2008, March 5). Mobile Access to data and information. Retrieved 
from http://www.pewinternet.org/2008/03/05/questions-and-data-5/
Pew Research Center. (2013, June  5).Smartphone ownership. Retrieved from http://
www.pewinternet.org/2013/06/05/smartphone-ownership-2013/
Pew Research Center. (2016). Broadband vs. dial-up adoption over time. http://www.
pewinternet.org/data-trend/internet-use/connection-type/
Phillips, S. (2007). A brief history of Facebook. The Guardian. Retrieved from http://www.
theguardian.com/technology/2007/jul/25/media.newmedia.
Quan-Haase, A. (2013). Technology and society: Social networks, power, and inequality. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Rajeck, J. (2016, January 5). Three display advertising issues to watch in 2016. eConsultancy.
com. Retrieved from https://econsultancy.com/blog/67366-three-display-advertising- 
issues-to-watch-in-2016/

44  Tham, Rodgers, and Thorson
Riffe, D., Lacy, S., & Drager, M. W. (1996). Sample size in content analysis of weekly news 
magazines. Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, 73(3), 635–644.
Rodgers, S., & Thorson, E. (2000). The interactive advertising model: How users perceive 
and process online ads. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 1(1), 41–60.
Sterne, J. (2006). The mp3 as cultural artifact. New Media & Society, 8(5), 825–842.
Sundar, S. S. (2008). The MAIN model: A heuristic approach to understanding technol-
ogy effects on credibility. In M. J. Metzger & A. J. Flanagin (Eds.), Digital media, youth, 
and credibility (pp. 73–100). The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation 
Series on Digital Media and Learning. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. doi: 10.1162/
dmal.9780262562324.073.

The internet has been the most fundamental change during my lifetime and for hundreds 
of years.
—Rupert Murdoch, Media Mogul
During the past 20 years, technology (e.g., the internet, broadband, smartphone, 
etc.) has altered our lives and ushered in a new age of interactivity capable of 
transforming how we communicate and use media. As a result, interactive media 
have brought information, entertainment, and commerce together in a period 
of media convergence unparalleled throughout human history and given rise to 
digital technologies that allow consumers to participate, create, and control media. 
Likewise, the creation and delivery of advertising has also evolved because of its 
symbiotic relationship with media, leading to the concept of interactive advertis-
ing. Interactive advertising is capable of moving beyond simply identifying how 
much or how often a persuasive message is delivered and, instead, presents oppor-
tunities for two-way, many-to-many exchanges between consumers, brands, and 
the media (Eastin, Daugherty, & Burns, 2011).
Because advertising is an applied discipline capable of being shaped and influ-
enced by research, the Journal of Interactive Advertising (JIAD) was founded in 
the fall of 2000 in recognition of the need to explore and understand this fast- 
developing digital age (Leckenby & Li, 2000). The Journal’s primary focus is to put 
into practice the concepts of interactivity in our academic discourse; to emphasize 
that interactive media are changing all aspects of advertising, marketing, commu-
nication, and society; and to provide a forum to address the enormous challenges 
and complexity of interactive advertising. In essence, JIAD has helped to establish 
and record a paradigm of interactive advertising research. Therefore, the purpose 
4
A SYSTEMATIC ANALYSIS OF 
INTERACTIVE ADVERTISING 
RESEARCH THROUGH A 
PARADIGM FUNNEL
Terry Daugherty and Vanja Djuric

46  Daugherty and Djuric
of this chapter is to provide a systematic analysis of the research published by 
JIAD to understand how the practice of interactive advertising has emerged and 
changed over time. More specifically, we begin by defining interactive advertis-
ing within a scholarly framework and apply the concept of a paradigm funnel to 
provide structure and insight within this body of work. We then identify various 
research trends that have manifested in the pages of the Journal and discuss future 
directions for interactive advertising in general.
Defining Interactive Advertising as a Paradigm
The notion of a paradigm in the social sciences has come to reflect the deep 
beliefs and assumptions involving knowledge within a particular research com-
munity (Nairn, Berthon, & Money, 2007). Kuhn (1962) first introduced the con-
cept in The Structure of Scientific Revolutions subsequently resulting in a plethora 
of paradigm classifications (Willmott, Jackson, & Carter, 1993; Lewis & Grimes, 
1999). While the concept has led to an influx of disciplines jockeying for theoreti-
cal superiority, Kuhn’s (1962, 1970) original work was focused on understanding 
how research changes over time, with one paradigm displacing another (Berthon, 
Nairn, & Money, 2003). Meaning, as scientists discover new knowledge that fun-
damentally expands or changes their theoretical assumptions, an alternative para-
digm emerges, such as interactive advertising.
Leckenby and Li (2000) first defined interactive advertising as any paid or 
unpaid promotion of products, services, or ideas by an identified sponsor to con-
sumers through mediated means. They recognized that the digital age was sig-
nificantly changing the world and that interactivity would soon permeate society 
while exceeding the boundaries (i.e., passive observer) of traditional advertising. 
At its core, interactivity occurs between humans and machines through commu-
nication, interaction, control, change, and creation via computer-mediated expe-
riences (see Hoffman & Novak, 1996; Rafaeli & Sudweeks, 1997; Bezjian-Avery, 
Calder, & Iacobucci, 1998; Heeter, 2000), with JIAD launched as an outlet for 
multidisciplinary interactive advertising scholarship.
Paradigm Funnel
The paradigm funnel represents a systematic technique for exploring, classifying, 
and analyzing a body of literature (Berthon et al., 2003). By following a struc-
tured approach in synthesizing a stream of research, the goal is to identify where 
observed differences exist between the explicit purposes and underlying assump-
tions of a study. Because science is comprised of empirical observation, the merg-
ing of fact with conjecture, and the articulation of theory (Kuhn, 1970, p. 25), 
the dynamics of any research paradigm will range from an explicit and observ-
able scientific structure to the implicit and unobservable (Nairn et al., 2007). 

Analysis of Interactive Ad Research  47
Subsequently, a paradigm funnel is comprised of four levels, with shifts between 
levels stemming from the observation of data, the way data are interpreted, and the 
theoretical approach. If data is observationally based (Level 1), then explanations 
are sought through structured analysis (Level 2). However, if scientific solutions 
are not found at this level, specific theory is questioned (Level 3) leading to the 
challenging of deep assumptions (Level 4) and ultimately a new paradigm (see 
Figure 4.1). This is not to say that the evolution of a research paradigm over time 
is linear. Rather, this structure allows for ordered comparisons to be made within 
complex literature that is often fragmented.
For the purpose of this chapter, the aforementioned criteria were applied to 
all research articles published in JIAD to identify the paradigm structure and 
gain insight into how interactive advertising scholarship has developed. A cen-
sus of the Journal was taken for research published between January 1, 2000 
and June 1, 2016 using the EBSCO database. Excluding editorials and point-
of-view articles, a total of 180 manuscripts were reviewed. The articles were 
evaluated based on the aforementioned paradigm funnel criteria and assigned 
to one of the four levels. Two coders independently analyzed all of the manu-
scripts, resulting in only 12 intercoder disagreements, indicating an acceptable 
reliability of 93 percent and Scott’s Pi accounting for chance agreement of 0.97 
(Riffe & Lacy, 2014). The articles assigned to each funnel level are illustrated 
in Table 4.1.
Explicit
Implicit
Empirical Observations
Analytical Methods
Specific Theory
Core Assumptions
FIGURE 4.1  The Paradigm Funnel
Source: Nairn et al., 2007

TABLE 4.1  Interactive Advertising Paradigm Funnel
Level
Study
1. Empirical 
Observations
38 articles
Katz (2000); Richards (2000); Jeandrain (2001); Dahlen 
(2002); Gould & Coyle (2002); McMillan (2002); Ang, 
Zhou, and Jiang (2003); Chan-Olmsted and Kang (2003); 
Chou (2003); Liu (2003); Patwardhan and Yang (2003); 
Ryu, Kim, and Kim (2003); Seounmi, Lee, and Doyle 
(2003); Taniwaki (2003); Lee, Lee, Kim, and Stout (2004); 
Macias, Lewis, and Shankar (2004); Nelson, Keum, and 
Yaros (2004); Phillips, Tandoh, Noble, and Bush (2004); 
Bailey (2005); Kim, McMillan, and Hwang (2005); 
Rosenkrans (2005); Barton (2006); Fong and Burton 
(2006); Cheong and Morrison (2008); Hanley, George-
Palilonis, and Tanksale (2008); Jansen, Hudson, Hunter, 
Liu, & Murphy (2008); Troutman and Timpson (2008); 
Hansen (2009); Okazaki (2009); Chen and Haley (2010); 
Fagerstrøm and Ghinea (2010); Huang and Tsang (2010); 
Katz (2010); Kelly, Kerr, and Drennan (2010); Atkinson, 
Driesener, and Corkindale (2014)
2. Analytical Methods
114 articles
Wells and Chen (2000); Choi, Miracle, and Biocca (2001); 
Edwards and Gangadharbatla (2001); Brown (2002); Choi 
and Rifon (2002); Daugherty and Reece (2002); Jee and 
Lee (2002); Luo (2002); Rodgers (2002); Yoon, Cropp, 
and Cameron (2002); Ha (2003); Hwang, McMillan, and 
Lee (2003); Macias (2003); Bellman and Rossiter (2004); 
Chaney, Lin, and Chaney (2004); Ferguson and Perse 
(2004); Grigorovici and Constantin (2004); Hernandez, 
Chapa, Minor, Maldonado, and Barranzuela (2004); Ko, 
Jung, Kim, and Shim (2004); Wan and Youn (2004); Xie, 
Donthu, Lohtia, and Osmonbekov (2004); Yoo, Kim, and 
Stout (2004); Chen, Griffith, and Shen (2005); Hupfer 
and Grey (2005); Nicovich (2005); Patwardhan and 
Ramaprasad (2005); Rodgers, Jin, Rettie, Alpert, and Yoon 
(2005); Sundar and Kim (2005); Swain (2005); Benedicktus 
and Andrews (2006); Chen and Rodgers (2006); 
Goldsmith and Horowitz (2006); Morimoto and Chang 
(2006); Porter and Golan (2006); Steyer, Garcia-Bardidia, 
and Quester (2006); Thorson and Rodgers (2006); Acar 
(2007); Berneburg (2007); Bruner and Kumar (2007); 
Drossos, Giaglis, Lekakos, Kokkinaki, and Stavraki (2007); 
Glass (2007); Merisavo et al. (2007); Nasco and Bruner  
(2007); Sicilia and Ruiz (2007); Unni and Harmon (2007); 
Wu (2007); Chu and Kamal (2008); Daugherty, Eastin, and 
Bright (2008); Gangadharbatla (2008); Im, Lee, Taylor, and 
D'Orazio (2008); Micu and Thorson (2008); Wise, Bolls, 
Kim, Venkataraman, and Meyer (2008); Xia and Bechwati 
(2008); Bellman, Schweda, and Varan (2009); Cha (2009); 
Edwards, Lee, and Ferle (2009); Jin and Bolebruch (2009); 
McMahan, Hovland, and McMillan (2009); Rosenkrans 
(2009); Zeng, Huang, and Dou (2009); Chang, Yan, Zhang, 
and Luo (2010); Cui, Wang, and Xu (2010); Eckler and 
Bolls (2011); Hoy and Milne (2010); Lewis and Porter

Analysis of Interactive Ad Research  49
Level
Study
(2010); Mabry and Porter (2010); Ahrens and Coyle 
(2011); Cauberghe and Pelsmacker (2011); Chi (2011); 
Chu (2011); Elias, Appaih, and Gong (2011); Kwon and 
Sung (2011); Lin and Peña (2011); Park, Rodgers, And 
Stemmle (2011); Dardis, Schmierbach, and Limperos 
(2012); Cortés and Vela (2013); Kamal, Chu, and Pedram 
(2013); Kim, Lin, and Sung (2013); Lee and Ahn (2013); 
Lee, Ham, and Kim (2013); Moon, Kim, Choi, and Sung 
(2013); Morrison, Cheong, and McMillan (2013); Pentina 
and Taylor (2013); Tsai and Men (2013); Wise, Alhabash, 
and Eckler (2013); Carr and Hayes (2014); Duff, Yoon, 
Wang, and Anghelcev (2014); Evans (2014); Jeong and 
Coyle (2014); Logan (2014); López and Sicilia (2014); 
Hayes and King (2014); Muk and Chung (2014); Sokolik, 
Magee, and Ivory (2014); Alhabash, McAlister, Lou, and 
Hagerstrom (2015); Chen, Lin, Choi, and Hahm (2015); 
De Keyzer, Dens, and De Pelsmacker (2015); Kinney and 
Ireland (2015); Kononova and Yuan (2015); Limpf and 
Voorveld (2015); Sashittal and Jassawalla (2015); Schulz, 
Dority, and Schulz (2015); Shan and King (2015); Siemens, 
Smith, and Fisher (2015); Wang, Cunningham, and Eastin 
(2015); Alhabash et al. (2016); Maslowska, Smith, and 
van den Putte (2016); van Riet et al. (2016); Wu (2016); 
Yaoyuneyong, Foster, Jounson, and Johnson (2016); Yoon 
and Youn (2016)
3. Specific Theory
21 articles
Heeter (2000); Rodgers and Thorson (2000); Ang (2001); 
Coffey (2001); Lombard and Snyder-Duch (2001); 
Pennington (2001); Roberts and Ko (2001); Schumann, 
Artis, and Rivera (2001); Sheehan (2002); Steinfield 
(2002); Mitra (2003); Fortunato and Windels (2005); 
McMillan (2005); Spurgeon (2005); Townsend (2005); 
Tremayne (2005); Murdough (2009); Russell (2009); Liang 
(2010); Martin and Todorov (2010); Ohme, Matukin, and 
Pacula-Lesniak (2011)
4. Core Assumptions
7 articles
Pavlou and Stewart (2000); Cannon (2001); Wu (2005); 
Vilpponen, Winter, and Sundqvist (2006); Sheehan and 
Morrison (2009); Mallia and Windels (2011); Wagler 
(2013)
Empirical Observation—Level 1
Level 1 of the funnel constitutes research focused on observing and document-
ing criteria or events within a paradigm. The purpose is the recognition and 
acknowledgment of the phenomenon in a descriptive manner proclaiming to 
the scientific world something is happening and to identify this as fact. A total of 
21 percent of JIAD’s articles were classified in this part of the funnel with most 
designed to explore an emerging area of interactive advertising (Figure 4.2). For 
instance, scholars early on investigated the implications of interactivity, websites, 

50  Daugherty and Djuric
and online advertising (Katz, 2000; Gould  & Coyle, 2002; McMillan, 2002; 
Rosenkrans, 2005), but this continuously changed to focus on new consumer 
behaviors, tactics, and/or technologies. Another group sought to examine con-
sumer acceptance of advergames and brand messages within games (Chou, 2003; 
Seounmi et al., 2003; Nelson et al., 2004) from both a user perspective as well as 
evaluating the marketing viability of such strategies, while others looked to define 
the emergence of the Web 2.0 by exploring electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM), 
social media, and user-generated content (UGC) (Fong & Burton, 2006; Kelly, 
Kerr, & Drennan, 2010; Fagerstrøm & Ghinea, 2010). Overall, the top of the fun-
nel often reflects first observations by researchers in an effort to call attention to 
phenomenon, which research in JIAD supports. In addition, the Level 1 interac-
tive advertising funnel of research published by JIAD provides more breadth than 
depth in that the number of topics (e.g., interactivity, internet advertising, mobile, 
etc.) is greater compared to only a few focal areas.
Analytical Methods—Level 2
Level 2 of the funnel represents research determined to connect data to theory 
using analytical approaches. Research at this level moves beyond categorizing 
facts to testing relationships and identifying patterns for enhancing predictive 
power. While the use of advanced techniques is a defining characteristic of this 
level, order and structure associated with correct theory is critical. Subsequently, 
the amount of research at this level increased significantly, reaching 63 percent. 
Whereas Level 1 provided breadth, Level 2 delivers depth across a number of 
N=180
Empirical 
Observations
21%
Analytical 
Methods
63%
Specific Theory
12%
Core 
Assumptions
4%
FIGURE 4.2  Percentage of Articles at Each Level of the Funnel

Analysis of Interactive Ad Research  51
interactive advertising topics. For instance, testing the effectiveness of common 
forms of internet advertising (e.g., display, search) is consistent throughout and a 
tactic researchers continuously seek to understand (Choi & Rifon, 2002; Rodg-
ers, 2002; Yoo, Kim, & Stout, 2004; Rosenkrans, 2009), with more recent trends 
examining video advertising (Lee, Ham, & Kim, 2013; Kononova & Yuan, 2015). 
Similarly, web use and online behavior remain key areas of research with articles 
testing message structure (Luo, 2002; Hwang, McMillan, & Lee, 2003), interactiv-
ity ( Jee & Lee, 2002; Wu, 2005), and consumer characteristics (McMahan, Hov-
land, & McMillan, 2009; Elias, Appiah, & Gong, 2011; Wise, Alhabash, & Eckler, 
2013; Schulz, Dority, & Schulz, 2015).
The importance of social media is also readily apparent as articles examining 
motivational use (Gangadharbatla, 2008; Tsai & Men, 2013; Logan, 2014; Sashit-
tal & Jassawalla, 2015), cultural differences (Chen & Haley, 2010), and advertis-
ing strategy (Chen et al., 2015; Kinney & Ireland, 2015; Alhabash et al., 2016) 
are introduced. Furthermore, the continued growth of gaming manifests with 
research exploring brand placement (Grigorovici & Constantin, 2004; Glass, 2007; 
Siemens et al., 2015), in-game advertising (Chaney, Lin, & Chaney, 2004; Chang 
et al., 2010; Lewis & Porter, 2010), and information processing (Acar, 2007; Dardis 
et al., 2012).
More recent work in Level 2 of the funnel assesses various approaches for ana-
lyzing eWOM and the timing associated with message reception, third-party influ-
ences (Carr & Hayes, 2014), interpersonal relationships (Shan & King, 2015), and 
message characteristics (Wang et al., 2015). The prominence of this topic area is also 
related to the growth of research examining mobile devices and advertising (Dros-
sos et al., 2007; Cortés & Vela, 2013; Kim et al., 2013; Limpf & Voorveld, 2015).
Specific Theory—Level 3
Level 3 of the funnel is comprised of research specifically designed to articulate 
theory generation and test empirical propositions, with 12 percent of the articles 
classified accordingly. The intent at this level is to conceptually organize and pro-
pose new beliefs within the interactive advertising paradigm through a theoretical 
lens. To this end, the concept of interactivity has drawn most of the attention, with 
articles identifying antecedents associated with interactive experiences (Heeter, 
2000; Lombard & Snyder-Duch, 2001; Schumann et al., 2001; McMillan, 2005; 
Tremayne, 2005). Similarly, new frameworks for how interactive advertising is 
processed by consumers have emerged to make positive contributions to the liter-
ature (Rodgers & Thorson, 2000; Roberts & Ko, 2001; Martin & Todorov, 2010). 
Further, immersive computer-mediated environments such as virtual reality (VR) 
(Pennington, 2001) and cybernetic virtual existences (Mitra, 2003) have also 
been explored, challenging interactive advertising researchers to move beyond 
the present and look to the future. In turn, e-commerce models designed around 

52  Daugherty and Djuric
integrating both online and offline businesses have been presented (Steinfield, 
2002) and extended to international markets (Liang, 2010). The limited breadth 
and depth of research identified within this level could be a symptom of the ado-
lescence of interactive advertising as a paradigm. However, this also suggests many 
opportunities for scholars to make a significant theoretical contribution.
Core Assumptions—Level 4
Finally, Level 4 of the funnel challenges deep assumptions established by previous 
research, questioning the core framework, knowledge, and/or methods associated 
within the values and beliefs of a paradigm. Only 4 percent of the articles were 
categorized at this level, which is not necessarily surprising given the abbrevi-
ated window of interactive advertising research. Early work at this level sought to 
challenge existing media strategies by evaluating both the effectiveness (Pavlou & 
Stewart, 2000) and differences (Cannon, 2001) of interactive advertising relative 
to traditional offline media. Another article (Wu, 2005) challenged the concept 
of interactivity as failing to account for mediated differences between what is 
perceived versus what is real, and beliefs were also contested involving what is 
known about eWOM (Vilpponen et al., 2006). Surprisingly, the most depth in 
opposition to core assumptions stems from the industry classified area of “creativ-
ity,” with researchers questioning current practices for the approaches used within 
computer-mediated environments (CMEs) (Sheehan  & Morrison, 2009; Mal-
lia & Windels, 2011; Wagler, 2013). Ultimately, as scholars continue to participate 
in a continuously evolving digital media landscape, the prospect of challenging 
assumptions is more than likely diminished when the rate of change negatively 
affects the necessary learning curve to effectively develop interactive advertising. 
Yet, as the research paradigm matures and technology evolves, more challenges of 
existing core assumptions will emerge.
Paradigm Funnel Discussion
The application of a paradigm funnel to the articles published in JIAD provides 
a distinct approach for examining this growing body of research while offering 
several benefits. First, we assessed the body of work in the Journal using a broad 
interpretation of Kuhn’s (1962) paradigm, defined in terms of interactive adver-
tising. This resulted in analyzing 180 research articles used to identify patterns 
or trends that could potentially provide scholarly insight. Second, the evaluation 
process encouraged the separation of facts, methodology, analysis, and theory for 
a greater understanding of the type of contribution each research article pro-
vides. This categorical breakdown serves to remind scholars of the importance of 
properly framing any research. Third, because the research is analyzed over time, 
the approach affords an understanding of how a research paradigm evolves. For 
instance, over half of the research in JIAD across a 16-year period was classified 

Analysis of Interactive Ad Research  53
as Level 2 (analytical methods). While an uneven distribution of levels is expected 
(Nairn et al., 2007), emerging and developing paradigms would more than likely 
appear top heavy across the first two levels. At the same time, a significantly dis-
proportionate funnel level could signal a paradigm shift. Given the recency of 
many of the articles in Level 2, this could be a sign that the interactive advertising 
paradigm is beginning to mature.
In the end, the analysis provides a starting point for understanding how research 
conducted within a paradigm can help scholars identify gaps or new opportu-
nities. This structured perspective serves to facilitate the cataloging of empiri-
cal work using critical analysis while enabling researchers to question existing 
knowledge. For example, the breadth of research topics examined in JIAD seems 
connected to the emergence of new interactive media and/or technology and 
appears to be negatively associated with research depth. While the delineation of 
funnel levels plays a role in this fact, there are no structural limitations preventing 
greater breadth and depth within the literature. This is more than likely a product 
of the broad paradigm definition of interactive advertising and the set number of 
articles published by the Journal each year. Regardless, it appears that opportunities 
exist for researchers to make significant contributions to interactive advertising 
through theory development and testing.
Impact and Contribution
Given the volume of interactive advertising research published in a relatively short 
period of time, JIAD is making a positive contribution to the body of literature. 
As a result, the Journal has been recognized as a leading academic outlet for adver-
tising scholarship (Kim, Hayes, Avant, & Reid, 2014; Wang, Rodgers, Wang, & 
Thorson, 2016) while publishing work from more than 300 authors in 23 differ-
ent countries. This external validation is qualified by the Google Scholar citation 
count of the Journal (Figure 4.3). For instance, with 11,000+ citations overall, the 
interactive advertising research presented to the academic community via JIAD is 
obviously considered valuable by many.
Perhaps the greatest contribution of the Journal is the diversity of research top-
ics explored under the umbrella of interactive advertising. In fact, it is the multiplic-
ity of subject matter through a focused lens that makes JIAD unique. To better 
understand the range of issues examined, the published articles (N = 180) were 
reviewed post-hoc and broadly classified according to their primary interactive 
advertising topics. Categories were derived a priori (e.g., social media, interac-
tivity) as well as inductively; intercoder reliability was not assessed because the 
purpose was to identify organic research themes independent of the previous 
paradigm funnel analysis.
Not surprising, the majority of research articles in the Journal (29.4%) examine 
some general form of internet advertising with other prominent themes iden-
tified, such as social media (15%), gaming (9.4%), and interactivity (5.6%) (see 

54  Daugherty and Djuric
FIGURE 4.3  JIAD Google Scholar Citations per Year
Figure 4.4). In all, 15 topics were discovered that reflected many of the most 
important issues within the industry, such as mobile (6.7%), eWOM (5.6%), and 
consumer behavior online (4.4%). To further extrapolate this data, a timeline of 
published articles was constructed (see Figure 4.5) revealing interesting patterns. 
For example, there have been consistent trends with about 35 percent of internet 
advertising articles published from 2000 to 2006. Although internet advertising 
has certainly evolved since the first banner ad appeared in 1994, the increasing 
importance of online advertising to reach consumers is clear. In fact, it was not 
until around 2006 when social media research began to emerge when we started 
to see a slight decline. The use of social media for viral marketing, engagement, 
and brand exposure has raised many questions with advertisers resulting in an 
increase in the quantity of articles published. While there is no reason to expect 
a slowdown currently, this research is starting to see a shift to mobile commu-
nication, which has been surprisingly sporadic. Nonetheless, gaming and mobile 
tend to follow a similar trend in that both started in the early 2000s with a steady 
flow along with pulses of increased activity. Interestingly, a linear connection does 
appear between interactivity, eWOM, and mobile. This perhaps reflects the con-
vergence of social media and smartphones (see 2005–2007 in Figure 4.5).
Pockets of “hot topics” do appear for gaming, interactivity, UGC, and high-
speed internet access between 2003 and 2005, yet have not seen much growth 
since. Other topics such as e-commerce and virtual reality have appeared through-
out the years but have a low publishing quantity overall. Perhaps this demon-
strates the continuous evolving nature of interactive advertising and the need for 
researchers to further observe, confirm, and postulate in this area. A clear pattern 
does emerge for some topics when examining the midpoint of the timeline as 

Analysis of Interactive Ad Research  55
FIGURE 4.4  General Interactive Advertising Research Topics in JIAD
FIGURE 4.5  Timeline of JIAD Publications by Topic
we see a cluster of interactive advertising topics that were once mainstream (e.g., 
interactivity, IMC, consumer behavior, etc.) displaced in the literature.
The most surprising observation is the scarcity of published research examin-
ing digital measurement and consumer privacy within the Journal. These topics 
remain critical issues in the industry but have failed to manifest scholarly interest 
in the pages of JIAD. While a spattering of articles appear, the quantity does very 
little to move the literature toward knowledge saturation. Obviously, measure-
ment and privacy have been explored in other scholarly outlets so the absence of 
this type of work could reflect subject matter bias, which is even more concern-
ing. At a very minimum, this should serve as a call to action among the commu-
nity of interactive scholars supporting JIAD.

56  Daugherty and Djuric
Conclusion
This chapter presents a systematic review of the interactive advertising literature 
published in JIAD through the application of a paradigm funnel approach. As 
such, much of the body of work appears within Levels 1 and 2 of the funnel, 
which attempts to document factual observations and manipulate data for the 
articulation of theory. The preponderance of research at these two levels reflects 
the early development of a paradigm. Consequently, as the paradigm matures, 
additional research is required to develop unique interactive advertising theories 
(Level 3) while questioning core assumptions (Level 4). It is our belief that the 
construction of specialized theory that embraces the unique characteristics and 
qualities of interactive advertising is not only needed, but is necessary for the 
future of the paradigm. This is not to say that there is no need for continued 
empirical observations in interactive advertising research. The broad classification 
of interactive advertising means that innovations of computer-mediated technol-
ogies will present almost continuous demand for the discovery and observation 
of facts. Yet, more mature areas within the paradigm, such as internet advertising, 
social media, and gaming, are ready for rich theoretical propositions and models.
The field of interactive advertising is interdisciplinary, with research obviously 
appearing beyond the pages of JIAD and within a multitude of scholarly outlets. 
As a result, the scope of our findings are limited and are not intended to generalize 
outside the examined unit of analysis. Rather, our intent was to critically analyze 
the scholarly contribution JIAD has made to the field of interactive advertising. 
The uniqueness of the Journal stems from its inextricable connection with our 
digital world and a proclivity for interactive scholarship. Leckenby and Li (2000) 
originally sought, 16 years ago, to provide a forum for the development of interac-
tive scholarship and to put into practice the knowledge gained. Without a doubt, 
the exploration, classification, and analyses in JIAD are examining critical aspects 
of interactive advertising and expanding our understanding of this paradigm.
References
Acar, A. (2007). Testing the effects of incidental advertising exposure in online gaming 
environment. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 8(1), 45–56.
Ahrens, J., & Coyle, J. R. (2011). A content analysis of registration processes on websites: 
How advertisers gather information to customize marketing communications. Journal 
of Interactive Advertising, 11(2), 12–26.
Alhabash, S., McAlister, A. R., Kim, W., Lou, C., Cunningham, C., Quilliam, E. T., & Rich-
ards, J. I. (2016). Saw it on Facebook, drank it at the bar! Effects of exposure to Facebook 
alcohol ads on alcohol-related behaviors. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 16(1), 44–58.
Alhabash, S., McAlister, A. R., Lou, C., & Hagerstrom, A. (2015). From clicks to behav-
iors: The mediating effect of intentions to like, share, and comment on the relation-
ship between message evaluations and offline behavioral intentions. Journal of Interactive 
Advertising, 15(2), 82–96.
Ang, P. H. (2001). The role of self-regulation of privacy and the internet. Journal of Interactive 
Advertising, 1(2), 1–9.

Analysis of Interactive Ad Research  57
Ang, P. H., Zhou, Q., & Jiang, Y. (2003). Lessons in broadband adoption from Singapore. 
Journal of Interactive Advertising, 4(1), 33–38.
Atkinson, G., Driesener, C., & Corkindale, D. (2014). Search engine advertisement design 
effects on click-through rates. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 14(1), 24–30.
Bailey, A. A. (2005). Consumer awareness and use of product review websites. Journal of 
Interactive Advertising, 6(1), 68–81.
Barton, B. (2006). Ratings, reviews & ROI: How leading retailers use customer word of 
mouth in marketing and merchandising. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 7(1), 5–50.
Bellman, S., & Rossiter, J. R. (2004). The website schema. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 
4(2), 38–48.
Bellman, S., Schweda, A., & Varan, D. (2009). A comparison of three interactive television 
ad formats. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 10(1), 14–34.
Benedicktus, R. L., & Andrews, M. L. (2006). Building trust with consensus information: 
The effects of valence and sequence direction. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 6(2), 3–25.
Berneburg, A. (2007). Interactive 3D simulations in measuring consumer preferences: 
Friend or foe to test results? Journal of Interactive Advertising, 8(1), 1–13.
Berthon, P., Nairn, A., & Money, A. (2003). Through the paradigm funnel: A conceptual 
tool for literature analysis. Marketing Education Review, 13(2), 55–66.
Bezjian-Avery, A., Calder, B., & Iacobucci, D. (1998). New media interactive advertising vs. 
traditional advertising. Journal of Advertising Research, 38, 23–32.
Brown, M. (2002). The use of banner advertisements with pull-down menus: A copy test-
ing approach. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 2(2), 57–65.
Bruner, G. C., & Kumar, A. (2007). Attitude toward location-based advertising. Journal of 
Interactive Advertising, 7(2), 3–15.
Cannon, H. M. (2001). Addressing new media with conventional media planning. Journal of 
Interactive Advertising, 1(2), 28–42.
Carr, C. T., & Hayes, R. A. (2014). The effect of disclosure of third-party influence on an 
opinion leader’s credibility and electronic word of mouth in two-step flow. Journal of 
Interactive Advertising, 14(1), 38–50.
Cauberghe, V., & Pelsmacker, P. D. (2011). Adoption intentions toward interactive digital 
television among advertising professionals. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 11(2), 45–59.
Cha, J. (2009). Shopping on social networking web sites: Attitudes toward real versus virtual 
items. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 10(1), 77–93.
Chaney, I. M., Lin, K. H., & Chaney, J. (2004). The effect of billboards within the gaming 
environment. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 5(1), 37–45.
Chang, Y., Yan, J., Zhang, J., & Luo, J. (2010). Online in-game advertising effect: Examining 
the influence of a match between games and advertising. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 
11(1), 63–73.
Chan-Olmsted, S., & Kang, J. W. (2003). The emerging broadband television market in the 
United States: Assessing the strategic differences between cable television and telephone 
firms. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 4(1), 13–24.
Chen, H., & Haley, E. (2010). The lived meanings of Chinese social network sites (SNSS) 
among urban white-collar professionals: A story of happy network. Journal of Interactive 
Advertising, 11(1), 11–26.
Chen, K. J., Lin, J. S., Choi, J. H., & Hahm, J. M. (2015). Would you be my friend? An 
examination of global marketers’ brand personification strategies in social media. Journal 
of Interactive Advertising, 15(2), 97–110.
Chen, Q., Griffith, D. A., & Shen, F. (2005). The effects of interactivity on cross-channel 
communication effectiveness. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 5(2), 19–28.

58  Daugherty and Djuric
Chen, Q., & Rodgers, S. (2006). Development of an instrument to measure web site per-
sonality. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 7(1), 4–46.
Cheong, H. J., & Morrison, M. A. (2008). Consumers’ reliance on product information and 
recommendations found in UGC. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 8(2), 38–49.
Chi, H. H. (2011). Interactive digital advertising vs. virtual brand community: Exploratory 
study of user motivation and social media marketing responses in Taiwan. Journal of 
Interactive Advertising, 12(1), 44–61.
Choi, S. M., & Rifon, N. J. (2002). Antecedents and consequences of web advertising cred-
ibility: A study of consumer response to banner ads. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 3(1), 
12–24.
Choi, Y. K., Miracle, G. E., & Biocca, F. (2001). The effects of anthropomorphic agents on 
advertising effectiveness and the mediating role of presence. Journal of Interactive Advertis-
ing, 2(1), 19–32.
Chou, Y. (2003). G-commerce in East Asia: Evidence and prospects. Journal of Interactive 
Advertising, 4(1), 47–53.
Chu, S. C. (2011). Viral advertising in social media: Participation in Facebook groups and 
responses among college-aged users. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 12(1), 30–43.
Chu, S. C., & Kamal, S. (2008). The effect of perceived blogger credibility and argument 
quality on message elaboration and brand attitudes: An exploratory study. Journal of 
Interactive Advertising, 8(2), 26–37.
Coffey, S. (2001). Internet audience measurement: A practitioner’s view. Journal of Interactive 
Advertising, 1(2), 10–17.
Cui, N., Wang, T., & Xu, S. (2010). The influence of social presence on consumers’ percep-
tions of the interactivity of web sites. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 11(1), 36–49.
Dahlen, M. (2002). Learning the web: Internet user experience and response to web mar-
keting in Sweden. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 3(1), 25–33.
Dardis, F. E., Schmierbach, M., & Limperos, A. M. (2012). The impact of game customiza-
tion and control mechanisms on recall of integral and peripheral brand placements in 
videogames. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 12(2), 1–12.
Daugherty, T., Eastin, M. S., & Bright, L. (2008). Exploring consumer motivations for creat-
ing user-generated content. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 8(2), 16–25.
Daugherty, T., & Reece, B. B. (2002). The adoption of persuasive internet communication 
in advertising and public relations curricula. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 3(1), 46–55.
De Keyzer, F., Dens, N.,  & De Pelsmacker, P. (2015). Is this for me? How consumers 
respond to personalized advertising on social network sites. Journal of Interactive Advertis-
ing, 15(2), 124–134.
Drossos, D., Giaglis, G. M., Lekakos, G., Kokkinaki, F., & Stavraki, M. G. (2007). Determi-
nants of effective SMS advertising: An experimental study. Journal of Interactive Advertis-
ing, 7(2), 16–27.
Duff, B. R. L., Yoon, G., Wang, Z., & Anghelcev, G. (2014). Doing it all: An exploratory 
study of predictors of media multitasking. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 14(1), 11–23.
Eastin, M. S., Daugherty, T., & Burns, N. M. (2011). Handbook of research on digital media and 
advertising: User generated content consumption. Hershey, PA: IGI-Global.
Eckler, P., & Bolls, P. (2011). Spreading the virus: Emotional tone of viral advertising and its 
effect on forwarding intentions and attitudes. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 11(2), 1–11.
Edwards, S. M., & Gangadharbatla, H. (2001). The novelty of 3D product presentations 
online. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 2(1), 10–18.
Edwards, S. M., Lee, J. K., & Ferle, C. L. (2009). Does place matter when shopping online? 
Perceptions of similarity and familiarity as indicators of psychological distance. Journal 
of Interactive Advertising, 10(1), 35–50.

Analysis of Interactive Ad Research  59
Elias, T., Appiah, O., & Gong, L. (2011). Effects of strength of ethnic identity and product 
presenter race on black consumer attitudes: A multiple-group model approach. Journal 
of Interactive Advertising, 11(2), 13–29.
Evans, N. J. (2014). Pinpointing persuasion in children’s advergames: Exploring the rela-
tionship among parents’ internet mediation, marketplace knowledge, attitudes, and the 
support for regulation. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 14(2), 73–85.
Fagerstrøm, A., & Ghinea, G. (2010). Web 2.0’s marketing impact on low-involvement 
consumers. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 10(2), 67–71.
Ferguson, D. A., & Perse, E. M. (2004). Audience satisfaction among TiVo and ReplayTV 
users. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 4(2), 1–8.
Fong, J.,  & Burton, S. (2006). Electronic word-of-mouth: A  comparison of stated and 
revealed behavior on electronic discussion boards. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 6(2), 
7–62.
Fortunato, J. A., & Windels, D. M. (2005). Adoption of digital video recorders and advertis-
ing: Threats or opportunities. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 6(1), 93–104.
Gangadharbatla, H. (2008). Facebook me: Collective self-esteem, need to belong, and 
internet self-efficacy as predictors of the iGeneration’s attitudes toward social network-
ing sites. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 8(2), 5–15.
Glass, Z. (2007). The effectiveness of product placement in video games. Journal of Interactive 
Advertising, 8(1), 23–32.
Goldsmith, R. E., & Horowitz, D. (2006). Measuring motivations for online opinion seek-
ing. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 6(2), 2–14.
Gould, J. R., & Coyle, S. J. (2002). How consumers generate clickstreams through web sites: 
An empirical investigation of hypertext, schema and mapping theoretical explanations. 
Journal of Interactive Advertising, 2(2), 42–56.
Grigorovici, D. M.,  & Constantin, C. D. (2004). Experiencing interactive advertising 
beyond rich media: Impacts of ad type and presence on brand effectiveness in 3D gam-
ing immersive virtual environments. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 5(1), 22–36.
Ha, L. (2003). Crossing offline and online media: A comparison of online advertising on 
TV web sites and online portals. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 3(2), 24–35.
Hanley, M., George-Palilonis, J., & Tanksale, V. (2008). Research-informed development 
for interactive media: Enhancing learning by engaging students with users. Journal of 
Interactive Advertising, 9(1), 56–64.
Hansen, S. S. (2009). Brands inspiring creativity and transpiring meaning: An ethnographic 
exploration of virtual world play. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 9(2), 4–17.
Hayes, J. L., & King, K. W. (2014). The social exchange of viral ads: Referral and coreferral 
of ads among college students. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 14(2), 98–109.
Heeter, C. (2000). Interactivity in the context of designed experiences. Journal of Interactive 
Advertising, 1(1), 3–14.
Hernandez, M. D., Chapa, S., Minor, M. S., Maldonado, C., & Barranzuela, F. (2004). His-
panic attitudes toward advergames: A proposed model of their antecedents. Journal of 
Interactive Advertising, 5(1), 74–83.
Hoffman, D. L., & Novak, T. P. (1996). Marketing in hypermedia computer-mediated envi-
ronments: Conceptual foundations. The Journal of Marketing, 6(3), 50–68.
Hoy, M. G., & Milne, G. (2010). Gender differences in privacy-related measures for young 
adult Facebook users. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 10(2), 28–45.
Huang, M., & Tsang, A. S. (2010). Development and current issues related to Internet mar-
keting communications in China. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 11(1), 1–10.
Hupfer, M. E., & Grey, A. (2005). Getting something for nothing: The impact of a sample 
offer and user mode on banner ad response. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 6(1), 105–117.

60  Daugherty and Djuric
Hwang, J. S., McMillan, S. J., & Lee, G. (2003). Corporate web sites as advertising: An 
analysis of function, audience, and message strategy. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 3(2), 
10–23.
Im, S., Lee, D. H., Taylor, C. R., & D’Orazio, C. (2008). The influence of consumer self-disclosure  
on web sites on advertising response. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 9(1), 37–48.
Jansen, B. J., Hudson, K., Hunter, L., Liu, F., & Murphy, J. (2008). The Google online mar-
keting challenge: Classroom learning with real clients, real money, and real advertising 
campaigns. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 9(1), 49–55.
Jeandrain, A. C. (2001). Consumer reactions in a realistic virtual shop: Influence on buying 
style. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 2(1), 2–9.
Jee, J., & Lee, W. N. (2002). Antecedents and consequences of perceived interactivity: An 
exploratory study. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 3(1), 34–45.
Jeong, Y., & Coyle, E. (2014). What are you worrying about on Facebook and Twitter? 
An empirical investigation of young social network site users’ privacy perceptions and 
behaviors. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 14(2), 51–59.
Jin, S. A. A., & Bolebruch, J. (2009). Avatar-based advertising in second life: The role of pres-
ence and attractiveness of virtual spokespersons. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 10(1), 
51–60.
Kamal, S., Chu, S. C., & Pedram, M. (2013). Materialism, attitudes, and social media usage 
and their impact on purchase intention of luxury fashion goods among American and 
Arab young generations. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 13(1), 27–40.
Katz, H. (2000). Interactivity in 2000: An industry viewpoint. Journal of Interactive Advertis-
ing, 1(1), 78–85.
Katz, H. (2010). The pool lane one: Making a splash with online video. Journal of Interactive 
Advertising, 10(2), 72–77.Kelly, L., Kerr, G., & Drennan, J. (2010). Avoidance of advertis-
ing in social networking sites: The teenage perspective. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 
10(2), 16–27.
Kim, K., Hayes, J. L., Avant, J. A., & Reid, L. N. (2014). Trends in advertising research: A lon-
gitudinal analysis of leading advertising, marketing, and communication journals, 1980 
to 2010. Journal of Advertising, 43(3), 296–316.
Kim, E., Lin, J. S., & Sung, Y. (2013). To app or not to app: Engaging consumers via branded 
mobile apps. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 13(1), 53–65.
Kim, J., McMillan, S. J., & Hwang, J. S. (2005). Strategies for the super bowl of advertising: 
An analysis of how the web is integrated into campaigns. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 
6(1), 46–60.
Kinney, L., & Ireland, J. (2015). Brand spokes-characters as Twitter marketing tools. Journal 
of Interactive Advertising, 15(2), 135–150.
Ko, H., Jung, J., Kim, J., & Shim, S. W. (2004). Cross-cultural differences in perceived risk of 
online shopping. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 4(2), 20–29.
Kononova, A., & Yuan, S. (2015). Double-dipping effect? How combining YouTube envi-
ronmental PSAs with thematically congruent advertisements in different formats affects 
memory and attitudes. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 15(1), 2–15.
Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kuhn, T. S. (1970). The structure of scientific revolutions (2nd ed.). Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Kwon, E. S., & Sung, Y. (2011). Follow me! Global marketers’ Twitter use. Journal of Interac-
tive Advertising, 12(1), 4–16.
Leckenby, J. D., & Li, H. (2000). From the editors: Why we need the Journal of Interactive 
Advertising. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 1(1), 1–3.

Analysis of Interactive Ad Research  61
Lee, J., Ham, C. D., & Kim, M. (2013). Why people pass along online video advertis-
ing: From the perspectives of the interpersonal communication motives scale and the 
theory of reasoned action. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 13(1), 1–13.
Lee, S. J., Lee, W. N., Kim, H., & Stout, P. A. (2004). A comparison of objective characteris-
tics and user perception of web sites. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 4(2), 61–75.
Lee, Y. J., & Ahn, H. Y. (2013). Interaction effects of perceived sponsor motives and Face-
book credibility on willingness to visit social cause Facebook page. Journal of Interactive 
Advertising, 13(1), 41–52.
Lewis, B., & Porter, L. (2010). In-game advertising effects: Examining player perceptions 
of advertising schema congruity in a massively multiplayer online role-playing game. 
Journal of Interactive Advertising, 10(2), 46–60.
Lewis, M. W., & Grimes, A. I. (1999). Metatriangulation: Building theory from multiple 
paradigms. Academy of Management Review, 24(4), 672–690.
Liang, C. (2010). The present situation of and prospects for e-business in China. Journal of 
Interactive Advertising, 11(1), 74–81.
Limpf, N., & Voorveld, H. A. (2015). Mobile location-based advertising: How informa-
tion privacy concerns influence consumers’ attitude and acceptance. Journal of Interactive 
Advertising, 15(2), 111–123.
Lin, J. S., & Peña, J. (2011). Are you following me? A content analysis of TV networks’ brand 
communication on Twitter. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 12(1), 17–29.
Liu, Y. L. (2003). Broadband demand, competition, and relevant policy in Taiwan. Journal of 
Interactive Advertising, 4(1), 39–46.
Logan, K. (2014). Why isn’t everyone doing it? A comparison of antecedents to following 
brands on Twitter and Facebook. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 14(2), 60–72.
Lombard, M., & Snyder-Duch, J. (2001). Interactive advertising and presence: A frame-
work. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 1(2), 56–65.
López, M., & Sicilia, M. (2014). eWOM as source of influence: The impact of participation 
in eWOM and perceived source trustworthiness on decision making. Journal of Interac-
tive Advertising, 14(2), 86–97.
Luo, X. (2002). Uses and gratifications theory and e-consumer behaviors: A  structural 
equation modeling study. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 2(2), 34–41.
Luna Cortés, G., & Royo Vela, M. (2013). The antecedents of consumers’ negative attitudes 
toward SMS advertising: A theoretical framework and empirical study. Journal of Interac-
tive Advertising, 13(2), 109–117.
Mabry, E., & Porter, L. (2010). Movies and Myspace: The effectiveness of official web sites 
versus online promotional contests. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 10(2), 1–15.
Macias, W. (2003). A preliminary structural equation model of comprehension and persua-
sion of interactive advertising brand web sites. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 3(2), 36–48.
Macias, W., Lewis, L. S., & Shankar, V. (2004). Dr. Mom and Dr. Web: A qualitative analysis of 
women’s use of health information on the web. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 4(2), 9–19.
Mallia, K. L., & Windels, K. (2011). Will changing media change the world? An exploratory 
investigation of the impact of digital advertising on opportunities for creative women. 
Journal of Interactive Advertising, 11(2), 30–44.
Martin, K., & Todorov, I. (2010). How will digital platforms be harnessed in 2010, and how 
will they change the way people interact with brands? Journal of Interactive Advertising, 
10(2), 61–66.
Maslowska, E., Smit, E. G., & van den Putte, B. (2016). It is all in the name: A study of 
consumers’ responses to personalized communication. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 
16(1), 74–85.

62  Daugherty and Djuric
McMahan, C., Hovland, R., & McMillan, S. (2009). Online marketing communications: 
Exploring online consumer behavior by examining gender differences and interactivity 
within internet advertising. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 10(1), 61–76.
McMillan, S. J. (2002). Longevity of websites and interactive advertising communication. 
Journal of Interactive Advertising, 2(2), 11–21.
McMillan, S. J. (2005). The researchers and the concept: Moving beyond a blind examina-
tion of interactivity. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 5(2), 1–4.
Merisavo, M., Kajalo, S., Karjaluoto, H., Virtanen, V., Salmenkivi, S., Raulas, M., & Lep-
päniemi, M. (2007). An empirical study of the drivers of consumer acceptance of 
mobile advertising. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 7(2), 41–50.
Micu, A. C., & Thorson, E. (2008). Leveraging news and advertising to introduce new 
brands on the web. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 9(1), 14–26.
Mitra, A. (2003). Cybernetic space: Bringing the virtual and real together. Journal of Interac-
tive Advertising, 3(2), 1–9.
Moon, J. H., Kim, E., Choi, S. M., & Sung, Y. (2013). Keep the social in social media: The role of 
social interaction in avatar-based virtual shopping. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 13(1), 14–26.
Morimoto, M., & Chang, S. (2006). Consumers’ attitudes toward unsolicited commercial 
e-mail and postal direct mail marketing methods: Intrusiveness, perceived loss of con-
trol, and irritation. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 7(1), 1–11.
Morrison, M. A., Cheong, H. J., & McMillan, S. J. (2013). Posting, lurking, and networking: 
Behaviors and characteristics of consumers in the context of user-generated content. 
Journal of Interactive Advertising, 13(2), 97–108.
Muk, A., & Chung, C. (2014). Driving consumers to become fans of brand pages: A theo-
retical framework. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 14(1), 1–10.
Murdough, C. (2009). Social media measurement: It’s not impossible. Journal of Interactive 
Advertising, 10(1), 94–99.
Nairn, A., Berthon, P., & Money, A. (2007). Learning from giants: Exploring, classifying and 
analysing existing knowledge on market research. International Journal of Market Research, 
49(2), 257–274.
Nasco, S. A., & Bruner, G. C. (2007). Perceptions and recall of advertising content presented 
on mobile handled devices. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 7(2), 51–62.
Nelson, M. R., Keum, H., & Yaros, R. A. (2004). Advertainment or adcreep game players’ 
attitudes toward advertising and product placements in computer games. Journal of Inter-
active Advertising, 5(1), 3–21.
Nicovich, S. G. (2005). The effect of involvement on ad judgment in a video game envi-
ronment: The mediating role of presence. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 6(1), 29–39.
Ohme, R., Matukin, M., & Pacula-Lesniak, B. (2011). Biometric measures for interactive 
advertising research. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 11(2), 60–72.
Okazaki, S. (2009). Mobile finds girls’ taste: Knorr’s new product development. Journal of 
Interactive Advertising, 9(2), 32–39.
Park, H., Rodgers, S., & Stemmle, J. (2011). Health organizations’ use of Facebook for 
health advertising and promotion. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 12(1), 62–77.
Patwardhan, P., & Ramaprasad, J. (2005). Rational integrative model of online consumer 
decision making. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 6(1), 2–13.
Patwardhan, P.,  & Yang, J. (2003). Internet dependency relations and online consumer 
behavior: A media system dependency theory perspective on why people shop, chat, 
and read news online. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 3(2), 57–69.
Pavlou, P. A., & Stewart, D. W. (2000). Measuring the effects and effectiveness of interactive 
advertising: A research agenda. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 1(1), 61–77.

Analysis of Interactive Ad Research  63
Pennington, R. (2001). Signs of marketing in virtual reality. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 
2(1), 33–43.
Pentina, I., & Taylor, D. G. (2013). Regulatory focus and daily-deal message framing: Are we 
saving or gaining with Groupon? Journal of Interactive Advertising, 13(2), 67–75.
Phillips, J., Tandoh, M., Noble, S., & Bush, V. (2004). The value of relationship strength in 
segmenting casino patrons: An exploratory investigation. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 
5(1), 60–73.
Porter, L., & Golan, J. G. (2006). From subservient chickens to brawny men: A comparison 
of viral advertising to television advertising. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 6(2), 4–33.
Rafaeli, S., & Sudweeks, F. (1997). Networked interactivity. Journal of Computer-Mediated 
Communication, 2(4). doi: 10.1111/j.1083–6101.1997.tb00201.x.
Richards, J. I. (2000). Interactive advertising concentration: A first attempt. Journal of Interac-
tive Advertising, 1(1), 15–22.
Riffe, D., & Lacy, S. (2014). Analyzing media messages: Using quantitative content analysis in 
research. New York, NY: Routledge.
Roberts, M. S., & Ko, H. (2001). Global interactive advertising: Defining what we mean 
and using what we have learned. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 1(2), 18–27.
Rodgers, S. (2002). The interactive advertising model tested: The role of motives in ad 
processing. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 2(2), 22–33.
Rodgers, S., Jin, Y., Rettie, R., Alpert, F., & Yoon, D. (2005). Internet motives of users in the 
United States, United Kingdom, Australia, and Korea: A cross-cultural replication of the 
WMI. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 6(1), 61–67.
Rodgers, S., & Thorson, E. (2000). The interactive advertising model: How users perceive 
and process online ads. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 1(1), 41–60.
Rosenkrans, G. (2005). Online auctions as advertising revenue in the media mix. Journal of 
Interactive Advertising, 6(1), 14–28.
Rosenkrans, G. (2009). The creativeness and effectiveness of online interactive rich media 
advertising. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 9(2), 18–31.
Russell, M. G. (2009). A call for creativity in new metrics for liquid media. Journal of Interac-
tive Advertising, 9(2), 44–61.
Ryu, C. R., Kim, D. H., & Kim, E. M. (2003). Diffusion of broadband and online advertis-
ing in Korea. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 4(1), 3–12.
Sashittal, H. C., & Jassawalla, A. R. (2015). Why do college students use Pinterest? A model 
and implications for scholars and marketers. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 15(1), 54–66.
Schulz, H. M., Dority, B. L., & Schulz, S. A. (2015). Individual differences in online con-
sumer behaviors in relation to brand prominence. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 15(1), 
67–80.
Schumann, D. W., Artis, A.,  & Rivera, R. (2001). The future of interactive advertising 
viewed through an IMC lens. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 1(2), 43–55.
Seounmi, Y., Lee, M., & Doyle, K. O. (2003). Lifestyles of online gamers: A psychographic 
approach. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 3(2), 49–56.
Shan, Y., & King, K. W. (2015). The effects of interpersonal tie strength and subjective 
norms on consumers’ brand-related eWOM referral intentions. Journal of Interactive 
Advertising, 15(1), 16–27.
Sheehan, K. B. (2002). Online research methodology: Reflections and speculations. Journal 
of Interactive Advertising, 3(1), 56–61.
Sheehan, K. B., & Morrison, D. K. (2009). The creativity challenge: Media confluence 
and its effects on the evolving advertising industry. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 9(2), 
40–43.

64  Daugherty and Djuric
Sicilia, M., & Ruiz, S. (2007). The role of flow in web site effectiveness. Journal of Interactive 
Advertising, 8(1), 33–44.
Siemens, J. C., Smith, S., & Fisher, D. (2015). Investigating the effects of active control on 
brand recall within in-game advertising. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 15(1), 43–53.
Sokolik, K., Magee, R. G., & Ivory, J. D. (2014). Red-hot and ice-cold web ads: The influ-
ence of web ads’ warm and cool colors on click-through rates. Journal of Interactive 
Advertising, 14(1), 31–37.
Spurgeon, C. (2005). Losers and lovers: Mobile phone services advertising and the new 
media consumer/producer. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 5(2), 47–55.
Steinfield, C. (2002). Understanding click and mortar e-commerce approaches: A concep-
tual framework and research agenda. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 2(2), 1–10.
Steyer, A., Garcia-Bardidia, R., & Quester, P. (2006). Online discussion groups as social 
networks: An empirical investigation of word-of-mouth on the Internet. Journal of Inter-
active Advertising, 6(2), 6–52.
Sundar, S. S., & Kim, J. (2005). Interactivity and persuasion: Influencing attitudes with 
information and involvement. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 5(2), 5–18.
Swain, W. N. (2005). Perceptions of interactivity and consumer control in marketing com-
munications: An exploratory survey of marketing communication professionals. Journal 
of Interactive Advertising, 6(1), 82–92.
Taniwaki, Y. (2003). Emerging broadband market and the relevant policy agenda in Japan. 
Journal of Interactive Advertising, 4(1), 25–32.
Thorson, K. S., & Rodgers, S. (2006). Relationships between blogs as eWOM and interac-
tivity, perceived interactivity, and parasocial interaction. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 
6(2), 5–44.
Townsend, L. (2005). The status of wireless survey solutions: The emerging “power of the 
thumb.” Journal of Interactive Advertising, 6(1), 40–45.
Tremayne, M. (2005). Lessons learned from experiments with interactivity on the web. 
Journal of Interactive Advertising, 5(2), 40–46.
Troutman, M., & Timpson, S. (2008). Effective optimization of web sites for mobile access: 
The transition from eCommerce to mCommerce. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 9(1), 
65–70.
Tsai, W. H. S., & Men, L. R. (2013). Motivations and antecedents of consumer engage-
ment with brand pages on social networking sites. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 13(2), 
76–87.
Unni, R., & Harmon, R. (2007). Perceived effectiveness of push vs. pull mobile location 
based advertising. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 7(2), 28–40.
van’t Riet, J., Hühn, A., Ketelaar, P., Khan, V. J., Konig, R., Rozendaal, E., & Markopoulos, P. 
(2016). Investigating the effects of location-based advertising in the supermarket: Does 
goal congruence trump location congruence? Journal of Interactive Advertising, 16(1), 
31–43.
Vilpponen, A., Winter, S., & Sundqvist, S. (2006). Electronic word-of-mouth in online 
environments: Exploring referral networks structure and adoption behavior. Journal of 
Interactive Advertising, 6(2), 8–77.
Wagler, A. (2013). Embracing change: Exploring how creative professionals use interactive 
media in advertising campaigns. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 13(2), 118–127.
Wan, F., & Youn, S. (2004). Motivations to regulate online gambling and violent game sites: 
An account of the third-person effect. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 5(1), 46–59.
Wang, S., Cunningham, N. R., & Eastin, M. S. (2015). The impact of eWOM message 
characteristics on the perceived effectiveness of online consumer reviews. Journal of 
Interactive Advertising, 15(2), 151–159.

Analysis of Interactive Ad Research  65
Wang, Y., Rodgers, S., Wang, Z., & Thorson, E. (2016). A seventeen-year study of graduate 
student authorship in advertising journals. Journalism & Mass Communication Educator, 
71(1), 69–83.
Wells, W. D., & Chen, Q. (2000). The dimensions of commercial cyberspace. Journal of Inter-
active Advertising, 1(1), 23–40.
Willmott, H., Jackson, N., & Carter, P. (1993). Breaking the paradigm mentality. Organiza-
tion Studies, 14(5), 681–719.
Wise, K., Alhabash, S., & Eckler, P. (2013). “Window” shopping online: Cognitive pro-
cessing of general and specific product windows. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 13(2), 
88–96.
Wise, K., Bolls, P. D., Kim, H., Venkataraman, A., & Meyer, R. (2008). Enjoyment of adver-
games and brand attitudes: The impact of thematic relevance. Journal of Interactive Adver-
tising, 9(1), 27–36.
Wu, G. (2005). The mediating role of perceived interactivity in the effect of actual interac-
tivity on attitude toward the website. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 5(2), 29–39.
Wu, G. (2007). Applying the Rossiter-Percy grid to online advertising planning: The role 
of product/brand type in previsit intentions. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 8(1), 15–22.
Wu, L. (2016). Understanding the impact of media engagement on the perceived value and 
acceptance of advertising within mobile social networks. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 
16(1), 59–73.
Xia, L., & Bechwati, N. N. (2008). Word of mouse: The role of cognitive personalization in 
online consumer reviews. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 9(1), 3–13.
Xie, T., Donthu, N., Lohtia, R., & Osmonbekov, T. (2004). Emotional appeal and incentive 
offering in banner advertisements. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 4(2), 30–37.
Yaoyuneyong, G., Foster, J., Johnson, E., & Johnson, D. (2016). Augmented reality market-
ing: Consumer preferences and attitudes toward hypermedia print ads. Journal of Interac-
tive Advertising, 16(1), 16–30.
Yoo, C. Y., Kim, K., & Stout, P. A. (2004). Assessing the effects of animation in online ban-
ner advertising: Hierarchy of effects model. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 4(2), 49–60.
Yoon, D., Cropp, F., & Cameron, G. (2002). Building relationships with portal users: The 
interplay of motivation and relational factors. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 3(1), 1–11.
Yoon, D., & Youn, S. (2016). Brand experience on the website: Its mediating role between 
perceived interactivity and relationship quality. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 16(1), 
1–15.
Zeng, F., Huang, L., & Dou, W. (2009). Social factors in user perceptions and responses to 
advertising in online social networking communities. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 
10(1), 1–13.


PART II
Theory Breakthroughs


What is clutter? Is all advertising clutter? These are the basic questions that we need 
to ask before embarking on research on advertising clutter. Clutter has been defined 
as “a large amount of non-editorial content in an editorial medium” (Ha & McCann, 
2008, p. 570). It is more about density than quantity of such non-editorial content. 
If the non-editorial content refers to advertisements, then it is advertising clutter. 
Clutter is described as a “difficult media environment” (Webb, 1979, p. 225). The 
key to this definition of advertising clutter is that the advertising is placed in a third-
party editorial media vehicle, such as magazines or television programs (Ha, 2008). 
Some important characteristics of clutter are that clutter is unwanted, undesirable, 
and excessive, and interferes with the consumption of editorial content.
Relevance of the ads to the individual is one major factor of whether the adver-
tising is considered desirable (Kim & Sundar, 2010). The entertainment value of the 
ad also affects the consumer’s receptiveness of the ads (Ducoffe, 1995; Ko, Cho, & 
Roberts, 2005). In addition, the goal of the user in the media consumption pro-
cess moderates clutter perception (Ha & McCann, 2008; Heinz, Hug, Nugaeva, & 
Opwis, 2013; Seyedghorban, Tahernejad, & Matanda, 2015). Hence, perceived clut-
ter levels vary by individuals (Ha, 1996). When advertising has a high level of ad-
context congruity (Zanjani, Diamond, & Chan, 2011) or high compatibility with 
editorial content (Ha, 1996) being seen as relevant (Kim & Sundar, 2010), then 
advertising is not clutter but is considered desirable and useful content to the audi-
ence. Hence, advertising clutter is a complex concept, as it varies by individuals.
Evolution of the Research on Clutter
Research on advertising clutter can be dated back to the late 1970s and had  
focused primarily on TV advertising clutter from Webb (1979) to Mord and Gil-
son (1985), Brown and Rothschild (1993), Pieters and Bijmolt (1997), and Zhao  
5
DIGITAL ADVERTISING CLUTTER 
IN AN AGE OF MOBILE MEDIA
Louisa Ha

70  Ha
(1997) to more recent researchers, such as Hammer, Riebe, and Kennedy (2009). 
The captivity of television as a mass medium and the high stakes TV advertising  
poses to the TV and advertising industry are the main reasons for such focus on TV 
advertising clutter. However, Ha (1996) demonstrates that the effect of clutter is not 
limited to TV but can affect any media outlet, including self-paced media such as 
magazines.
The online and digital media context presents new challenges because the pas-
sive and captive environment of traditional offline media is replaced by the active 
and self-paced environments in digital media. The competition for users’ attention 
online is fierce, as users can easily move to another web page at the click of a mouse 
or the touch of a finger in mobile media. Theoretically, users are less subject to 
advertisers in digital media with the abundance of choices at their fingertips. Yet, 
online advertising formats range from complete control by advertisers, such as pre-
roll video ads, that show the TV commercial before the display of an online video 
users want to watch, and pop-up ads that block the whole screen for several seconds 
before the user can move to anything else, to ads as non-intrusive as a sponsored 
link on a Google search page and banners along the edges or bottom of a web page.
Burns and Lutz’s (2006) experiment compared different consumer responses 
to six online advertising formats: banners, floating ads, large rectangles, interstitials, 
skyscrapers, and pop-ups. Their experiment showed that pop-up ads and floating 
ads scored highest on the annoyance factor, while interstitial ads scored highest 
on the entertainment factor. Banner ads scored highest on the information factor 
and received the highest overall positive attitude from consumers and performed 
the best on all behavioral measures, such as click-through percentage, percent visit 
later, and click-through frequency. Cho and Cheon (2004) developed a model of 
online advertising avoidance prompted by perceived goal impediment, perceived 
ad clutter, and prior negative experience using a student sample. Perceived ad 
clutter was found to be the most important predictor of advertising avoidance. 
This result was replicated in a recent study of a general consumer sample in Iran 
(Seyedghorban, Tahernejad, & Matanda, 2015).
Causes of Advertising Clutter
One fundamental issue challenging advertisers is that some consumers have an 
overall negative attitude toward advertising in general due to its profit-making 
persuasion motive and its negative effect on society. Advertising is seen by some 
to lower the quality of content and sacrifice the independent nature of the news 
media. The use of ad-blocker software on computers and subscriptions to ad-free 
premium program packages, such as YouTube Red and Hulu Plus, are examples of 
overt manifestations of those online users who do not like to see any ads at all. The 
Adobe Page Fair Ad Blocking Report shows that 16 percent of U.S. online users 
and up to 198 million users worldwide used ad blockers (PageFair, 2015). The 
report also indicates that a large increase in the quantity of online ads will stimu-
late interest in using ad blockers among U.S. online users. The trade association 

Digital Advertising Clutter  71
for digital advertising, the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB), views ad-blockers 
as a threat to the digital advertising industry, especially condemning those who 
replace the blocked ads with their own programmatic ads (Tribbey, 2016).
Three Dimensions of Clutter as Advertising Environment
Unlike the extreme of complete hatred toward advertising and total ad avoidance, 
complaints about advertising clutter are more commonly caused by the ways 
advertisements are presented to the audience in an editorial media unit, be it as 
an issue of a magazine, a TV program, a newspaper, or a web page. Ha (1996) pro-
posed three dimensions of advertising clutter, or essentially three ways that adver-
tisements can constitute clutter to the audience: quantity, competitiveness, and 
intrusiveness. Quantity is the large number of ads or proportion of ads (degree 
of commercialization) in the space of an editorial media unit, or the so-called 
“list length effect,” and commercial load (Bellman, Treleaven-Hassard, Robinson, 
Rask, & Varan, 2012). Competitiveness is the degree of similarity of the product 
categories in the ads in an editorial media unit, causing confusion and perceived 
duplication among the audiences. Intrusiveness is the degree to which the ads 
interfere with the audience’s consumption of editorial content. So a commercial 
inserted in between two programs would be considered less intrusive than the  
one inserted in an unexpected commercial break that interrupts the flow of a pro-
gram. Although Ha’s (1996) study showed that both the quantity and intrusiveness 
dimensions had the most negative impact on advertising effectiveness in terms of 
recall, recognition, and attitude toward the ad, the competitiveness dimensions of 
clutter could still be a concern when researchers examine ads that are of similar 
product categories in a more captive medium such as television and not in a self-
paced medium such as magazines. The many similar product/service sponsored 
links in a Google search is a common example of highly competitive digital ad 
clutter, as they can be confused by the highly similar product listings.
Effects of Clutter
Approaches to Clutter Effects
Despite the interest of advertisers and researchers in the effects of clutter, the results  
are inconclusive due to several reasons. First is the difference in the captivity of 
media, which is the degree to which the user can control the pace of flow of content  
of the medium. Captive media, such as TV and radio, usually result in higher recall 
than self-paced media, such as print and online. For example, Hammer, Riebe, and  
Kennedy (2009) found that there is no difference in the recall of ads and ad avoidance 
in radio and TV with more or fewer ads. Creative execution is a better predictor  
of recall than clutter. Second is the difference in user task orientations. If users have a  
clear task, their tolerance of clutter is lower. If they are in a leisure/surfing mode, they  
are less resistant toward clutter. Third is the difference between laboratory and field 

72  Ha
research settings. The lab environment that controls many variables and forces ad/
editorial exposure to participants could result in higher recall and recognition 
than the many distractions the audience would be faced with in field settings.
Ha and McCann (2008) proposed an integrated model of advertising clutter 
to provide a comprehensive model of understanding perception formation and 
its effects in both the digital and traditional media environments. Their model 
includes: 1) the structural approach, 2) the information processing approach, and 
3) the goal impediment (functional) approach in examining the effect of advertis-
ing clutter. The difference between online and offline advertising clutter is mainly 
in the increase in advertiser control of advertising display time/customization, and 
variety in ad formats for user control (see Figures 5.1 and 5.2).
Self-paced
FIGURE 5.1  A Conceptual Framework of Advertising Clutter in Offline Media
Reprinted with permission. Ha, L. & McCann, K. (2008). An integrated model of advertising clutter in 
offline and online media environment. International Journal of Advertising, 27(4), 569–592. http://www.
tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.2501/S0265048708080153

Digital Advertising Clutter  73
FIGURE 5.2  A Conceptual Framework of Advertising Clutter in Online Media (Bold 
faces indicate differences from offline media.)
Reprinted with permission. Ha, L. & McCann, K. (2008). An integrated model of advertising clutter in 
offline and online media environment. International Journal of Advertising, 27(4), 569–592. http://www.
tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.2501/S0265048708080153
As noted in Chapter 1, the structural approach is about the physical attributes 
of ads and, in this case, advertising clutter, which are controllable by advertisers 
and the media firm. These include the duration of ads, number of ads, location 
and visibility of ads, ad-context/editorial congruity, and the execution (produc-
tion quality) of the ads. These factors can affect the perception of clutter level 
among the audiences.
Although physical attributes as a media-centered analysis can influence per-
ception of clutter, there are other information processing factors affecting percep-
tion of clutter such as overall attitudes toward advertising (e.g., Muehling, 1987) 
and persuasion knowledge or the awareness of a persuasive intent in advertising 
(e.g., Campbell & Kirmani, 2000). Capability of processing advertising messages 
among the audiences (perceived message overload) can also affect the perceived 

74  Ha
advertising clutter level. Reactance theory and overload theory are the common 
theories used to explain the negative effects of clutter. Reactance theory argues that 
audiences resist external control over them and react negatively toward efforts to 
persuade them (Brehm & Brehm, 1981; Edwards, Li, & Lee, 2002), while overload 
theory explains the inability of audiences to process large amounts of messages 
in a cluttered situation (Malhotra, Jain, & Lagakos, 1982). In addition, users select 
advertising that is perceived as relevant or interesting for them to process based 
on selective attention theory to save their attention resources (Smith & Buchholz, 
1991). Finally, the consumer’s involvement in the advertised product will affect their 
processing of the advertising based on the Elaboration Likelihood Model (ELM) 
proposed by Petty, Cacciopo, and Schumann (1983). Consumers highly involved in 
the advertised product will use a central processing route and pay attention to the 
information contained in the advertising. Consumers not involved in the advertised 
product will use peripheral cues such as advertising execution elements to process 
the ads. When advertising clutter consists largely of products that consumers are not 
involved in, then the entertainment value of the ads becomes a critical factor for 
them to process and remember the ads. Hence, researchers on advertising clutter 
should also take into consideration the information processing approach in exam-
ining effects of advertising clutter on the processing of advertising messages.
There is also the functional approach that can be applied to the study of clutter 
by examining how clutter affects the editorial content consumption process and 
the goal or user task in media content consumption. Similar to the user mode 
in Rodgers and Thorson’s (2000) Interactive Advertising Model (IAM), Ha and 
McCann’s (2008) integrated model proposed that user task orientations affected  
perceived clutter levels. Informational searches and task-oriented consumers had a 
higher perceived level of ad clutter than entertainment, exploration, and shopping- 
oriented consumers. Subsequent empirical research by Zanjani et al. (2011) con-
firmed that information seekers were more likely to be affected by ad clutter than 
surfers. Their experiment shows that advertising clutter has little effect on surfers 
who have no particular purpose in consuming the e-magazine. But those who 
have the task of seeking information found the ad clutter intrusive and avoided 
the ads. Their recognition and recall of ads was lower when the ad-context con-
gruity increased.
Segev, Wang, and Fernandes’s (2014) study of advertising on blogs found that 
importance of ad-context congruency was contingent upon consumers’ issue 
involvement. Ad-context congruency was especially important to those who feel 
the issue in the editorial content is very relevant to them. But to those who 
were less involved with the issue, ad-context incongruence was better perceived. 
In contrast, Seyedghorban, Tahernejad, and Matanda (2015) found that paratelic 
users (surfers) were more likely to perceive higher advertising clutter than telic 
users (task performers) because they were more likely to have prior negative 
experiences with online advertising, e.g., they had clicked on ads that were not 
useful to them.

Digital Advertising Clutter  75
Types of Clutter Effects
Cognitive Effects of Advertising Clutter
There are three types of clutter effects on audiences: cognitive, affective, and 
behavioral. The most common measures of the effects of clutter are its negative 
cognitive effect on memory of advertisements. For memory of ads, unaided and 
aided recall, and recognition of ads with choices are common measures. Lee and 
Cho’s (2010) experiment found that there is an interactive effect between fre-
quency of the ads and online advertising clutter. In a highly cluttered web page, 
frequency of the target ad facilitated memory, but not recognition, of the banner 
ad. Bellman et al.’s (2012) experiment found that beyond three minutes of com-
mercials within the primetime shows online, there was a marked decline in ad 
recall and recognition. Usually a negative cognitive effect is related to the quantity 
of advertising but not the intrusiveness of advertising.
Affective Effects of Advertising Clutter
Affective effects of clutter include attitude toward the advertisement (Aad) in the 
medium/media vehicle, attitude toward advertising in general, attitude toward the 
brand (Abr), perceived editorial quality, and enjoyment of media content.
It is a well-known fact that consumers have different expectations and atti-
tudes toward advertising in different media. For example, in the 2012 Millward 
Brown Global AdReactions Report of 6000 mobile media users worldwide 
(Statista, 2016a), results showed that consumers have much more favorable atti-
tudes toward TV (51%), radio (50%), and magazine ads than online media such 
as online video ads (28%), mobile ads (23%), and email ads (18%). Hence, Elliot 
and Speck (1998) found different receptiveness toward advertising clutter for 
different media. The attitude transfer process can explain how negative attitudes 
toward advertising that appears in media may affect attitude toward the ad 
(Aad), attitude toward a specific brand (Abr), and/or attitude toward advertising 
in general (i.e., advertising that appears in a media vehicle, such as magazines) 
(Ha, 1996).
It is also important to understand that ad clutter as a measurement of com-
mercialization can also affect perceived editorial quality of the media vehicle. For 
example, too many ads in a magazine will adversely affect the audience’s percep-
tion of the quality of the magazine and lower the value of the advertisement to 
the advertiser (Ha & Litman, 1997). Kim and Sundar’s (2010) experiment also 
found that subjects who saw relevant ad clutter evaluated the website that dis-
played the ads significantly more positively than the website that had irrelevant ad 
clutter. So it is not just amount, but relevancy, that determine the affective effect 
of clutter. Hence, advertising clutter does not only threaten efficacy of advertising 
but also the editorial media that carry the advertising as well.

76  Ha
Clutter can also affect the enjoyment of editorial content. Disengagement and 
adaptation are two psycho-physiological responses to the video programs result-
ing from ad clutter (Bellman et al., 2012). Disengagement is a decline in auto-
nomic arousal after watching commercials in a video. Adaptation is the disruption 
and welcome break of the hedonic experience of media content through com-
mercials that led to increasing enjoyment. According to Bellman et al.’s (2012) 
experiment, adding commercials to prime-time type of programs online did not 
increase enjoyment of programs, instead audiences adapted to the program.
Behavioral Effects of Advertising Clutter
Behavioral effects of advertising clutter include advertising avoidance and reac-
tance, such as not clicking through the ads. One commonly studied behavioral 
effect of ad clutter is advertising avoidance. Many advertising avoidance studies, 
including Cho and Cheon’s (2004) model, include perceived advertising clutter 
as a factor causing advertising avoidance. Almost all advertising avoidance studies 
included one or more clutter dimension in their studies to explain why people 
avoid advertising (Rejón-Guardia & Martínez-López, 2014; Seyedghorban, Tah-
ernejad, & Matanda, 2015).
Another behavioral effect is advertising reactance, that is, the resistance to be 
persuaded by the advertisement after exposure to the ads. When consumers feel 
overwhelmed by advertisements and cannot avoid them for whatever reasons 
(such as loud noise, blocked screen), they will resist the advertising and purposely 
reject the advertising messages they are exposed to. They can ignore or refuse to 
follow the suggestions and actions recommended by the advertisers, such as click-
ing through the link/ad. Schumann, von Wangenheim, and Groene (2014) found 
lower click-through rates (CTRs) among consumers who reported higher ad 
clutter in their experiment of receptiveness toward digital advertising.
Attention to Advertising in Multiple Web Pages
How do online users process ads in a cluttered environment? Goodrich’s (2011) 
study used a dual attitude model to explain users’ processing of ads in a cluttered 
environment by comparing mere exposure versus conscious processing of online 
advertising shown in a sequence of eight web pages with some containing banner 
ads. Her experiment found interaction effects of ad types and ad locations. Visual ads  
on the right side of a web page and text ads on the left side of the page resulted 
in higher attention. However, high attention was negatively correlated with brand 
attitude. The tested product, an electric shaver, did not have a contextual fit with 
the web pages. The Goodrich (2011) study showed that attention to the ad due to 
structural factors such as advertising types and location may not result in liking of 
the brand. Breaking through the clutter is not just about generating attention to 
the ad, but also creating a positive brand attitude.

Digital Advertising Clutter  77
In the following section, clutter-related issues in several major digital advertis-
ing formats are examined.
Digital Advertising Clutter in Different Ad Formats
Search Advertising and Competitiveness of Ads
Search advertising revenue in the U.S. reached $27.6 billion in 2015, which is 
more than one half of the total revenue of all digital advertising types (Statista, 
2016b). Despite this, relatively little research has been published about search ads 
(Ha, 2008). Even when it was studied, it was mainly for relevance (ad contextual 
congruity), rather than competitiveness in relation to ad clutter. Dou, Linn, and 
Yang’s (2001) study examined the online ad industry’s use of smart banners by 
typing in 345 keywords for 115 product categories in 11 search engines. They 
found that many smart banners did not find relevant results. Kim and Sundar’s 
(2010) experiment using a small student sample (N = 13) found that advertising 
clutter could be reduced by increasing the relevance of ads to the website context 
without reducing the number of ads. Haans, Raassens, and van Hout (2013) found 
that evidence type used (i.e., expert, statistical, or causal evidence) in the text 
affected the CTR of the sponsored links (search ads) in low involvement products. 
Expert and statistical evidence were considered the most credible and attractive to 
the searchers. An interaction effect was found in Yoo’s (2011) experiment between 
positivity of advertising message frame and presence of keywords in the search 
results in facilitating the sponsored link click-through.
One main assumption in search advertising is that when consumers type in a 
keyword or a phrase into a search engine, such as Google, they are interested in 
the product/service and, subsequently, are in a shopping mode. But if the con-
sumer tries to research specific information on a topic rather than shopping, 
then these so-called “smart” ads become an impediment to completing that goal 
because shopping is not a goal at that time. The consumer has to browse through 
all the paid listings to find relevant listing to their search. This extra effort will not 
lead to more use of the ads, but may add to the consumers’ resentment toward the 
advertisers (and search engines) that serve the ads.
Even with the smart ads or personalized ads, there is another issue of trust 
in the advertisers. Those advertisers to whom the consumers are unfamiliar but 
who used personalized ads will create a backlash effect because they are seen as 
violating privacy and stealing personal data from the consumer, i.e., they will be 
considered less trustworthy and manipulative by consumers (Bleier & Eisenbeiss, 
2015). There are also ethical and legal concerns about targeted online behavioral 
advertising (Nill & Aalberts, 2014). Hence, adding the relevance of the ads is not 
as effective as it seems. Schumann, von Wangenheim, and Groene’s (2014) experi-
ment showed that normative reciprocity, i.e., reminding consumers that receiving 
targeted advertising as a return for getting free services, was more effective in 

78  Ha
gaining consumer acceptance than emphasizing the utility value of the targeted 
advertising to the consumers. The CTR of the targeted ads was higher even in 
higher perceived clutter level when the reciprocity argument was presented.
Banner Blindness Effects
Banner blindness refers to the overlooking of banner ads on a web page. Several 
studies about consumers’ attention to banner ads (Benway, 1998) have found a 
banner blindness effect if the banners are placed in an F shape on a screen (i.e., 
too high or on the edges) or for users who have to perform a goal-directed 
search for information (Pagendarm & Schaumburg, 2001). Banner ads on Face-
book attracted much lower attention levels than the friends’ recommendations of 
the user (Barreto, 2013). Consumers easily overlook these banner ads. However, 
these banner blindness studies did not vary the number of banners (quantity) 
or whether the banners pop up or animate on the users’ screen (intrusiveness) 
to examine if banner blindness still occurred. Frequency of banner ads has been 
shown to positively relate to recall in clutter situations (Zanjani, Diamond, & 
Chan, 2011). Prior studies have shown that pop-up ads (Edwards, Li, & Lee, 2002; 
Cho & Cheon, 2004) caught the consumers’ attention despite the negative effect 
of stimulating their intention to avoid the ads. Animated ads can arouse consumers 
and draw attention to the ads (Sundar & Kalyanaraman, 2004; Yoo, Kim, & Stout, 
2004). Hence, the manner of how banners are presented to consumers is critical 
for them to be viewed as clutter.
Pre-Roll Ads vs. Mid-Roll Commercials in  
Online Videos and TV Shows
Despite the increasing use of in-stream video advertising in online videos, not 
many published studies examine video advertising from a clutter perspective. One 
major concern of clutter in online in-stream video ads is the position of the ads 
that can affect the intrusiveness of the ads. There are three types of positions: pre-
roll (before the video is shown), mid-roll (inserted in the middle of the video con-
tent similar to TV commercial breaks), and post-roll ads (shown after the video 
is over or between episodes). Krishnan and Sitaraman’s (2013) study of Akamai’s 
video delivery network with 65 million unique viewers watching 362 million 
videos and 257 million ad videos of 33 video providers found that mid-roll ads 
were 18.1 percent more likely to complete when placed as a mid-roll than as a 
pre-roll. Bellman et al.’s (2012) study comparing different levels of mid-roll adver-
tising clutter in TV shows online revealed that the optimal level of online video 
advertising was three minutes per hour with six different ads and was similar to 
research on traditional TV advertising clutter. They also found a primacy order 
effect in that only the first ad being shown had a greater advantage in getting 
attention and was better remembered than other ads.

Digital Advertising Clutter  79
Li and Lo’s (2015) experiment showed that mid-roll ads led to better brand 
name recognition than pre-roll and post-roll ads and to the interaction effect of 
ad position and ad context congruity. They explained that the mid-roll ads per-
formed better due to attention spillover from the video when editorial content 
for ads were congruent with the content of the media, such as watches shown in 
fashion programs. But when the ad was unrelated to the video content, the audi-
ences simply ignored the ads with no benefit of brand recognition even if they 
were put as mid-roll ads (Li & Lo, 2015). They found that incongruent ads with 
content worked best in post-roll ads. However, it should be noted that all these 
studies about online video ads only measured their effects on memory and brand 
recognition, rather than attitude toward the ad or brand. The author argues that 
the latter are more important measures of advertising effectiveness if we consider 
the main purpose of advertising is persuasion.
With these lab-based experimental findings supporting the effectiveness of 
mid-roll ads, it is interesting that YouTube, the largest online video provider, still 
employs pre-roll full ads and TrueView ads, which allow users to skip ads after 
five seconds. It is because pre-roll ads can capture the most viewers and must be 
viewed for consumers to watch the video (and can even include those consum-
ers who did not finish the video). Hence, the provision of choice may reduce 
consumers’ resistance toward the ads, but how much this is viewed positively as a 
consumer choice needs further study. Even if there is only one commercial, which 
is typical in a YouTube video, consumers may view it as unwanted or an obstacle 
to the use of the video content, which puts it squarely in the realm of an ad clut-
ter effect study.
Measures of Digital Editorial Unit and  
Digital Advertising Clutter
A critical need for researchers of digital advertising clutter is to determine the 
editorial unit. The editorial unit may vary by the type of display device in which 
the digital advertising is placed. Nonetheless, the first screen visible to the user 
without scrolling down probably is the most conservative and standardized meas-
ure of editorial unit. It is because scrolling down a page will become another page 
of content on the screen and that requires extra effort by users of the content. 
It is hard to estimate how many users scroll down the screen to view the entire 
page. Other deep-link destination pages of a website is a further step for a user to 
explore the site, and more research is needed to estimate the likelihood of users to 
scroll further down a website. In a digital video setting, the duration of the video 
should be an editorial unit. A smartphone screen is much smaller than a tablet or 
a computer screen, so the likelihood of perceived clutter level is higher in a smart-
phone screen than its bigger screen counterparts when advertising is displayed as 
a proportion of space. It is important that advertisers prepare different versions 
of ads for different versions of the page. Many web pages now have a computer 

80  Ha
version and a mobile version. Advertisers should also prepare their ads accordingly 
for the mobile version and computer version to minimize the physical presence 
of advertising clutter.
If we still use the conceptualization of three dimensions of clutter as the 
advertising environment presented to the audiences, then we need to develop 
measures of the digital advertising clutter corresponding to the three dimensions 
with regard to different advertising formats. For example, the clutter level from a 
quantity dimension would be the proportion of the screen or number of adver-
tisement/sponsored links or both, depending on the ad format of interest. If spon-
sored links and small buttons/banners are used for comparison, then the number 
of ads will be a better measure. But if prominence or size is the key issue of 
concern, then the proportion of screen devoted to digital banner ads/sponsored 
links should be a measure of digital ad quantity. If the digital ad is in the form of 
in-stream video, the proportion of the duration of the commercial over the actual 
video can be used to measure the quantity of ads in addition to commercial load.
As for the competitiveness dimension, the degree of similar product categories 
being shown on a screen should be a measure of competitiveness. Hence, in a 
Google search page, the proportion of sponsored links from the same product/ 
service categories among all the sponsored links will be the competitiveness 
measure. In fact, judging from this perspective, even though the sponsored links 
occupy little physical space of a page because of their high similarity in product 
categories, its competitiveness clutter level is likely quite high. Yet, because of the 
high ad-context congruity in the search algorithm and display of the sponsored 
links, the perceived competitiveness may be viewed as favorable instead of confus-
ing. But whether users may be confused or more willing to try different sponsors 
in more sponsored links in different search settings will require more research.
For the intrusive dimension, whether the user is forced to view the ad on a 
screen or per video/podcast will be the main measure. The most intrusive one is 
the total blocking of the use of editorial content until the ad is fully displayed, 
such as pop-up ads and non-skippable video ads on online videos. The moder-
ately intrusive one will be the TrueView type of skippable ads (after five seconds 
of compulsory display, the users can opt out of the ad) and the mid-roll ads. The 
non-intrusive one will be banner ads or sponsored links on the side of the screen 
that users can easily ignore and where no editorial content is blocked from the 
users. As new digital formats emerge with either higher or lower levels of intru-
siveness, researchers should continue to monitor advertising formats and measure 
the perceived intrusiveness of digital ads to consumers.
Mobile Advertising and New Levels of  
Ad-Context Congruity
Now, mobile media represents a large portion of online access. eMarketer reported 
that 75 percent of internet users used their mobile devices to access the internet 

Digital Advertising Clutter  81
(Statista, 2016c). Hence, digital ads are much more likely to be displayed on 
mobile media, which have smaller screens. The GPS (Global Positioning System) 
and other access of data of mobile users allow even more possibility of customiza-
tion for advertisers. These so-called location-based advertising and targeting cre-
ated more opportunities for ad-context congruity. It raises ad-context congruity 
to a much higher level by the sheer ability to put the ad in close proximity to the 
actual purchase time and location. Indeed, Bauer and Strauss’s (2016) review of 
location-based advertising studies on mobile devices identified at least 12 types 
of contextual information from mobile phones that can aid advertisers: 1) users’ 
location, 2) the time the ad can be delivered when users use the device, 3) users’ 
profiles, 4) users’ interests, 5) users’ preferences, 6) users’ behaviors, 7) users’ demo-
graphics, 8) weather at the users’ locations, 9) characteristics of the surrounding 
environment, 10) type of mobile device the user is using, 11) users’ needs (related 
to search), and 12) users’ activities. There are many more possibilities depending 
on the point of access for information. Despite all these possibilities, an important 
concern is how much the advertiser should take advantage of such contextual 
information without being seen as violating the privacy of the individual user. 
Weather is public information while user demographic information is not. Some 
types of relevancy may be more welcomed than others. For example, location may 
be a welcome customization. When someone searches a restaurant, a local restau-
rant ad display would be more relevant than a restaurant at a far distance from the 
user unless the user specifies the location of the restaurant. Or when someone is 
in a shopping mall, ads and sales discount offers from stores in the shopping mall 
would be highly relevant. Okazaki, Molina, and Hirose (2012) argue that the 
perceived ubiquity of mobile ads to the consumers led to the avoidance of mobile 
ads. Yet, how many of the customized mobile ads they would like to receive and 
how these ads should be displayed (pointers on maps, text messages, banners, but-
tons, or videos) should be further studied.
Future of Digital Advertising Clutter Research
Differences Between Pull and Push advertising
A final factor to be considered in clutter research is whether the advertising is 
requested by the consumer (on-demand) or given to the consumer. Ads may not 
be perceived as clutter when consumers are the ones who request the information/ 
ads (pull), such as a product search on a shopping site such as Amazon.com. But 
when ads are presented without consumers requesting it (push), they are more 
easily perceived as clutter (Grusell, 2007; Brettel & Spilker-Attig, 2010). Consum-
ers are much more likely to find the ads helpful when they choose to receive 
the ads (pull), and they resent misleading ads that do not deliver what they were 
promised (Truong & Simmons, 2010). It is easy to push digital targeted ads to 
consumers using computer programming, but consumers’ reactance can be much 

82  Ha
higher if the ads interrupt the consumption of other digital content. Digital ads, 
while they are relatively easy to customize to the consumer based on their loca-
tion, use time and other contextual information available in mobile devices, so 
are also more likely to be seen as clutter impeding the consumption of editorial 
content if the customization is seen as illegitimate (e.g., advertisers should not 
know the user’s information, such as an advertiser with no prior relationship with 
the user). In other words, customization is a double-edged sword that advertisers 
need to be aware of. A research hierarchy will need to be developed by research-
ers to determine an acceptable level of relevance and customization to determine 
how consumers trust and view the utility value of such information. Such ques-
tions that would guide this inquiry include: How many ads (quantity) and how 
many ads from companies from the same category (competitiveness) interrupt the 
flow of editorial content (intrusiveness)? And, in different usage situations (pull vs. 
push), what effect (e.g., ad avoidance, ad blocking, flaming, etc.) do customized ads 
have on consumer responses (e.g., avoidance, anger, resentment, ad blocking, etc.)?
One important question in digital advertising is the blurring boundaries 
between ads and editorial content. The increasing call for “native advertising,” such 
as product brand placement and sponsored content, to combat avoidance of clearly 
identified advertisements (Verhellen, Dens, & De Pelsmacker, 2013) may push the 
concept of clutter to another level. Should we include native ads in the measure-
ment of clutter level? If yes, then we need to first determine what is pure editorial 
content and what is sponsored content. All sponsored content should be consid-
ered clutter including product placement, which is part of the editorial content. 
Hence, it may be better to put advertising clutter in perspective by limiting it to 
third-party editorial media, such as a mobile app or a web page (either regular or 
mobile version) not owned by the advertiser, and exclude subtle brand placements.
Although the chapter has proposed measurements of digital editorial units and 
clutter levels, it would also be helpful for researchers to examine the degree of 
discrepancy between the physical attributes of advertising clutter and perceived 
levels of clutter by varying each functional and individual information processing 
factor to see which factor(s) affect the perceived clutter level most. It should be 
noted that creativity in advertising would facilitate the acceptance of ads as enter-
tainment instead of clutter.
Ultimately, optimizing the advertising environment will reduce the perceived 
advertising clutter level and maximize receptiveness toward advertising and spon-
sored content in editorial media. It is the joint responsibility of the industry and 
the academic researchers to come up with the most acceptable digital advertising 
environment. As we learn more about the antecedents and consequences of per-
ceived clutter, advertisers may want to create ads that include both high informa-
tion and entertainment value that reflects consumers’ needs. Once this is done, 
advertising will not viewed as clutter, but as a welcome, integral part of media 
consumption.

Digital Advertising Clutter  83
References
Barreto, M. A. (2013). Do users look at banner ads on Facebook? Journal of Research in 
Interactive Marketing, 7(2), 119–139.
Bauer, C., & Strauss, C. (2016). Location-based advertising on mobile devices: A literature 
review and analysis. Management Review Quarterly, 66(3), 159–194.
Bellman, S., Treleaven-Hassard, S., Robinson, J. A., Rask, A., & Varan, D. (2012). Getting the 
balance right. Journal of Advertising, 41(2), 5–24. doi: 10.2753/JOA0091–3367410201.
Benway, J. P. (1998, October). Banner blindness: The irony of attention grabbing on the 
World Wide Web. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 
42(5), 463–467.
Bleier, A., & Eisenbeiss, M. (2015). The importance of trust for personalized online adver-
tising. Journal of Retailing, 91(3), 390–409.
Brehm, S. S., & Brehm, J. W. (1981). Psychological reactance: A theory of freedom and control. 
New York, NY: Academic Press.
Brettel, M., & Spilker-Attig, A. (2010). Online advertising effectiveness: A cross-cultural 
comparison. Journal of Research in Interactive Marketing, 4(3), 176–196.
Brown, T. J., & Rothschild, M. L. (1993). Reassessing the impact of television advertising 
clutter. Journal of Consumer Research, 20, 138–146.
Burns, K. S., & Lutz, R. J. (2006). The function of format: Consumer responses to six on-
line advertising formats. Journal of Advertising, 35(1), 53–63.
Campbell, M. C., & Kirmani, A. (2000). Consumers’ use of persuasion knowledge: The 
effects of accessibility and cognitive capacity on perceptions of an influence agent. Jour-
nal of Consumer Research, 27(1), 69–83.
Cho, C., & Cheon, H. J. (2004). Why do people avoid advertising on the internet? Journal 
of Advertising, 33(4), 89–97.
Dou, W., Linn, R., & Yang, S. (2001). How smart are ‘smart banners’? Journal of Advertising 
Research, 41(4), 31–43.
Ducoffe, R. H. (1995). How consumers assess the value of advertising. Journal of Current 
Issues & Research in Advertising, 17(1), 1–18.
Edwards, S. M., Li, H., & Lee, J. H. (2002). Forced exposure and psychological reactance: 
Antecedents and consequences of the perceived intrusiveness of pop-up ads. Journal of 
Advertising, 31(3), 83–96.
Elliot, M. T., & Speck, P. S. (1998). Consumer perceptions of advertising clutter and its 
impact across various media. Journal of Advertising Research, 38(1), 29–41.
Goodrich, K. (2011). Anarchy of effects? Exploring attention to online advertising and 
multiple outcomes. Psychology & Marketing, 28(4), 417–440.
Grusell, M. (2007). Advertising? Yes please, but only when it’s my choice. Journal of Media 
Business Studies, 4(3), 87–101.
Ha, L. (1996). Advertising clutter in consumer magazines: Dimensions and effects. Journal of 
Advertising Research, 36(4), 76–85.
Ha, L. (2008). Online advertising research in advertising journals: A review. Journal of Cur-
rent Issues and Research in Advertising, 30(1), 33–50.
Ha, L., & Litman, B. (1997). Does advertising clutter have diminishing returns? Journal of 
Advertising, 26(1), 31–42.
Ha, L., & McCann, K. (2008). An integrated model of advertising clutter in offline and 
online media environment. International Journal of Advertising, 27(4), 569–592. http://
www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.2501/S0265048708080153.

84  Ha
Haans, H., Raassens, N., & van Hout, R. (2013). Search engine advertisements: The impact 
of advertising statements on click-through and conversion rates. Marketing Letters, 24(2), 
151–163.
Hammer, P., Riebe, E., & Kennedy, R. (2009). How clutter affects advertising effectiveness. 
Journal of Advertising Research, 49(2), 159–163.
Heinz, S., Hug, M., Nugaeva, C., & Opwis, K. (2013, April). Online ad banners: The effects 
of goal orientation and content congruence on memory. In CHI’13 Extended Abstracts 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1875–1880). ACM.
Kim, N. Y., & Sundar, S. S. (2010). Relevance to the rescue: Can “smart ads” reduce nega-
tive response to online ad clutter? Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, 87(2), 
346–362. doi: 10.1177/107769901008700208.
Ko, H., Cho, C. H., & Roberts, M. S. (2005). Internet uses and gratifications: A structural 
equation model of interactive advertising. Journal of Advertising, 34(2), 57–70.
Krishnan, S. S., & Sitaraman, R. K. (2013, October). Understanding the effectiveness of 
video ads: A measurement study. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Internet Measure-
ment Conference (pp. 149–162). ACM.
Lee, S. Y., & Cho, Y. S. (2010). Do web users care about banner ads anymore? The effects 
of frequency and clutter in web advertising. Journal of Promotion Management, 16(3), 
288–302. doi: 10.1080/10496490903582594.
Li, H., & Lo, H. Y. (2015). Do you recognize its brand? The effectiveness of online in-stream 
video advertisements. Journal of Advertising, 44(3), 208–218.
Malhotra, N. K., Jain, A. K., & Lagakos, S. W. (1982). The information overload controversy: 
An alternative viewpoint. Journal of Marketing, 46, 27–37.
Mord, M. S., & Gilson, E. (1985). Shorter units: Risk-responsibility-reward. Journal of Adver-
tising Research, 25, 9–19.
Muehling, D. D. (1987). An investigation of factors underlying attitude-toward-the-adver 
tising in general. Journal of Advertising, 16(1), 32–40.
Nill, A., & Aalberts, R. J. (2014). Legal and ethical challenges of online behavioral targeting 
in advertising. Journal of Current Issues & Research in Advertising, 35(2), 126–146.
Okazaki, S., Molina, F. J., & Hirose, M. (2012). Mobile advertising avoidance: Exploring the 
role of ubiquity. Electronic Markets, 22(3), 169–183.
PageFair (2015, August). The 2015 ad blocking report. Retrieved from https://blog.page 
fair.com/2015/ad-blocking-report/
Pagendarm, M., & Schaumburg, H. (2001). Why are users banner-blind? The impact of 
navigation style on the perception of web banners. Journal of Digital Information, 2(1). 
Retrieved from https://journals.tdl.org/jodi/index.php/jodi/article/view/36/38.
Petty, R., Cacciopo, J. T., & Schumann, D. (1983). Central and peripheral routes to adver-
tising effectiveness: The moderating role of involvement. Journal of Consumer Research, 
10(3), 135–146.
Pieters, R. G. M., & Bijmolt, T. H. A. (1997). Consumer memory for television advertising: 
A field study of duration, serial position, and competition effects. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 23, 362–372.
Rejón-Guardia, F., & Martínez-López, F. J. (2014). Online advertising intrusiveness and 
consumers’ avoidance behaviors. In F. Rejón-Guardia & F. J. Martínez-López (Eds.), 
Handbook of strategic e-business management (pp. 565–586). Berlin Heidelberg: Springer.
Rodgers, S., & Thorson, E. (2000). The interactive advertising model: How users perceive 
and process online ads. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 1(1), 41–60.

Digital Advertising Clutter  85
Schumann, J. H., von Wangenheim, F., & Groene, N. (2014). Targeted online advertising: 
Using reciprocity appeals to increase acceptance among users of free web services. Jour-
nal of Marketing, 78(1), 59–75. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/jm.11.0316.
Segev, S., Wang, W.,  & Fernandes, J. (2014). The effects of ad–context congruency on 
responses to advertising in blogs: Exploring the role of issue involvement. International 
Journal of Advertising, 33(1), 17–36.
Seyedghorban, Z., Tahernejad, H., & Matanda, M. J. (2015). Reinquiry into advertising 
avoidance on the internet: A conceptual replication and extension. Journal of Advertising, 
45(1), 120–129.
Smith, R. E., & Buchholz, L. M. (1991). Multiple resource theory and consumer processing 
of broadcast advertisements: An involvement perspective. Journal of Advertising, 20(3), 1–8.
Statista. (2016a). Millward Brown AdReaction 2012—global report. Retrieved from http://
www.statista.com/statistics/247891/mobile-users-attitudes-towards-different-advertising-
formats-worldwide/
Statista. (2016b). Digital market outlook. Retrieved from https://www.statista.com/
outlook/216/digital-advertising#market-revenue.
Statista. (2016c). eMarketer 2015 worldwide internet and mobile users. Retrieved  
from http://www.statista.com/statistics/284206/north-america-mobile-phone-internet- 
user-penetration/
Sundar, S. S.,  & Kalyanaraman, S. (2004). Arousal, memory, and impression-formation 
effects of animation speed in Web advertising. Journal of Advertising, 33(1), 7–17.
Tribbey, C. (2016, February 1). Ad-blocking remains high hurdle for digital video. Multi-
channel News (p. 15).
Truong, Y., & Simmons, G. (2010). Perceived intrusiveness in digital advertising: Strategic 
marketing implications. Journal of Strategic Marketing, 18(3), 239–256.
Verhellen, Y., Dens, N., & De Pelsmacker, P. (2013). Consumer responses to brands placed in 
YouTube movies: The effect of prominence and endorser expertise. Journal of Electronic 
Commerce Research, 14(4), 287–303.
Webb, P. H. (1979). Consumer initial processing in a difficult media environment. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 6, 225–236.
Yoo, C. Y. (2011). Interplay of message framing, keyword insertion and levels of product 
involvement in clickthrough of keyword search ads. International Journal of Advertising, 
30(3), 399–424. doi: 10.2501/IJA-30–3–399–424.
Yoo, C. Y., Kim, K., & Stout, P. A. (2004). Assessing the effects of animation in online ban-
ner advertising: Hierarchy of effects model. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 4(2), 49–60. 
Retrieved from http://jiad.org/vol4/no2/yoo/index.htm.
Zanjani, S. H. A., Diamond, W. D., & Chan, K. (2011). Does ad-context congruity help surf-
ers and information seekers remember ads in cluttered e-magazines? Journal of Advertis-
ing, 40(4), 67–84. doi: 10.2753/JOA0091–3367400405.
Zhao, X. (1997). Clutter and serial order redefined and retested. Journal of Advertising 
Research, 37(5), 57–74.

Advertising in digital media is conceptually different from advertising in any of 
the older media. Historically, whenever a new medium becomes popular, adver-
tisers adapt their messages to fit that medium (print ads to radio ads to television 
ads), but the central concept would remain the same: mass communication of 
persuasive content. But, with digital advertising, that concept has undergone a 
dramatic change. Persuasive messages are no longer disseminated to the masses 
but tailored to individual consumers. What’s more, those consumers have unprec-
edented agency in dictating the nature of the messages they receive as well as the 
manner and frequency with which they receive them. As a result, digital advertis-
ing is not simply about piping ad content through a new set of channels but a 
negotiated transaction between advertisers and consumers.
There are many digital technologies and trends underlying the negotiation 
between advertisers and consumers. The large-scale adoption and diffusion of 
mobile and social media technologies, coupled with advances in user tracking, 
data mining, and big-data analyses, have served to provide advertisers with more 
opportunities to reach consumers as well as to better target their efforts. Concur-
rently, advances in interface technology have enabled users of modern digital 
media to make intricate decisions about the nature, duration, and format of adver-
tising appeals to which they will attend. On most internet-based media, ranging 
from cable television to mobile apps, consumers can pay to avoid advertisements 
altogether. In some platforms, such as YouTube, they can limit their exposure to 
ads that precede the content they are seeking to watch. On search engines, such 
as Google, they can shape the nature of ads they receive by entering keywords 
that are of personal interest and utility. The many algorithms that advertisers use 
to target consumers can be co-opted by the latter to tailor their information 
environment.
6
USING THEORY OF INTERACTIVE 
MEDIA EFFECTS (TIME) TO 
ANALYZE DIGITAL ADVERTISING
S. Shyam Sundar, Jinyoung Kim,  
and Andrew Gambino1

Theory of Interactive Media Effects  87
At the heart of this negotiation between advertisers and consumers is the con-
cept of interactivity. Digital advertising is uniquely characterized by the interac-
tivity offered by modern media. Interactivity can be theoretically defined as the 
functionality that affords user input, which can shape output by the medium. It 
has been operationally defined in various ways—as ability to have a conversation 
(Rafaeli, 1988), exercise choice (Heeter, 1989), and manipulate interface features 
and content (Steuer, 1992), to mention three classic approaches. With newer tech-
nologies, interactivity has transcended simple notions of having a conversation 
(e.g., Skype), exercising choice (from menu options on a website), and control-
ling the flow of communication (e.g., joystick in a game) to customization and 
assertion of human agency (Sundar, 2008a). In the current context of personal 
and social media, interactivity can range from the swiping action that we perform 
so often on our mobile devices to customizing the apps on our smartphones 
to clicking the “Like” button in Facebook to following a brand on Twitter to 
sharing content on Pinterest to writing about our feelings on blogs. These activi-
ties involve a range of user activity, from customization of one’s environment to 
curation of information for the benefit of others in one’s network to creation of 
original content, as in user-generated content, or UGC.
Theory of Interactive Media Effects (TIME)
The theory of interactive media effects (TIME) was formulated to understand the 
psychological consequences of all these interactive possibilities afforded by modern 
digital media. It is a combination of four models of technology-effects and draws 
upon the media-effects research tradition in emphasizing a variable-centered,  
rather than object-centered, approach to studying the psychological effects of 
media (Sundar, Jia, Waddell, & Huang, 2015). That is, instead of studying a given 
technology or medium as a whole, this approach advocates disaggregating it into 
its constituent variables and investigating the distinct effects of those variables as 
well as common or logical combinations of those variables.
The variables underlying interactivity are treated as affordances (Sundar & Bel-
lur, 2010), which are possibilities for action suggested visually by environmen-
tal stimuli (Gibson, 1977). The notion of possibilities is important because media 
users may not always engage with all the interactive tools offered on an interface. 
Oftentimes, interactivity serves as a visual cue that users notice but do not actively 
use. An example is the live-chat option on an e-commerce site, which one may 
not use if one can complete the transaction without consultation. Another exam-
ple would be the rating associated with a hotel on TripAdvisor.com. We may not 
necessarily use the interactive tool that gathers our own rating but simply observe 
the metric generated based on entries by other users of the site. In both these 
examples, interface affordances are simply cues to action, which are not necessar-
ily undertaken by the user. Yet, these cues can have important effects. It is quite 
common for us to evaluate a website based on the features it has, even though we 

88  Sundar, Kim, and Gambino
may not use all those features. Likewise, it is common for us to make decisions 
about which hotel to stay at based on metrics generated by interactive actions 
of other users rather than our own. TIME categorizes these types of effects, due 
primarily to cues on the interface, as belonging to the Cue-route, which is the 
top pathway in Figure 6.1.
Cue-Route of TIME
Affordances of interactive media can serve as cues on the interface, triggering 
cognitive heuristics (or mental shortcuts) about the nature of the underlying con-
tent, thereby shaping user judgments of the quality and credibility of that content. 
This is the fundamental premise of the MAIN Model (Sundar, 2008b), which 
focuses on cues embedded in four classes of affordances—Modality, Agency, Inter-
activity, and Navigability. For example, the sheer presence of video modality in an 
otherwise textual medium can cue the realism heuristic (that which you can see is 
credible, based on the mental shortcut “seeing is believing”). Likewise, the agent 
or source of communication could cue a number of heuristics, including the band-
wagon heuristic (if others think it is good, then it’s good for me, too), which could 
FIGURE 6.1  Theory of Interactive Media Effects (TIME)
Sundar (2015, p. 51, Figure 3.1). © Wiley Blackwell. Reprinted with permission.

Theory of Interactive Media Effects  89
be triggered when you encounter content accompanied by metrics suggesting a 
large number of endorsements, such as likes, shares, and ratings. Interactive affor-
dances can cue the contingency heuristic (what I receive is contingent upon what 
I send), leading to heightened perceptions of message relevance. Navigability tools 
on the interface, such as convenient toolbars and warnings before critical actions, 
could cue the scaffolding heuristic (it’s looking out for me, so it can be trusted) and 
thereby have a positive halo effect on the content presented through the inter-
face. In this way, the various affordances related to modality, agency, interactivity, 
and navigability trigger distinct cognitive heuristics that shape user judgments of 
the interface and its content. The MAIN model identifies over two-dozen spe-
cific heuristics. Other newer heuristics triggered by interface cues have also been 
identified, especially in the context of online privacy and security, such as fuzzy 
boundary heuristic and bubble heuristic (Gambino, Kim, Sundar, Ge, & Rosson, 2016; 
Sundar, Kim, Gambino, & Rosson, 2016).
As Sundar, Xu, & Dou (2012) note, the MAIN Model can be applied to the 
context of advertising and marketing by changing the dependent variable from 
credibility to consumer attitudes toward the advertisements and products. Digital 
advertising is rife with cues that can trigger heuristics pertaining to the quality 
of the product or service being advertised. For example, a just-in-time advertise-
ment, such as in location-based advertising (LBA), can cue the helper heuristic (it’s 
trying to help, so it can be trusted) or the intrusiveness heuristic (it’s hijacking my 
attention, so it can’t be trusted) depending upon how it manifests itself on the 
user’s smartphone and which affordance of LBA is highlighted on the interface to 
serve as a salient cue to users. When we apply the cue-route of TIME to analyzing 
digital advertising, principal consideration is given to the visually suggestive cues 
conveyed by the advertisement on the digital interface. These cues are likely to 
dictate the success of the ad by determining whether users will receive the ad. In 
some cases, users may be sufficiently persuaded by the cues and their superficial 
reception of the ad, without feeling the need to explore further. This is where the 
heuristics can help us understand the effects of digital advertising. But, in other 
cases, users may go further and attend to the ad with greater involvement. This is 
where the action-route of TIME takes over, the bottom pathway in Figure 6.1.
Action-Route of TIME
By definition, interactive media encourage user action. TIME incorporates mech-
anisms from three theoretical models (interactivity effects model, agency model 
of customization, and motivational technology model) to propose that actions 
engendered by affordances of interactive media—actions such as manipulat-
ing the interface, browsing content and sending messages—will lead to greater 
user engagement with media content, via four sets of potential mediators:  
1) by expanding users’ “perceptual bandwidth,” i.e., breadth and depth of their 
sensory experience of the interface; 2) by cueing perceptions of contingency 

90  Sundar, Kim, and Gambino
(or relatedness) in message exchange; 3) by imbuing in users a sense of agency, 
that they can control the course of the interaction; and, 4) by enhancing self- 
determination or intrinsic motivation among users, accruing from feelings of 
greater competence, relatedness, and autonomy in their online interactions.
Not every action afforded by interactive media leads to all four of these pre-
dictors of user engagement. The expansion of perceptual bandwidth is caused 
primarily by the modality-interactivity affordance, which refers to the variety of 
interaction techniques available for users to manipulate the interface, ranging from 
clicking, sliding, zooming, swiping, and dragging on the screen (Sundar, Bellur, 
Oh, Xu, & Jia, 2014) to manipulating virtual environments that can create a vivid 
alternate reality (Sundar, Oeldorf-Hirsch, & Garga, 2008). Perceptions of contin-
gency are primarily promoted by the message-interactivity affordance (Sundar, 
Bellur, Oh, Jia, & Kim, 2016), which refers to tools that offer back-and-forth, 
interdependent message exchanges, such as an instant messenger (where it is abun-
dantly clear that the messages received are a direct consequence of messages sent), 
as well as to tools that offer tailored content based on prior user behaviors (where 
it may be less clear that messages received are contingent upon prior user actions). 
Sense of agency is driven by the source-interactivity affordance, which permits 
users to serve as agents or sources of communication, either by customizing, curat-
ing, or creating content. Self-determination is predicted by competence, related-
ness, and autonomy, which are influenced by navigability, message-interactivity,  
and customization (or source-interactivity) affordances respectively, according to 
the motivational technology model (Sundar, Bellur, & Jia, 2012).
The engagement generated by user action in interactive media environments 
can range from absorption in content to elaboration of that content to self-
expression by making new content contributions. It can also mean repeated visits 
to the site or sustained use of the interface. These different forms of user engage-
ment will in turn dictate the cognitive, attitudinal, and behavioral outcomes of 
using interactive media.
Applying TIME to Digital Advertising
Considering the centrality of interactivity in digital advertising, TIME is an obvi-
ous choice for theorizing about its psychological effects. Many, if not most, digital 
ads are likely to have cue effects, by instantly triggering cognitive heuristics about 
the advertised product or service. These effects can be understood by investigating 
the role of specific cognitive heuristics that govern user judgments and, thereby, 
drive the persuasive success of the ads. The cue-route of TIME, which is based on  
the MAIN model, has already identified several heuristics at play in digital media 
interactions. Research could investigate the role of these heuristics in the particu-
lar domain of digital advertising, while also discovering new heuristics that may 
be specific to this domain.

Theory of Interactive Media Effects  91
When consumers do engage with digital ads, the action-route of TIME offers a  
variety of concepts with which to analyze the psychological mechanisms of online 
persuasion. While interacting with some ads contributes to enhanced sense of 
contingency, interacting with others may make the user feel more agentic. Some 
interactive marketing campaigns, especially in the health domain, could enhance 
self-determination among users while others may succeed in transporting users to 
a virtual environment. The action-route of TIME provides the vocabulary as well 
as mechanisms for understanding these outcomes of digital advertising and their 
consequent effects on persuasion.
We illustrate the use of TIME by analyzing seven recent trends in digital 
advertising: Mobile Video, VR/AR Ads, Chatbots, Behavioral Advertising (BA), 
Location-based Advertising (LBA), Search-Engine Advertising (SEA), and Native 
Advertising (NA). We begin each section by defining the trend (or type of digital 
advertising) and reviewing the emerging literature on its psychological effects. We 
then identify one or more core affordances of interactivity, in keeping with the 
variable-centered approach of TIME. Next, we describe the potential effects of 
these affordances on persuasion, both via the cue-route and via the action-route, 
as applicable.
Mobile Video Advertising
Coupled with the explosive growth of mobile device usage and improvements in 
network speeds, mobile video is seen as the future of advertising. Experts project 
that revenue from mobile video advertisements will grow from $3.54 billion in 
2015 to $13.3 billion by 2020 (PWC, 2015). Mobile video is simply video viewed 
on a mobile device (e.g., smartphone, tablet). However, there are many distinct 
features or affordances of mobile video that separate it from its predecessors (e.g., 
internet video, television). Advertisers must take into account both the form of 
the device itself and the application platform on which the video will be viewed. 
For example, we know that screen size matters. In a study by Kim, Sundar, and 
Park (2011), individuals who viewed the same content on a larger screen rated 
it as more enjoyable. Additionally, Kim and Sundar (2016) showed that when 
exposed to mobile video advertisements on larger mobile screens, the content 
was better received (higher trust in ad) and processed more heuristically than 
text-based advertisements. An effective mobile video advertising campaign will 
consider these modality affordances, and TIME can be a useful framework for 
assessing its impact.
The cue-route of TIME, which is based on the MAIN model, offers guidance 
in explaining many of the psychological effects of mobile video advertisements. 
For example, screen size may serve as a salient modality cue, which leads to the 
triggering of a relevant cognitive heuristic. As previously mentioned, larger screen 
sizes can lead to a more immersive experience (Detenber & Reeves, 1996; Kim & 

92  Sundar, Kim, and Gambino
Sundar, 2016). The positive outcomes attributed to this type of immersion may 
be due to the being-there heuristic, when sensory information leads to an authentic 
and intense feeling of being a part of the universe portrayed in the digital media.
More generally, video modality, compared to text, is known to trigger heuris-
tic processing of mobile advertising content, with positive persuasion outcomes 
(Kim & Sundar, 2016). One explanation for these positive effects is the realism 
heuristic (if something seems real, then it must be credible), triggered by the rela-
tive ease with which video content is decoded by consumers compared to textual 
content. However, heuristics can also lead to negative attitudes toward products. 
Particularly relevant to mobile advertising are the intrusiveness and distraction heuris-
tics, which may be cued by flashy or unsolicited content (Sundar & Kalyanaraman, 
2004; Zhang, Wu, Kang, Go, & Sundar, 2014; Gambino et al., 2016).
Such negative impressions via the cue-route may be exacerbated when users 
attempt to engage with mobile video ads. The static nature of video advertise-
ments, especially forced advertisements (Hegner, Kusse, & Pruyn, 2016), leave the 
user with very little opportunities for interaction with the interface, let alone the 
brand or product. As a result, the action-route of TIME would predict that mobile  
video ads would decrease users’ sense of agency. When the user is provided an 
opportunity to select the ad that he/she would like to watch, there is a semblance 
of source-interactivity, but once the ad starts playing, the user is essentially held 
hostage as he/she is forced to view a non-interactive video advertisement. There-
fore, the action-route of TIME would predict negative effects for mobile video 
ads, whereas the cue-route predicts a combination of positive and negative effects, 
as discussed earlier.
Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality Advertising
With affordable VR devices attracting content producers in a number of domains, 
advertisers have begun deploying virtual reality advertising campaigns (Ellis, 
2016). Earlier in the year, Oreo utilized the Google Cardboard technology to 
offer a 360-degree flythrough of an Oreo-inspired virtual world, and it appears 
that many other firms are attempting to deploy advertisement strategies in the 
VR realm. While consumers are excited about these VR experiences (the Oreo 
“Wonder-Vault” currently has over 3 million views), there are still major doubts 
and questions regarding how to effectively utilize the VR platform for advertising 
purposes (Harwell, 2016).
VR/AR platforms hold a lot of promise for digital advertising, considering 
the compelling user experience provided by them. An experiment by Jin (2009) 
showed that the role of a modality-rich experience, such as a virtual environment, 
was most effective on consumers unfamiliar with the product being advertised. 
In terms of AR, utilizing layover images (the display of digital images over rel-
evant real-world spaces) and super-imposed visuals, advertisers can showcase their 
products in and supplement them with additional information that is relevant 

Theory of Interactive Media Effects  93
or personalized to the consumer to increase positive consumer attitudes and 
purchase intentions (Stoyanova, Brito, Georgieva, & Milanova, 2015). While this 
technology is new, research has found that consumers enjoy these AR advertise-
ments more so than traditional print advertisements, with users showing higher 
perceptions of informativeness, novelty, and effectiveness and less irritation than 
a QR-code-based ad, as well as less time-effort than a traditional advertisement 
(Yaoyuneyong, Foster, Johnson, & Johnson, 2016).
The cue-rich environments of both AR and VR present many possibilities 
for their effects, making it difficult for the practitioner to correctly identify the 
key elements of VR and AR. For advertisers, the very newness of the technology 
can be utilized and lead to outcomes such as engagement and increased feel-
ings of presence (Limperos, Waddell, Ivory, & Ivory, 2014). These positive effects 
may be explained by the coolness heuristic, which is an acknowledgement of the 
hipness of a product based on its newer, stylish modality cues (Sundar, Tamul & 
Wu, 2014). However, at times when the new modality causes uncertainty in the 
user, it can have negative effects on involvement. In this case, the user may be so 
involved with the technology, they will pay little attention to the content of the 
advertisement and rank it very low on credibility. This phenomenon is termed 
the novelty heuristic (Sundar, 2008b; Sundar & Limperos, 2013). Additionally, when 
superfluous interactive features are included but do not trigger the positive coolness 
heuristic, they can lead to disappointment in the user and yield negative evaluations 
via the bells-and-whistles heuristic, that a feature is all flash and no substance (Oh, 
Robinson, & Lee, 2013).
In terms of interactive action, VR and AR systems hold possibilities to be 
truly immersive, reactive, and user-action centered. Because of these elements, 
user experience of VR and AR technologies can be examined via TIME’s action-
route, particularly in increasing a user’s perceptual bandwidth, or expanding a 
user’s sensory breadth and depth in an interaction, encouraging more exploration 
of the interface and freeing up cognitive resources (Steuer, 1992; Sundar et al., 
2015). Identified as a key mechanism in the modality-interactivity action-route, 
perceptual bandwidth can be increased in VR through immersive affordances 
within 3D environments that increase a user’s feelings of vividness, intuitiveness, 
and natural mapping, such as a 3D object that responds instantaneously to the 
user’s interaction with it.
According to TIME, increases in perceptual bandwidth via these mechanisms 
can lead to heightened levels of engagement, especially absorption in the narra-
tive, with positive effects on brand awareness, recognition, recall, attitudes toward 
content, and even behavioral change. Additionally, these outcomes can be achieved 
in VR and AR through the source-interactivity affordance. By allowing the user 
to be the central actor in an immersive, reactive mediated experience, especially 
since the entire environment responds to user action, VR and AR ads afford users 
a high sense of control, which can lead to positive agency effects through self-
determination and feelings of competence.

94  Sundar, Kim, and Gambino
Because of the user-action rich environments of VR and AR, TIME predicts 
many positive outcomes for VR and AR advertisements. However, cue-route 
effects for these technologies may be the key, especially given how important 
peripheral cues have been in similar advertising environments (Peters & Leshner, 
2013). It is important to be mindful of the double-edged, modality-based heuris-
tics such as coolness and bells and whistles, which depend on the user’s interpreta-
tion of the affordances as being either interesting or superfluous. These cue-based 
effects may immediately turn the user on or off to the experience and promote or 
prevent the positive action-route effects from taking hold, or they may enhance 
the experience and be additive to the action-route effects.
Chatbot Advertising
While it once seemed like a convenience to “have an app for that,” many tech 
companies are betting on users growing tired of the clutter and attempting to 
package services in a single platform. Apple has Siri, Amazon has Alexa, and now 
with over 900 million users, Facebook’s Messenger application is attempting to 
meet all of its users’ needs through its M messenger bot (Moses, 2016). Unlike 
Siri, which serves as a sole personal assistant, Facebook has allowed for outside 
developers to build their own chatbot based on M’s technology. That means 
that within the messenger service, any company can develop its own chatbot 
that can interact personally with a user to take orders and respond directly to 
them. Over 30,000 companies have already taken the plunge, from Kayak.com 
for your travel needs, to 1–800-flowers, to Poncho (weather), to Fusion (emoji-
based news), chatbots are becoming more prevalent and diverse in their services 
every day (Moses, 2016; Oremus, 2016). With M and Messenger, Facebook is 
attempting to streamline and deploy a single communication tool for all user 
needs, cutting down on the time spent navigating through multiple applica-
tions. The technology is ambitious but has already shown benefits, particularly 
in attracting users (generally young adults) who would not normally interact 
with the brand.
By utilizing this technology, a brand can make itself visible and interactive, 
and instantly responsive to the input and needs of the consumer. Visibility and 
interactivity with a brand can be utilized to build a personal relationship with 
the consumer. As brand interactivity in the form of communication has been 
suggested as the causal link between consumer brand attitudes and activity (Beu-
keboom, Kerkhof, & de Vries, 2015), the direct line of communication that a 
chatbot affords advertisers is a great opportunity. However, the basis for positive 
effects in a chatbot interaction may lie in effective, contingent interactions. Con-
tingent interactions are defined by reactive, interdependent message exchanges, 
and perception of contingency has been shown to determine levels of engage-
ment and attitudes and intentions toward websites (Sundar et al., 2014). As most 
current chatbots rely on a scripted question and answer system without drawing 

Theory of Interactive Media Effects  95
back on previous communication, they may not actually be achieving contingent 
interactions nor reaping its positive effects.
Even within a simple messenger interface, there are opportunities for chatbots 
to utilize cues and heuristics to positively influence their brand. For chatbots 
making recommendations, the machine heuristic, that non-human agents will pro-
vide more objective information (Sundar  & Nass, 2001), can be triggered by 
simply reminding the user that she/he is interacting with a robot. An experiment 
in an educational setting has shown that the perception that the machine is the 
source can lead to heightened learning outcomes, and a telepresent agent was 
rated high in credibility (Edwards, Edwards, Spence, Harris, & Gambino, 2016). 
The triggering of the machine heuristic can be done through simple graphic cues 
or communication choices, but awkward communication may lead to negative, 
communication flow-disrupting outcomes. The Facebook Messenger platform 
also provides developers the opportunity to give user’s responsive buttons with 
options such as “If you would like to read more about this story, click here.” 
These navigability cues can trigger positive heuristics such as the helper heuristic 
and scaffolding heuristic, which can increase perceptions of content credibility and 
brand attitude due a user’s feelings of the features being provided by a benevolent 
designer (Sundar, 2008b).
In addition to cue-based effects, chatbot ads can have action-route effects due 
to message-interactivity. Attitudes toward the brand and product can be increased 
by going beyond a simple question-answer system and increasing the level of 
contingency in the interaction. For example, hierarchical hyperlinks, buttons, and 
navigational tools that logically arrange the order in which content appears can 
give the user the perception that the system is responding personally to them, thus 
increasing their perceived contingency (Sundar, Kalyanaraman, & Brown, 2003; 
Sundar & Kim, 2005). Additionally, showing and utilizing the history of an inter-
action will lead to heightened perceptions of contingency and positive attitudes 
(Sundar et al., 2014).
Behavioral Advertising
Thanks to technological developments in user tracking and dynamic data min-
ing, advertisers are now able to de-massify their campaigns based on consumers’ 
preferences and needs, and target individuals with highly personalized advertising, 
whereby online and mobile campaign messages perfectly match their personal 
background and preferences. For instance, Amazon.com automatically reminds its 
customers to place new orders for household products (e.g., laundry detergent, 
dish soap) when they are about to run out, or sends discount offers for high-
priced items that have been placed in their online shopping cart without being 
checked out. Many restaurant chains, including Panera, email their customers 
coupons for sandwiches if a regular customer does not visit one of its branches 
for a while. In general, advertisers have been quick to capitalize on the substantial 

96  Sundar, Kim, and Gambino
benefits of personalized advertising, with tailored campaigns becoming increas-
ingly common (Chen & Stallaert, 2014).
In order for BA to reflect each user’s needs, advertisers first collect exhaustive 
information about each customer, once they decide what messages to display that 
fit his or her needs (McStay, 2012). Such user information comes in diverse for-
mats, including basic demographics, IP address, browsing activities within specific 
websites (e.g., the number of clicks, frequency and recency of visits, total time), 
and purchase records (Bilenko, Richardson, & Tsai, 2011). All of these extensive 
details about individual customers are saved in cookies, small files that are stored 
in a web browser, containing information about the individual’s personal tastes 
and preferences (McStay, 2012). Based on the accumulated data, a multitude of 
user profiles are built, from which the consumer’s likely interests are inferred. 
In particular, the rich data that embodies each customer’s taste can be compiled 
from two distinct sources—from a single website (first-party BA) or from mul-
tiple websites that a user has visited (third-party BA) (Sableman, Shoenberger, & 
Thorson, 2013).
Given the prominent usage of BA on various online and mobile venues, 
increasing research attention has been paid to capturing its psychological impact 
on consumers. For instance, Yan et al. (2009) found that when the commercial 
messages were directed to each user, users’ click-through of online ads increased 
quite dramatically (670%). Similarly, Sa and his colleagues (2013) reported that 
not only did a user’s perceived relevance to the online ad lead to more pleasant 
and interesting experience with the commercial website, but also the perceived 
relevance of BA to the page’s content improved recall of the campaign messages. 
Yet, Summers, Smith, and Reczek (2014) revealed the positive impact of divert-
ing consumers’ attention to online ads is conditional upon their prior positive 
attitudes toward BA.
Despite the positive influence of BA on users’ experiences with commercial 
websites, automatic presentation of various BA based on consumers’ background 
information has triggered privacy concerns. In fact, Ur and his colleagues (2012) 
reported that the majority of consumers perceive online advertising as manipula-
tive when based on their personal data, implying avoidance of BA. They tended 
to believe, erroneously, that they could prevent their data from being tracked by 
using anti-virus software and ad-blocking functions on their internet browsers. 
Along similar lines, Kelly, Kerr, and Drennan (2010) showed user distaste for BA 
in the context of social networking sites. BA avoidance was more pronounced if 
customers had negative experience with online advertising, the content of BA 
was irrelevant to their tastes, and the consumers were generally skeptical of infor-
mation from the internet. In fact, Okazaki and his colleagues (2012) showed that 
perceived ubiquity of BA leads customers to disapprove of BA.
The basis for such positive, as well as negative attitudes toward BA, with their 
consequent effects on advertising success, can be analyzed by applying the cue-
route of TIME, which explains that various cues in BA content might trigger 

Theory of Interactive Media Effects  97
both positive and negative heuristics that influence customers’ stance toward the 
messages. For example, advertisers can run online campaign messages based on 
the frequency of a user’s visit to a specific retailer’s website such that the more fre-
quently the consumer visits the brand’s site (e.g., a young female college student’s 
daily visit to Forever21.com for clothing and accessory shopping), the more likely 
she is to receive individualized online advertising, such as “Check out this exclu-
sive discount offer for VVIP customers like you!” Since this kind of targeted mes-
sage presents the most acceptable and relatable content to customers by analyzing 
their previous browsing history, the similarity heuristic (if there is similarity between 
my interests and what this ad offers, it is credible) might play a role in increasing 
their liking of brands and products. When brands provide commercials based on 
a customer’s recent browsing activities on specific websites, they might trigger 
the helper heuristic (this ad is here to help me, so I trust it). Not all heuristics trig-
gered by BA’s affordance of personalized advertising is positive however. Consid-
ering that the individualized content includes explicitly or implicitly identifiable 
personal information of customers, BA messages might trigger the intrusiveness 
heuristic (it’s intruding into my activities, so it cannot be trusted) or the online 
security heuristic (the internet is not safe, thus risky to reveal personal information). 
Moreover, some unsolicited BA that matches with customers’ background infor-
mation might imbue an impression that there exist algorithms operating behind 
the scenes that save such information and generate targeted advertising messages, 
thus triggering the fuzzy boundary heuristic (the boundaries between systems are 
fuzzy, resulting in information leakage across them) (Sundar, Kang, Wu, Go, & 
Zhang, 2013).
Different from the cue-based effects that shape customers’ online experi-
ences with BA, the action-route of TIME would predict that the interactive 
nature of BA triggers actions that lead to psychological engagement with the 
advertising messages. Given that many corporate online websites and mobile 
applications serve as tools that provide personalized content directed to each 
customer, customers are likely to perceive contingency of such content. In 
line with this prediction, De Sa, Navalpakkam, and Churchill (2013) showed 
that BA messages that were contingent upon users’ personal interests resulted 
in more a pleasant and interesting experience with the brand’s website. When 
customers perceive such high levels of contingency afforded by personalized 
commercials, it then leads to engagement with the commercial messages (e.g., 
repeated visits to websites, clicks of BA messages), and they form positive atti-
tudes toward the brands. In fact, Yan et al. (2009) found that the BA messages 
that reflect customers’ needs produced more click-throughs. In all, the action-
route of TIME theorizes that customers’ perceived responsiveness afforded by 
BA would increase engagement with not only the given campaign messages but 
also the linked online and mobile websites. This kind of engagement is a criti-
cal determinant of consumer attitudes and purchase intentions of the promoted 
products and services.

98  Sundar, Kim, and Gambino
Location-Based Advertising
As the vast majority of consumers carry their mobile devices with wireless con-
nection to the web, location-based advertising (LBA) has emerged as an increas-
ingly popular advertising platform. With the aid of location-tracking technologies 
(e.g., the Global Positioning System), LBA allows advertisers to pinpoint each 
consumer’s location and propagate real-time personalized commercial messages 
immediately (Aalto, Göthlin, Korhonen, & Ojala, 2004), which realizes the ideal 
of just-in-time marketing. In particular, LBA is characterized by its four strengths 
that other direct advertising technologies might lack: 1) real-time, 2) context 
(location)-specific, 3) immediately replaceable, and 4) individually tailored com-
mercial messages (Bauer & Strauss, 2016). As an example, Facebook might run a 
mobile ad on a user’s newsfeed, suggesting a visit to a well-known local restaurant 
that is located near the user at that moment.
In order to run LBA, beacons, small-sized devices that transmit and receive 
data via Bluetooth technology to mobile devices in the vicinity (a maximum 
of 50 meters) are used (Bessler, 2007). Specifically, beacons emit their own data 
to nearby devices, which are detected by smartphones and other mobile devices 
(Bessler, 2007). Some pre-installed mobile applications on smartphones then 
respond to the beacons’ signal by showing a push message to users, such as “Wel-
come to Nike! Check out our new summer shorts!” or “Greetings from Walmart! 
You just got a $1 coupon for Ben & Jerry’s chocolate ice cream!” In addition to 
push messages, some promotional deals can be requested by customers via their 
smartphones as they walk into a retail store.
Given its popularity with advertisers, LBA has generated several empirical 
studies that document its psychological influence on various persuasion out-
comes (Bruner & Kumar, 2007). A recent study by Lee, Kim, and Sundar (2015) 
showed that customers who received ads that matched with their current loca-
tion expressed more positive attitudes toward the messages and showed greater 
behavioral intentions to visit the promoted store. Similarly, Banerjee and Dholakia 
(2008) found that LBA positively affected consumers’ perceptions of usefulness 
of the ad, store evaluations, and willingness to respond to the offer. However, 
this effect is by no means universal. There has been an increasing realization that 
customers avoid such context-congruent advertising due to privacy concerns 
(Dhar & Varshney, 2011). As Lee and Hill (2013) found, many consumers tend 
to perceive that their control over their private information is violated. Moreo-
ver, as Lin, Paragas, and Bautista (2016) noted, push-based LBA are oftentimes 
perceived as disruptive and intrusive to customers, inducing psychological distur-
bance (Edwards, Li, & Lee, 2002; Bruner & Kumar, 2007).
Nonetheless, the real-time presence of benefits to customers in the form of 
available coupons and promotional deals present many opportunities for adver-
tisers. In particular, as the cue-route of TIME predicts, multiple cues embedded 
in LBA messages can trigger a set of heuristics that help customers evaluate the 

Theory of Interactive Media Effects  99
quality of products and their brands being promoted by LBA. When users receive 
mobile coupons that can be readily used at the right time and place, such presence 
of advertising messages might trigger the instant gratification heuristic (immediate 
service is better than delay in satisfaction of needs) with positive effects on pur-
chase. In addition, automatic delivery of usable coupons and other useful promo-
tional information to their mobile devices when they walk into its branch might 
encourage customers’ further information disclosure to advertisers, which facili-
tates direct and tailored marketing to their audience by triggering the reciprocity 
heuristic (if retailers provide their information to me, I will do the same in return). 
Moreover, pull-based messages that deliver multiple coupons and sale information 
based upon consumers’ requests can trigger the interaction heuristic (the more calls 
for interaction, the better) and the responsiveness heuristic (this stores attends to my 
request and responds immediately). Since GPS-based systems track a user’s loca-
tion every second, LBA systems can also change the advertising content instantly 
based on changes in the user’s location. If a user visits a grocery store, an LBA 
system delivers relevant coupons for that store, and it can automatically change its 
promotional messages if the user is taking a break in a coffee shop. Such expedient 
change of content might not only trigger the responsiveness heuristic, but also the 
coolness heuristic (if it is cool, then it is credible) and the flow heuristic, arising from 
an optimal match between user expectations and system actions.
The action-route of TIME would focus on customers’ actions with LBA, such 
as turning on/off GPS function of mobile devices and customization of the fre-
quency and timing of location-based notifications, which would determine their 
level of engagement with LBA content. More specifically, the source-interactivity 
aspect of LBA, whereby the users can customize the options of location-based 
notifications, would imbue in them a sense of agency. As a result of perceiv-
ing agency, consumers can better engage with the brands, which ultimately 
leads to positive attitudes and behavioral intentions toward the advertised prod-
ucts. Extant research has shown that the perceived agency engendered by LBA 
increases engagement with the campaign messages. For instance, Banerjee and 
Dholakia (2008) showed that LBA that allowed customers to share their locations 
and express their needs for instant shopping enhanced their perceived useful-
ness of the ad, store evaluations, and willingness to buy their products. However, 
such active usage of LBA needs to be employed with great care. As previous lit-
erature on the personalization paradox (Awad & Krishnan, 2006; Aguirre, Mahr, 
Grewal, Ruyter, & Wetzels, 2015) showed, customers worry about losing their 
privacy although they want more tailored services based on locations. Hence, it is 
important to alleviate privacy concerns by giving more granular interactive tools 
that consumers can customize when, where, and how often they would receive 
push notifications. Such tools should even allow users to opt out of the services, 
if necessary, preventing them from receiving unwanted marketing notifications. 
By providing this level of agency to users, it might relieve their privacy concerns 
while using location-based services.

100  Sundar, Kim, and Gambino
Search Engine Advertising
In addition to BA and LBA, search engine advertising (SEA) is another form of 
online advertising that consumers readily experience as they search for specific 
brand or product-related information on search engines, such as Google, Bing, 
and Yahoo. In fact, SEA accounts for the largest portion of online advertising 
(Haans, Raassens, & Van Hout, 2013), serving as one of the largest advertising 
platforms (Yao & Mela, 2011) in the U.S. market (Bucklin & Sismeiro, 2009).
SEA includes commercial texts next to general online search results where 
advertisers pay a premium for consumers’ clicks on the URL of their websites 
(Ghose & Yang, 2009; Haans, Raassens, & Van Hout, 2013). SEA generally consists 
of two parts: a link to advertiser’s website and a short description of the linked site, 
often without any pictures. When users enter specific keywords in a search engine, 
a list of sponsored links and short descriptions show up on the results page, which 
are ranked based on each advertiser’s payment for a single click (Zenetti, Bijmolt, 
Leeflang, & Klapper, 2014). With prepaid keywords relevant to certain products/
services and their brands, advertisers can directly reach their audience who are 
interested in knowing more about them (Varian, 2007).
There exist three mechanisms that serve to evaluate the value and effective-
ness of SEA (Zenetti et al., 2014). For example, if a user searches for “Apple”  
(a technology company headquartered in Cupertino, CA) on Google, the first 
search result located on the top of the page is a sponsored link to the company’s 
official website (www.apple.com), not generic search results on the fruit. This is 
because the company has paid for a set of predefined keyword listings related to 
the company and their products. The first mechanism that simply shows prior-
itized results with a sponsored link is called an “impression.” Yet, not all impres-
sions lead to an actual click of the sponsored URL. Rather, a majority of users 
ignore the promoted link and proceed to the non-sponsored content lower down 
on the page. Hence, what advertisers actually pay for search engine advertising 
is calculated based on the number of actual clicks on a promoted website, which 
denotes “click-through.” Moreover, if the user subsequently spends money on 
purchasing products and/or services through their visit, then advertisers pay for 
such committed action on the part of the user, called “conversion.”
As SEA grew into a powerful and influential platform in online advertising, 
many empirical studies have documented its effectiveness in augmenting click-
throughs and conversion rates. For instance, Zenetti et al. (2014) revealed that 
SEA significantly increased the level of awareness of both ad messages and brands. 
Moreover, they showed increased intention to purchase products from the spon-
sored brand even without clicking the provided website URL. Yet, not all studies 
have shown support for the positive effect of displaying the sponsored search 
results at the top. Ghose and Yang (2009) found that higher click-through and 
conversion rates did not come from placing the sponsored link at the forefront 
on result pages. Instead, links located at the middle positions led to greater user 

Theory of Interactive Media Effects  101
interactions with the advertisers’ websites. Further, it is important to note that a 
growing body of literature shows users’ avoidance of SEA on the web. A survey 
by Hotchkiss, Garrison, and Jensen (2004) reported that 77 percent of respond-
ents did not favor sponsored search results. Similarly, Lo, Chiu, and Hsieh (2013) 
showed that users clicked the sponsored links much less than the non-sponsored 
ones and spent less time viewing the SEA than the neutral information on the 
results page, echoing the findings of Hotchkiss et al. (2004).
Despite consumers’ tendency to avoid SEA, however, the cue-route of TIME 
would presume that the presence of sponsored links might trigger both the promi-
nence heuristic (privileging the first search result) and the helper heuristic (the spon-
sored link is there to help me, so it can be trusted). However, if too many links are 
present, the browsing heuristic (encouraging users to check out the various offers) 
or the elaboration heuristic (encouraging users to make sense of the relationship 
between the offers and the search keyword) might be triggered, depending upon 
how integrated the links are to the search results.
The action-route of TIME provides a slightly different approach to explaining 
how SEA influences consumers’ evaluations of various brands and products. SEA 
is generated based on a set of key words provided by online users, which reflect 
their informational needs. That is, a list of sponsored links on the results page is 
an outcome of message-interactivity affordances. This would imbue in users a 
sense of contingency (and also agency) since the information comes from their 
own request. Whenever consumers change their key words entered on search 
engines, the search engine refreshes the page with new results, thereby signal-
ing the contingent nature of its operation. The more sponsored links correspond 
to their interests, the greater the feeling of contingency. This will likely encourage 
their active engagement with the sponsored links, with consequent effects on their 
attitudes and behaviors, as already noticed in research. Zenetti et al. (2014) showed 
that customers’ actions of search and subsequent review of search results signifi-
cantly improved their recognition of SEA messages. Moreover, these messages led 
to greater purchase intention even without visiting the promoted website. In sum, 
given active user involvement in the search process, SEA can benefit from the 
positive effects proposed by the action-route of TIME.
Native Advertising
One of the biggest trends in mobile and digital advertising in general is the move 
toward native advertising (Cohen, 2016). Native advertising refers to a long-used 
tactic of embedding an advertisement within the “native” frame of content (e.g., 
a pinned tweet, a “story” on Gawker, or a sponsored video in a user’s Facebook 
newsfeed). From a story in GQ to a status update on Facebook, a native advertise-
ment looks like a typical article or post, but it is actually an advertisement. In the 
push to properly monetize digital advertising, and especially mobile applications, 
native advertising has shown to be one of the most effective strategies (Fulgoni & 

102  Sundar, Kim, and Gambino
Lipsman, 2014). Facebook (2016) boasts about how their native advertising has 
shown engagement scores up to 60 percent higher than banner advertisements, 
with up to three times higher retention. While it seems like a sure-fire hit for 
advertisers, when we think about what constitutes a native advertisement, it is 
difficult to pinpoint exactly what might make it successful.
In essence, a native advertisement is just an advertisement embedded in an 
interface with which a user is familiar. For the most part, research on native 
advertising has focused on consumers’ recognition of whether a native advertise-
ment is content or advertisement, as this is a concern amongst content producers 
and consumers (IAB, 2013). However, Wojdynski and Evans (2016) showed that 
despite a disclosure cue, very few participants recognized the content as an adver-
tisement, and overall, the content was perceived as more negative when it was 
recognized as an advertisement. Simply, one reason for the effectiveness of native 
adverting may lie in its ability to effectively blend in with its ecosystem.
As native advertising depends very much on the entire interface in which the 
content is embedded, the cue-route of TIME is particularly useful in explaining 
the mechanisms behind effective native ads. When embedded in social media, 
native ads are accompanied by the same kind of metrics relating to popularity as 
regular user-generated content. Perhaps the most ubiquitous of all cues in social 
media platforms is the bandwagon cue, a cue that conveys to the user infor-
mation about the crowd’s opinion and often triggers the bandwagon heuristic (if 
others think this is good (content), then I should think so, too) (Sundar, Oeldorf-
Hirsch, & Xu, 2008). In an experiment in an e-commerce setting, Sundar et al. 
(2008) showed that merely varying the star rating of a product in an Amazon web 
page led to higher attitudes toward the product as well as purchase intentions. In 
a study of alcohol marketing, Alhabash, McAlister, Quilliam, Richards, and Lou 
(2015) found that when a Facebook brand status update had more Likes or Shares, 
participants were more willing to share it themselves (viral behavior) and express 
greater behavioral intentions. These studies demonstrate the power of bandwagon 
cues on user psychology in an environment similar to native advertising. Addition-
ally, given that native advertising is generally embedded within a trusted medium 
(e.g., Facebook), it can trigger the authority heuristic, where users infer credibility 
based on perceived endorsement by a trustworthy or well-established source.
Successful native advertisements appearing in social-media depend heavily 
on user-generated content that signal its popularity or relevance to other users 
(Alhabash et al., 2015). Social media interfaces allow the user to interact with 
native advertisements, which appears just like a normal post in the news feed 
(with a small “sponsored” mark), by taking actions such as “liking,” “sharing,” 
“commenting,” and now “reacting” to them. When users see these native ads and 
are compelled to “like,” “share,” or “comment,” on them, they are directly inter-
acting with the brand and signaling their intention to join their network. These 
are manifestations of the source-interactivity affordance, and therefore, are likely 
to enhance consumers’ sense of agency. Increasing feelings of “self-as-source” via 

Theory of Interactive Media Effects  103
such interactive actions can lead to heightened feelings of involvement and iden-
tification with the brand.
Concluding Remarks
In sum, a variety of theoretical mechanisms derived from TIME can be used to 
explain the positive, as well as negative effects, of different forms of digital adver-
tising. As Table 6.1 shows, seven major types of digital advertising can be analyzed 
TABLE 6.1  List of the Cue-route Heuristics and the Action-route Mechanisms
Type of Digital Advertising
Cue-route Heuristics
Action-route Mechanisms
 Mobile Video 
Advertising
being-there heuristic
realism heuristic
intrusiveness 
heuristic
distraction heuristic
Lack of User Control  Decreased 
Sense of Agency
Virtual Reality, 
Augmented Reality 
Advertising
coolness heuristic
novelty heuristic
bells-and-whistles 
heuristic
Vividness  Increased Perceptual 
Bandwidth
Intuitiveness  Increased Perceptual 
Bandwidth
Natural Mapping  Increased 
Perceptual Bandwidth
User Control  Increased Sense of 
Agency
Competence  Increased Sense of 
Agency
Chatbot Advertising
machine heuristic
helper heuristic
scaffolding heuristic
Threadedness  Increased 
Contingency
Reciprocity  Increased 
Contingency
Responsiveness  Increased 
Contingency
Behavioral Advertising
similarity heuristic
helper heuristic
intrusiveness 
heuristic
online security 
heuristic
fuzzy boundary 
heuristic
Reciprocity  Increased 
Contingency
Responsiveness  Increased 
Contingency
Location-based 
Advertising
instant gratification 
heuristic
reciprocity heuristic
interaction heuristic
responsiveness 
heuristic
coolness heuristic
flow heuristic
Customization  Increased Sense of 
Agency
User Control  Increased Sense of 
Agency
(Continued )

104  Sundar, Kim, and Gambino
Type of Digital Advertising
Cue-route Heuristics
Action-route Mechanisms
Search Engine 
Advertising
prominence heuristic
helper heuristic
browsing heuristic
elaboration heuristic
Threadedness  Increased 
Contingency
Responsiveness  Increased 
Contingency
Native Advertising
bandwagon heuristic
authority heuristic
Involvement  Increased Sense of 
Agency
User Control  Increased Sense of 
Agency
Identification  Increased Sense of 
Agency
TABLE 6.1  (Continued)
via both the cue-route and the action-route. The former is distinguished by the 
heuristics that are triggered by affordances embedded in the digital ads, often at 
first glance, whereas the latter is determined by the psychological states induced 
when consumers act on those affordances.
The heuristics pertain to user impressions of the central affordance of a given 
type of digital ad and convey their assignment of both value proposition as well 
as their perceptions of downsides to that type of advertising. For example, mobile 
video can be seen as being higher on credibility because of its realism of portrayal 
and transportability; it can also be seen as intrusive and distracting, leading to nega-
tive effects. The central modality affordance in VR/AR advertising can evoke the 
coolness and novelty heuristics for generating positive effects, but can also invoke the 
negative bells-and-whistles heuristic if the content of the ad is unmatched by the novel 
modality of presentation. Likewise, data-based advertising techniques like BA, LBA, 
and SEA all have distinct positive heuristics triggered by their respective affordances 
but also raise concerns about privacy and security of the user data that they collect 
and share with other systems.
The conclusions drawn by users based on heuristics are quite different from 
the outcomes of the action-route, as evident from the mechanisms listed in the 
third column of Table 6.1. The action-route is dominated by the three types of 
interactivity identified by TIME. While VR/AR affords modality interactivity; 
chatbot, SEA, and BA afford message-interactivity; and LBA and native advertis-
ing afford source-interactivity. User actions on these affordances serve to enhance 
perceptual bandwidth, sense of contingency, and sense of agency respectively, with 
positive effects on user engagement with digital advertising. These principles of 
the action-route cannot only help us understand the success of certain forms 
of digital advertising but can also be applied to understand why some forms of 
advertising (such as mobile video) are unable to engage users in a positive man-
ner. The secret to success in digital advertising is the affordance of interactivity, 
in some form. Denying users an opportunity to interact, especially when their 
attention is hijacked as in the case of traditional media, will only lead to negative 

Theory of Interactive Media Effects  105
reactions. This lesson emerges very clearly when one analyzes digital ads using the 
TIME framework.
Note
	1	 This research is supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) via Stand-
ard Grant CNS-1450500.
References
Aalto, L., Göthlin, N., Korhonen, J., & Ojala, T. (2004). Bluetooth and WAP push based 
location-aware mobile advertising system. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Confer-
ence on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services (pp. 49–58).
Aguirre, E., Mahr, D., Grewal, D., de Ruyter, K., & Wetzels, M. (2015). Unraveling the per-
sonalization paradox: The effect of information collection and trust-building strategies 
on online advertisement effectiveness. Journal of Retailing, 91(1), 34–49.
Alhabash, S., McAlister, A. R., Quilliam, E. T., Richards, J. I., & Lou, C. (2015). Alco-
hol’s getting a bit more social: When alcohol marketing messages on Facebook increase 
young adults’ intentions to imbibe. Mass Communication and Society, 18(3), 350–375.
Awad, N. F., & Krishnan, M. S. (2006). The personalization privacy paradox: An empirical 
evaluation of information transparency and the willingness to be profiled online for 
personalization. MIS Quarterly, 30(1), 13–28.
Banerjee, S., & Dholakia, R. R. (2008). Mobile advertising: Does location-based advertising 
work? International Journal of Mobile Marketing, 3(2), 68–74.
Bauer, C., & Strauss, C. (2016). Location-based advertising on mobile devices: A literature 
review and analysis. Management Review Quarterly, 66(3), 159–194.
Bessler, S. (2007). A system for locating mobile terminals with tunable privacy. Journal of 
Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research, 2(2), 82–91.
Beukeboom, C. J., Kerkhof, P., & de Vries, M. (2015). Does a virtual like cause actual liking? 
How following a brand’s Facebook updates enhances brand evaluations and purchase 
intention. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 32, 26–36.
Bilenko, M., Richardson, M., & Tsai, J. (2011). Targeted, not tracked: Client-side solutions 
for privacy-friendly behavioral advertising. TPRC. Retrieved from http://papers.ssrn.
com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1995127.
Bruner, G. C., & Kumar, A. (2007). Attitude toward location-based advertising. Journal of 
Interactive Advertising, 7(2), 3–15.
Bucklin, R. E., & Sismeiro, C. (2009). Click here for internet insight: Advances in click-
stream data analysis in marketing. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 23(1), 35–48.
Chen, J., & Stallaert, J. (2014). An economic analysis of online advertising using behavioral 
targeting. MIS Quarterly, 38(2), 429–449.
Cohen, D. (2016, April 5). Native advertising dominate Facebook audience network. Adweek. 
Retrieved from http://www.adweek.com/socialtimes/native-advertising-facebook- 
audience-network-study/637217.
De Sa, M., Navalpakkam, V., & Churchill, E. F. (2013, April). Mobile advertising: Evaluating 
the effects of animation, user and content relevance. In Proceedings of the 2013 Annual 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’13) (pp. 2487–2496).
Detenber, B. H., & Reeves, B. (1996). A bio-informational theory of emotion: Motion and 
image size effects on viewers. Journal of Communication, 46(3), 66–84.

106  Sundar, Kim, and Gambino
Dhar, S., & Varshney, U. (2011). Challenges and business models for mobile location-based 
services and advertising. Communications of the ACM, 54(5), 121–128.
Edwards, A., Edwards, C., Spence, P. R., Harris, C., & Gambino, A. (2016). Robots in 
the classroom: Differences in students’ perceptions of credibility and learning between 
“teacher as robot” and “robot as teacher.” Computers in Human Behavior, 63, 304–310, 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2016.06.005.
Edwards, S. M., Li, H., & Lee, J. H. (2002). Forced exposure and psychological reactance: 
Antecedents and consequences of the perceived intrusiveness of pop-up ads. Journal of 
Advertising, 31(3), 83–95.
Ellis, S. S. (2016, March 23). Immersive advertising is becoming a (virtual) reality for brands. 
The Huffington Post. Retrieved from http://www.huffingtonpost.com/advertising-
week/immersive-advertising-is_b_9534484.html.
Facebook. (2016). The future of mobile advertising is native. Facebook. Retrieved from 
https://www.facebook.com/business/news/mobile-native-advertising.
Fulgoni, G., & Lipsman, A. (2014). Numbers, please: Digital game changers: How social 
media will help usher in the era of mobile and multi-platform campaign-effectiveness 
measurement. Journal of Advertising Research, 54(1), 11–16.
Gambino, A., Kim, J., Sundar, S. S., Ge, J., & Rosson, M. B. (2016). User disbelief in pri-
vacy paradox: Heuristics that determine disclosure. In Proceedings of CHI’16 Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’16) (pp. 2837–2843).
Ghose, A., & Yang, S. (2009). An empirical analysis of search engine advertising: Sponsored 
search in electronic markets. Management Science, 55(10), 1605–1622.
Gibson, J. (1977). The theory of affordances. In R. E. Shaw & J. Bransford (Eds.), Perceiving, 
acting, and knowing: Toward an ecological psychology (pp. 67–82). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates.
Haans, H., Raassens, N., & Van Hout, R. (2013). Search engine advertisements: The impact 
of advertising statements on click-through and conversion rates. Marketing Letters, 24(2), 
151–163.
Harwell, D.R. (2016, March  10). The creepy, inescapable advertisements that could 
define virtual reality. The Washington Post. Retrieved from https://www.washington 
post.com/news/the-switch/wp/2016/03/10/the-creepy-inescapable-advertisements- 
that-could-define-virtual-reality/
Heeter, C. (1989). Implications of new interactive technologies for conceptualizing com-
munication. In J. L. Salvaggio & J. Bryant (Eds.), Media use in the information age: Emerg-
ing patterns of adoption and consumer use (pp. 217–235). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, Inc.
Hegner, S. M., Kusse, M. D. C., & Pruyn, A. T. (2016). Watch it! The influence of forced pre-
roll video ads on consumer perceptions. In P. Verlegh, H. Voorveld, & M. Eisend (Eds.), 
Advances in Advertising Research (pp. 63–73). New York, NY: Springer.
Hotchkiss, G., Garrison, M., & Jensen, S. (2004). Search engine usage in North America. 
Retrieved from http://www.enquiro.com/research.asp.
IAB. (2013). The native advertising playbook. IAB. Retrieved from https://www.iab.com/
wp-content/uploads/2015/06/IAB-Native-Advertising-Playbook2.pdf.
Jin, S. A. A. (2009). The roles of modality richness and involvement in shopping behavior in 
3D virtual stores. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 23(3), 234–246.
Kelly, L., Kerr, G., & Drennan, J. (2010). Avoidance of advertising in social networking sites: 
The teenage perspective. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 10(2), 16–27.
Kim, K. J., & Sundar, S. S. (2016). Mobile persuasion: Can screen size and presentation 
mode make a difference to trust? Human Communication Research, 42(1), 45–70.

Theory of Interactive Media Effects  107
Kim, K. J., Sundar, S. S., & Park, E. (2011). The effects of screen-size and communication 
modality on psychology of mobile device users. In Proceedings of the 2011 Annual Conference 
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA’11) (pp. 1207–1212).
Lee, H. H., & Hill, J. T. (2013). Moderating effect of privacy self-efficacy on location-based 
mobile marketing. International Journal of Mobile Communications, 11(4), 330–350.
Lee, S., Kim, K. J., & Sundar, S. S. (2015). Customization in location-based advertising: 
Effects of tailoring source, locational congruity, and product involvement on ad atti-
tudes. Computers in Human Behavior, 51, 336–343.
Limperos, A., Waddell, T. F., Ivory, A. H., & Ivory, J. D. (2014). Psychological and physiologi-
cal responses to stereoscopic 3D presentation in handheld digital gaming: Comparing 
the experiences of frequent and infrequent game players. Presence, 23(4), 341–353.
Lin, T. T. C., Paragas, F., & Bautista, J. R. R. (2016). Determinants of mobile consumers’ 
perceived value of location-based mobile advertising and user responses. International 
Journal of mobile communications, 14(2), 99–117.
Lo, S. K., Chiu, Y. P., & Hsieh, A. Y. (2013). Photograph and model use within an online 
auction page for influencing buyer’s bidding behavior. Online Information Review, 37(3), 
354–368.
McStay, A. (2012). I consent: An analysis of the cookie directive and its implications for UK 
behavioral advertising. New Media & Society, 15(4), 596–611.
Moses, L. (2016, June 21). How fusion, complex and other publishers are using Facebook 
messenger bots. Digiday. Retrieved from http://digiday.com/publishers/4-publishers- 
using-facebook-messenger-bots/
Oh, J., Robinson, H. R., & Lee, J. Y. (2013). Page flipping vs. clicking: The impact of natu-
rally mapped interaction technique on user learning and attitudes. Computers in Human 
Behavior, 29(4), 1334–1341.
Okazaki, S., Li, H., & Hirose, M. (2012). Benchmarking the use of QR code in mobile 
promotion: Three studies in Japan. Journal of Advertising Research, 52(1), 102–117.
Oremus, W. (2016, June 28). Facebook thinks it has found the secret to making bots less 
dumb. Slate. Retrieved from http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2016/06/28/
facebook_s_ai_researchers_are_making_bots_smarter_by_giving_them_memory.html.
Peters, S., & Leshner, G. (2013). The effects of advergames on game players’ processing of 
embedded brands. Journal of Advertising, 42(2–3), 113–130.
PWC. (2015). Global entertainment and media outlook 2016–2020. Retrieved from 
http://www.pwc.com/gx/en/industries/entertainment-media/outlook.html.
Rafaeli, S. (1988). Interactivity: From new media to communication. In R. P. Hawkins, J. 
M. Wieman, & S. Pingree (Eds.), Advancing communication science: Merging mass and inter-
personal processes (pp. 110–134). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Sableman, M., Shoenberger, H., & Thorson, E. (2013). Consumer attitudes toward relevant 
online behavioral advertising: Crucial evidence in the data privacy debates. Media Law 
Resource Center Bulletin, 1, 93–110.
Steuer, J. (1992). Defining virtual reality: Dimensions determining telepresence. Journal of 
Communication, 42(4), 73–93.
Stoyanova, J., Brito, P. Q., Georgieva, P., & Milanova, M. (2015). Comparison of consumer 
purchase intention between interactive and augmented reality shopping platforms 
through statistical analyses. In Innovations in Intelligent Systems and Applications (INISTA), 
2015 International Symposium on (pp. 1–8). IEEE.
Summers, C., Smith, R. W., & Reczek, R. W. (2014). Learning about the self through adver-
tising: The effect of behaviorally-targeted advertising on consumer self-perceptions and 
behavior. Advances in Consumer Research, 42, 693–694.

108  Sundar, Kim, and Gambino
Sundar, S. S. (2008a). Self as source: Agency and customization in interactive media. In E. 
Konijn, S. Utz, M. Tanis, & S. Barnes (Eds.), Mediated interpersonal communication (pp. 
58–74). New York, NY: Routledge.
Sundar, S. S. (2008b). The MAIN model: A heuristic approach to understanding technology 
effects on credibility. In M. J. Metzger & A. J. Flanagin (Eds.), Digital media, youth, and 
credibility (pp. 72–100). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Sundar, S. S., & Bellur, S. (2010, June). Measuring media use as affordances: A heuristics approach 
to interactivity. Paper presented at the 60th annual conference of the International Com-
munication Association, Singapore.
Sundar, S. S., Bellur, S., & Jia, H. (2012). Motivational technologies: A theoretical frame-
work for designing preventive health applications. In M. Bang & E. L. Ragnemalm 
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Persuasive Technology (PERSUA-
SIVE 2012), LNCS 7284 (pp. 112–122).
Sundar, S. S., Bellur, S., Oh, J., Jia, H., & Kim, H. S. (2016). Theoretical importance of 
contingency in human-computer interaction: Effects of message interactivity on user 
engagement. Communication Research, 43(5), 595–625.
Sundar, S. S., Bellur, S., Oh, J., Xu, Q., & Jia, H. (2014). User experience of on-screen inter-
action techniques: An experimental investigation of clicking, sliding, zooming, hover-
ing, dragging and flipping. Human Computer Interaction, 29(2), 109–152.
Sundar, S. S., Jia, H., Waddell, T. F., & Huang, Y. (2015). Toward a theory of interactive media 
effects (TIME): Four models for explaining how interface features affect user psychol-
ogy. In S. S. Sundar (Ed.), The handbook of the psychology of communication technology (pp. 
47–86). Malden, MA: Wiley Blackwell.
Sundar, S. S.,  & Kalyanaraman, S. (2004). Arousal, memory, and impression-formation 
effects of animation speed in web advertising. Journal of Advertising, 33(1), 7–17.
Sundar, S. S., Kalyanaraman, S.,  & Brown, J. (2003). Explicating website interactivity: 
Impression-formation effects in political campaign sites. Communication Research, 30(1), 
30–59.
Sundar, S. S., Kang, H., Wu, M., Go, E., & Zhang, B. (2013). Unlocking the privacy paradox: 
Do cognitive heuristics hold the key? In Proceedings of CHI’13 Extended Abstracts on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’13) (pp. 811–816).
Sundar, S. S., & Kim, J. (2005). Interactivity and persuasion: Influencing attitudes with 
information and involvement. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 5(2), 6–29.
Sundar, S. S., Kim, J., Gambino, J., & Rosson, M. R. (2016). Six ways to enact privacy by design: 
Cognitive heuristics that predict users’ online information disclosure. Paper presented at the 
Bridging the Gap between Privacy by Design and Privacy in Practice workshop in the 
34th annual conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (ACM SIGCHI), 
San Jose, SD.
Sundar, S. S., & Limperos, A. (2013). Uses and grats 2.0: New gratifications for new media. 
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 57(4), 504–525.
Sundar, S. S., & Nass, C. (2001). Conceptualizing sources in online news. Journal of Com-
munication, 51(1), 52–72.
Sundar, S. S., Oeldorf-Hirsch, A., & Garga, A. (2008). A cognitive-heuristics approach to 
understanding presence in virtual environments. In A. Spagnolli & L. Gamberini (Eds.), 
PRESENCE 2008: Proceedings of the 11th Annual International Workshop on Presence (pp. 
219–228). Padova, Italy: CLEUP Cooperativa Libraria Universitaria Padova. Retrieve 
from http://www.temple.edu/ispr/prev_conferences/proceedings/2008/sundar.pdf.

Theory of Interactive Media Effects  109
Sundar, S. S., Oeldorf-Hirsch, A., & Xu, Q. (2008). The bandwagon effect of collaborative 
filtering technology. Proceedings of CHI’08 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems, 26, 3453–3458.
Sundar, S. S., Tamul, D., & Wu, M. (2014). Capturing “cool”: Measures for assessing coolness 
of technological products. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 72, 169–180.
Sundar, S. S., Xu, Q., & Dou, X. (2012). Role of technology in online persuasion: A MAIN 
model perspective. In S. Rodgers & E. Thorson (Eds.), Advertising theory (pp. 355–372). 
New York, NY: Routledge.
Ur, B., Leon, P. G., Cranor, L. F., Shay, R., & Wang, Y. (2012, July). Smart, useful, scary, creepy: 
Perceptions of online behavioral advertising. In Proceedings of the 2012 Annual Conference 
on Usable Privacy and Security (pp. 4–18).
Varian, H. R. (2007). Position auctions. International Journal of Industrial Organization, 25(6), 
1163–1178.
Wojdynski, B. W., & Evans, N. J. (2016). Going native: Effects of disclosure position and 
language on the recognition and evaluation of online native advertising. Journal of Adver-
tising, 45(2), 157–168.
Yan, J., Liu, N., Wang, G., Zhang, W., Jiang, Y., & Chen, Z. (2009, April). How much can 
behavioral targeting help online advertising? In Proceedings of the 2009 International Con-
ference on World Wide Web (pp. 261–270).
Yao, S., & Mela, C. F. (2011). A dynamic model of sponsored search advertising. Marketing 
Science, 30(3), 447–468.
Yaoyuneyong, G., Foster, J., Johnson, E., & Johnson, D. (2016). Augmented reality market-
ing: Consumer preferences and attitudes toward hypermedia print ads. Journal of Interac-
tive Advertising, 16(1), 16–30.
Zenetti, G., Bijmolt, T. H., Leeflang, P. S., & Klapper, D. (2014). Search engine advertising 
effectiveness in a multimedia campaign. International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 18(3), 
7–38.
Zhang, B., Wu, M., Kang, H., Go, E., & Sundar, S. S. (2014). Effects of security warnings and 
instant gratification cues on attitudes toward mobile websites. In Proceedings of the 2014 
Annual Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’14) (p. 111).

Introduction
With the convenience and speed afforded by the digital age of marketing, busi-
ness conducts and consumer expectations have altered greatly. These changes have 
benefited both advertisers and consumers, but have also raised concerns for con-
sumer privacy. Generally referred to as “an individual’s right to be let alone” (War-
ren & Brandeis, 1890, supra note 1 at 195), privacy in the context of advertising 
is often associated with consumers’ concern over their ability to control personal 
information in situations such as market transactions and consumption activities 
(Foxman & Kilcoyne, 1993). A report from Pew Research Center revealed that 
the majority of Americans believe that being able to maintain privacy and con-
fidentiality in their lives is important. In the report, over 93 percent stated that 
control over who can collect information is important, and 90 percent responded 
that control over what information can be collected is also important (Madden & 
Raine, 2015).
In recent years, consumers have come to own multiple technological devices, 
which connect to the internet, causing increased concerns about advertisers using 
cross-device tracking methods to obtain personal information. With the control 
over the flow of information out of their hands, consumers have developed con-
cern and skepticism toward ads delivered in a digital environment. These issues in 
multi-device tracking practices in digital advertising continue to grow so rapidly 
that even legislators such as the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) struggle to 
adapt regulations to keep up (Kaye, 2015).
On the other hand, there is past research supporting the use of advertising 
personalization to reduce the likelihood that individuals will respond negatively 
toward digital advertising (e.g., Baek & Morimoto, 2012). This is at the expense 
7
PERSONALIZATION, PERCEIVED 
INTRUSIVENESS, IRRITATION, 
AND AVOIDANCE IN DIGITAL 
ADVERTISING
Mariko Morimoto

Personalization and Avoidance  111
of collecting personal information from consumers, which may also increase con-
sumers’ privacy concerns. Thus, the key to creating successful digital advertising 
campaigns is to identify the degree of personalization in advertising that does not 
threaten the consumers’ ability to control personal information.
The purpose of this chapter is to elaborate the relationship between con-
sumer concerns over their online privacy and negative responses they may have 
to digital advertising using the framework of Brehm’s (1966) psychological reac-
tance theory. Consumers may feel perceived intrusiveness, irritation, and avoid-
ance toward digital advertising. A certain degree of advertising personalization, 
however, has the potential to ease negative responses and may even enhance its 
effectiveness. Hence, this framework aims to initiate discussion for discovering a 
balance between personalization in digital advertising and consumer online pri-
vacy protection.
Consumer Online Privacy Concerns from Psychological 
Reactance Perspective
Consumer privacy is an ever-present issue in marketing and advertising. Obtaining 
accurate consumer information to target prospective customer groups is essential 
for an effective promotional campaign. From a consumer’s standpoint, however, 
the collection of personal information to create a better targeting strategy may 
be interpreted as an encroachment of their privacy, creating adverse effects that 
all advertisers wish to avoid: negative perceptions, negative attitudes, and negative 
reactions to ads and brands.
Consumer Online Privacy in the Context of Consumers’ 
Information and Activity Control
To overcome consumer’s potential negative response to digital advertising, the 
theory of psychological reactance helps to explain the relationship between tar-
geted advertising and online privacy. However, subsequent advertising outcomes 
must first be defined, which has been done in previous research in marketing 
and advertising (e.g., Foxman & Kilcoyne, 1993; Phelps, Nowak, & Ferrell, 2000; 
Sheehan & Hoy, 2000). First, privacy law generally consists of four areas, includ-
ing: 1) appropriation of name or likeness, 2) intrusion into solitude of an individual, 
3) disclosure of private information, and 4) placing an individual in a false light 
(Pember & Calvert, 2008; Morimoto & Macias, 2009). Of the four, the subcat-
egory of intrusion is relevant in the context of digital advertising.
Foxman and Kilcoyne (1993) defined consumer privacy on the basis of who 
controls consumer data and whether consumers are informed of the collec-
tion and their privacy rights. The concept of a social contract, which is formed 
when a consumer provides a marketer with their personal information (Dunfree, 
Smith, & Ross, 1999), provides helpful insights. This contract is breached when 

112  Morimoto
consumer information is rented or sold to a third party without permission, non-
consented information collection is conducted, or consumers are not offered an 
opportunity to limit the dissemination of their information (Culnan, 1995; Phelps 
et al., 2000). Phelps et al. (2000) found that consumers want control over the types 
and volume of commercial solicitations depending on the marketers’ use of their 
personal information. Based on the consumers’ idea of control, Morimoto and 
Macias (2009) have conceptualized issues on consumer online privacy to revolve 
around intrusion into consumer solitude, physical spaces, and activities; control 
over private information; and control over marketer and advertiser interactions on 
digital platforms. Hence, a good predictor of consumers’ subsequent attitudes and 
behavioral intent toward digital advertising is the degree of control they perceive 
to have over their online activities and information. The theory of psychological 
reactance (Brehm, 1966) illustrates the process well.
Psychological Reactance and Its Relationship with 
Consumers’ Information and Activity Control
Psychological reactance occurs when individuals become agitated due to a threat 
to their behavioral freedom (Brehm, 1989). In this situation, individuals are moti-
vated to change, modify, or alter attitudes and behaviors to re-establish their 
threatened freedom and autonomy (Baek & Morimoto, 2012). Reactance is likely 
to take place when: 1) an individual regards the threatened freedom as impor-
tant, 2) the severity of the threat escalates, 3) the particular threat restricts other 
freedoms, and 4) the individual enjoys the freedom (Brehm, 1966; Edwards, Li, & 
Lee, 2002, p. 85). To be more specific, Clee and Wicklund (1980) have explained 
reactance to occur when an individual perceives reduction of their freedom. This 
repels them from the behaviors and attitudes forced upon them, consequently 
moving the individual in the opposite direction of the influence, which is called 
a “boomerang effect” (p. 390).
Individuals must expect to have freedom of choice—to freely engage in con-
trolling their information and behavior—for reactance to occur (Clee & Wick-
lund, 1980). Consumers feel a loss of freedom when they realize that control of 
their information and behaviors is in the hands of advertisers. The fear of further 
removal from control of personal information may spark psychological reactance 
and yield unintended responses from the consumer such as the development of 
negative attitudes toward advertised brands and advertisers, as well as negative 
behavioral outcomes. Consumers can freely expect to have control over their 
exposure to different types of digital ads and dissemination of their information 
such as past purchases, locations, and activities. The theory of psychological reac-
tance can effectively explain possible consequences of digital advertising and help 
advertisers understand consumers’ negative reactions.
Empirical research on advertising responses based on psychological reactance 
is extended to digital environments. Edwards et al. (2002) focused on consumers 

Personalization and Avoidance  113
experiencing forced exposure to pop-up ads and reported that perceived intru-
siveness could cause reactance, irritation, and ad avoidance. In regard to unso-
licited commercial emails, the more consumers view promotional messages as 
obtrusive, the stronger their reactance will be. The end result is ad avoidance and 
negative attitudes toward ads (Morimoto & Macias, 2009). White, Zahay, Thor-
bjørnsen, and Shavitt (2008) also suggested that click-through intentions could 
be affected by consumers’ reactance to personalization in commercial email mes-
sages. Reactance can be also triggered by lack of trust toward advertisers. Bleier 
and Eisenbeiss (2015) discovered that personalized banner ads based on the con-
sumer’s purchase interests provoked reactance and privacy concerns when the 
marketers and advertisers were less trusted. As these examples show, psychological 
reactance can be the root to predicting consumer responses to digital advertising 
and the consequences of efforts by advertisers.
Potential Outcomes of Psychological Reactance  
in Digital Advertising
Hierarchy of effects models (e.g., Ray, 1982; Park & Salvendy, 2012) explain the 
effects of cognition, affect, and behavior on the consumer’s responses to product 
offerings, and are often used to understand consumer information processing and 
advertising responses. Ray (1982) suggested that consumers first obtain an under-
standing of the information, which then shapes their attitudes and finally leads 
to behavioral intentions. This model can also describe potential consequences 
of psychological reactance triggered by digital advertising. The three factors that 
have been identified as possible outcomes of reactance are further elaborated in 
the following sections.
Perceived Ad Intrusiveness
The first outcome is a cognitive evaluation called perceived ad intrusiveness. Yoo 
and Kim (2005) explain cognitive evaluations as “thoughts that consumers pro-
duce when they are exposed to advertising” (p. 21). Perceived intrusiveness is one 
of the key influencers of attitude formation among audiences of digital advertis-
ing (Morimoto & Chang, 2009), alongside emotional reactions such as irritation 
(Edwards et al., 2002).
There are two attributes that constitute ad intrusiveness. The first attribute is 
a function of interruption to one’s task. In Ha’s (1996) research on advertising 
clutter, the nature of advertising to seek the audience’s attention was found to be 
obtrusive in editorial content in media (see also Chapter 5 of this text). Conse-
quently, this shows that ads may be seen as intrusive, as they can interfere with the 
goals of the audiences (Edwards et al., 2002). The situation can be replicated in 
a digital environment as well. Edwards et al. (2002) conceptualized perceived ad 
intrusiveness as the point that a person finds presented information contradictory 

114  Morimoto
to his/her own goals, as in the context of internet ads. This type of intrusiveness 
can be seen in various digital advertising ranging from more traditional con-
texts, such as pop-up ads (e.g., Edwards et al., 2002) and unsolicited commercial 
email messages (e.g., Morimoto  & Chang, 2009), to newer forms like online 
videos (Goodrich, Schiller, & Galletta, 2015) and location-based ads (e.g., Gazley, 
Hunt, & McLaren, 2014). Regardless of the advertisement’s format, any degree 
of perceived intrusiveness generally affects the consumer’s subsequent emotions, 
attitudes, and behavioral intent and provokes psychological reactance when they 
feel it hinders their freedom to complete online tasks, enjoy media content, etc.
The second attribute revolves around the issue of information control, par-
ticularly the disclosure of personal information. Baek and Morimoto (2012) have 
defined the point of threat to consumer privacy as the moment when the con-
sumer becomes worried about “the potential invasion of the right to prevent the 
disclosure of personal information to others” (p. 63). Consumers may find the 
use of personal information and browsing data in digital advertising as intrusive 
if they have not given marketers permission for its collection. Greater levels of 
intrusiveness are felt among consumers if the use of their personal information is 
for commercial purposes or if its transfer to a third party is unsanctioned. In other 
words, the freedom of being able to control the distribution of one’s informa-
tion plays an important role in whether the individual undergoes psychological 
reactance.
The control aspect of perceived ad intrusiveness in digital advertising is explored 
in more recent research. Van Doorn and Hoekstra (2013) have argued that when 
an online ad requires personal identification or transaction information, it tends 
to trigger ad intrusiveness and leads to decreased purchase intentions. A study of 
short message service (SMS) advertising by Corte¯s and Vela (2013) have shown 
that sending SMS ads to the consumer’s mobile phone without permission can 
also fuel perceived ad intrusiveness; if a consumer feels that his/her mobile phone 
is a personal and private object, the likelihood of perceiving intrusiveness through 
SMS ads is greater. Other research has also generally indicated that perceived ad 
intrusiveness is related to irritation (e.g., Ying, Korneliussen, & Grønhaug, 2009) 
and negative attitudes toward ads (e.g., Gazley et al., 2014), a concept known to 
negatively influence various factors and behaviors including attitudinal variables.
Ad Irritation
Ads that stimulate the consumer’s senses can bring out feelings of irritation 
(Edwards et al., 2002). Perceived ad intrusiveness due to interruptions to tasks 
caused by the volume of ads on screen and/or lack of control of personal infor-
mation can be considered excessive stimuli. Thus, ad intrusiveness can be denoted 
as an antecedent of ad irritation, making it a crucial factor to study since it can 
impact the effectiveness of advertising executions (Aaker & Bruzzone, 1985).

Personalization and Avoidance  115
Ad irritation can be described as the negative, impatient, and displeasing feel-
ings that consumers experience due to advertising stimuli (Aaker & Bruzzone, 
1985; Morimoto & Chang, 2009). Previous scholars have identified influencers of 
irritation in perceived ad intrusiveness (e.g., Greyser, 1973; Edwards et al., 2002; 
Corte¯s & Vela, 2013), in product categories (e.g., Bauer & Greyser, 1968; Aaker & 
Bruzzone, 1985) and in the amount of ads and ad appearances (e.g., Edwards et 
al., 2002). It is not difficult to imagine that the data collected from the consumer’s 
digital activities are also used to develop cross-media promotional strategies. For 
effective media planning, the same ads are likely to appear across multiple digital 
devices and social media platforms, but repeated exposure to the ads may invoke 
irritation within the consumer. Psychological reactance theory also predicts that 
people tend to respond to persuasive messages in a negative manner if they appear 
to dissatisfy the consumer’s needs for self-determination and control (Brehm, 
1966; Burgoon, Alvaro, Grandpre, & Voulodakis, 2002). According to this idea, 
the reception of commercial messages sent using personal information can be 
also taken as unwanted communication (Baek & Morimoto, 2012). As a result, ad 
irritation may cause affective responses such as attitudes toward advertising (e.g., 
Hernandez, Chapa, Minor, Maldonado, & Barranzeula, 2004), consumer skep-
ticism (e.g., Obermiller  & Spangenberg, 1998), and behavioral outcomes, like 
avoidance (e.g., Speck & Elliott, 1997; Cho & Cheon, 2004).
Empirical research on irritation in the digital context illustrates the trend 
explained above. In the mobile phone context, Park and Salvendy (2012) identi-
fied ad irritation as one of the three factors that shapes attitudes toward ads. By 
comparing multiple media formats, Baek and Morimoto (2012) found that the 
effect of ad irritation on attitudinal variables is magnified in digital media in com-
parison to traditional ad media; unsolicited commercial email appears to trigger 
more irritation than traditional telemarketing does. Another study on unsolicited 
commercial email has also shown a strong relationship between perceived ad irri-
tation and attitudes toward the medium (Morimoto & Chang, 2009). Although 
these examples mostly exhibit the influence of irritation on affective factors rather 
than behavioral intentions/outcomes, advertisers should be aware that some 
behavioral outcomes seen in reactions toward traditional ads are also expected to 
be in the digital advertising environment due to psychological reactance.
Ad Avoidance
Negative perceptions toward advertising practices can subsequently lead to nega-
tive behavioral outcomes (Ray, 1982), and avoidance is one of the major negative 
changes in the consumer’s behavior. Ad avoidance is defined as “all actions by 
media users that differentially reduce their exposure to ad contents” (Speck & 
Elliott, 1997, p. 61) and regarded as a remedy to intrusion by ads (Morimoto & 
Macias, 2009). Cho and Cheon (2004) have proposed three dimensions of ad 

116  Morimoto
avoidance in the internet context: cognitive, affective, and behavioral. Cognitive 
ad avoidance is when consumers intentionally ignore ads, affective ad avoidance 
is when consumers dislike the ads and avoid the source of the ads, and behavio-
ral ad avoidance is the actual physical action taken to avoid ads (Cho & Cheon, 
2004). Hence, according to psychological reactance theory, consumers may avoid 
ads to regain the freedom to resume their online tasks. The tendency of avoid-
ance is expected to be greater for digital advertising since the internet is a more 
goal- and task-oriented medium than traditional media (Chen & Wells, 1999). 
Also, by avoiding digital ads, consumers regain control of personal information 
since avoidance can terminate the dissemination of personal information, such as 
locations and activities. Thus, this behavioral outcome is likely to remain as the 
consumer’s remedy to ad intrusiveness and irritation.
Ad avoidance takes place in several patterns: consumers can select opt-out 
options from mailing lists to avoid future reception of ads (e.g., Milne & Rohm, 
2004), individuals can attempt to minimize time spent viewing ads by closing 
pop-ups ads (Edwards et al., 2002), viewers can switch channels to avoid ads while 
watching TV (Heeter & Greenberg, 1985; Speck & Elliot, 1997), and ads can also 
be avoided cognitively, meaning, they are not paid attention to (Fransen, Verlegh, 
Kirmani, & Smit, 2015). Consumers can install ad-blocking software, services, and 
applications to avoid ads in the internet environment. Although there are relatively 
fewer consumers who are willing to pay to avoid receiving digital ads, particu-
larly on their mobile phones (Sterling, 2015), than those who attempt to avoid 
ads through other techniques, marketers can use paid services to show their ads 
even to ad-blocker users (Welch, 2015). The “chase” between these two parties— 
consumers escaping from ads and marketers catching up with them—seems to 
continue regardless of ad media formats.
Previous scholars throughout the years have also identified factors associated 
with ad avoidance. For example, Speck and Elliot’s (1997) study on broadcasting 
and print media has suggested attitudes toward media categories and perceived 
annoyance as strong predictors of ad avoidance. Perceptions like intrusiveness, 
irritation, informativeness, and ad utilities toward ad executions can increase the 
possibility of ad avoidance (e.g., Edwards et al., 2002; Morimoto & Chang, 2009). 
In addition, past negative experiences with ads can affect the likelihood of ad 
avoidance (Cho & Cheon, 2004). These examples illustrate the Learning Hierar-
chy Model (Ray, 1982), which suggests a relationship between perceptions, affects, 
and behavioral outcomes.
In digital advertising, consumers tend to physically avoid more traditional forms 
of digital ads such as pop-up ads (Edwards et al., 2002) and unsolicited commercial 
email messages (Morimoto & Chang, 2009) by installing ad blocking software or by 
closing/deleting them. Sheehan and Hoy (2000) pointed out that consumers might 
even react to ads more actively and send negative messages back to advertisers, 
called “flaming” (p. 46), when their concerns for privacy become significant. Such 
elaborated responses, however, appear less often among young consumers who 

Personalization and Avoidance  117
have grown up with internet technology and have been surrounded by digital ads. 
Instead, young consumers appear to cognitively avoid ads on social media as they 
find these ads irrelevant and social media as a less credible source (Kelly, Kerr, & 
Drennan, 2010). Although ad avoidance is usually paired with negative reactions to 
ads, it is possible to reduce the chance of such reactions by providing more freedom 
to consumers via opt-out options that can be easily completed online by consum-
ers themselves. For instance, a study on YouTube viewers revealed that viewers 
showed strong preference for “skippable” ads; an option to skip midstream ads can 
reduce negative responses from consumers and enhance their viewing experiences 
(Pashkevich, Dorai-Raj, Kellar, & Zigmond, 2012). For digital advertisers, while 
avoidance is not necessarily a preferred consumer outcome, negative responses can 
be minimized through proactive strategies to reach appropriate audiences, one of 
which is personalization of ad contents used to effectively target customers.
Personalization and Reactance to Digital Advertising
Personalization of Digital Advertising
Advertising personalization has been a popular topic; however, scholars have not 
come to a concrete conclusion that fully endorses its effectiveness in consumer 
attitude and behavioral formation. White et al. (2008) define personalization as “a 
specialized flow of communication that sends different recipients distinct messages 
tailored to their individual preferences or characteristics” (p. 40). The definition is 
accepted in academia, but it does not clearly reflect the nature of advertising as a 
form of commercial speech. Baek and Morimoto (2012) suggested in their study 
that although the distinction between personalized promotions and advertising 
is ambiguous, personalized advertising gives more weight on commercial messages 
with a sale of a product in mind compared to other promotional offers. By com-
bining both approaches, personalized advertising can be defined as distinctive 
commercial messages tailored to individual preferences and/or characteristics and 
sent to different recipients. Digital advertising can take advantage of information-
processing technology to target well-defined audiences.
Personalized advertising has both pros and cons. The most notable advantage 
is better targeting efforts with preferred outcomes. Using personal data to match 
consumer preferences and interests, advertisers can make ads more useful to con-
sumers and achieve a higher potential for purchase (Wang, Yan, Chen, & Zhang, 
2015a). Additionally, greater relevance in personalized advertising can make the 
information search process more efficient for consumers (Van Doorn & Hoekstra, 
2013). Because of its relevance, personalized advertising can receive more infor-
mation processing capacity from consumers and end up with better encoding 
results (Bright & Daugherty, 2012).
On the other hand, personalized advertising has raised concerns due to data 
collection. Specifically, privacy concerns tend to increase when consumers believe 

118  Morimoto
that advertisers keep tabs of their online behaviors to obtain data on their prefer-
ences, which can be perceived as privacy disclosure (Wang et al., 2015a). When 
ad messages include personal information, consumers may also feel as if they 
cannot escape from the observation of unknown advertisers (White et al., 2008). 
Moreover, consumers can feel manipulated by advertisers or view personalized 
advertising as a threat to their privacy if the ad appears too close to their prefer-
ence (Bleier & Eisenbeiss, 2015). Even with this ambivalence, the popularity of 
personalized advertising in a digital environment will probably remain, the key 
to overcoming consumers’ concern being able to identify the types and tolerable 
degrees of personalization. The big question is: where exactly is this balance?
Types of Personalization
Demographic and Psychographic Information
Researchers have attempted to identify the types and degrees of personalization 
that could maximize advertising effectiveness. Demographic and psychographic 
information is a frequently used variable in personalized advertising. Of the two, 
demographic information such as gender (excluding age) tends to be a com-
monly used factor. Therefore, consumers’ responses can be negative when they 
encounter ads with elements of stable personal information. White et al. (2008) 
indicated that when personalized information such as name, location, and lifestyle 
in commercial messages clearly identifies, characterizes, and/or distinguishes the 
recipient, it could trigger personalization reactance, i.e., reactance in response to 
inappropriate personalization, because such communication is too personal for 
the recipient. Consumers may think that once this type of information is in the 
hand of marketers, they will have permanent access to the information. Although 
laws in many countries require marketers to provide consumers with an option 
to opt-out from mailing/contact lists (e.g., CAN-SPAM Act in the U.S. and EU 
Opt-In Directive in EU), it does not guarantee that the information will be dis-
carded by advertisers upon opt-out requests. Consequently, personalization reac-
tance is provoked, followed by negative consumer reactions.
Previous Online Browsing & Purchase Histories
The second type of personalization uses the consumer’s shopping and online 
activities. In this practice, ads are tailored to reflect their most recent shopping 
behavior (recorded via clickstream data), for instance, at an online store (Bleier & 
Eisenbeiss, 2015). The monitoring is administrated through cookies: small text 
files installed on users’ devices for data collection (Smit, Edith, Noort, & Voorveld, 
2014). While the consumer’s geolocational information may be protected if they 
refuse cookies, advertisers can still track their online activities because they leave 
digital footprints in other ways. Thus, browsing histories can be monitored and 

Personalization and Avoidance  119
used for more tailored advertising (Van Doorn & Hoekstra, 2013). However, even 
if the created ads better fit the customer’s interests, personalized ads with this 
information are likely to provoke perceived intrusiveness (Van Doorn & Hoekstra, 
2013). The degree of personalization with this type of information, combined 
with other advertising creative and media decisions, should be carefully adminis-
trated in practice.
Location-Based Information
With the development of mobile communication and positioning technologies, 
location-based advertising (LBA) has become an important practice for advertis-
ers because information on places that are relevant and interesting to consum-
ers based on proximity is helpful when trying to approach consumers (Limpf & 
Voorveld, 2015). LBA can be classified into either a push or pull format: pull LBA 
is initiated by the consumer when they request ads or promotions from marketers 
close to their geographic locations (Limpf & Voorveld, 2015) while push LBA is 
initiated by advertisers when they push location-based ads to consumers’ devices 
(Wang, Yang, & Zhang, 2015b). Although these ads are convenient for consumers 
and make their shopping experiences easier, they may also raise a serious pri-
vacy concern if receivers find the ads intrusive (Limpf & Voorveld, 2015; Wang et 
al., 2015b). Because this information type is closely related to consumers’ actual 
behavior and physical location, commercial messages sent without the consumer’s 
permission might be taken as aggressive and/or as a threat to privacy.
Solutions to Ease Reactance for Digital Advertisers
Building Trust with Consumers
Consumers have become more concerned about digital advertising due to lack of 
trust with online advertisers. Their fears are caused by internet hackers’ and legiti-
mate businesses’ uses of detailed consumer profiles (Rapp, Hill, Gaines, & Wilson, 
2009). Consumers are less willing to disclose personal information to advertisers 
without a preexisting relationship with them (Milne, Culnan, & Greene, 2006). 
This phenomenon can be explained by a mere exposure effect (Zajonc, 1968), 
a tendency that individuals prefer objects/ideas that they have become familiar 
with. Thus, advertisers who have made prior connections with consumers may 
be able to better enhance the acceptance and effectiveness of personalized digital 
advertising.
To approach new consumers, it is essential to inform them of the ethical con-
ducts in information handling. Lack of explicit privacy policies from advertisers 
can result in perceived loss of control (Rapp et al., 2009), an antecedent of psy-
chological reactance. To prevent this from happening, advertisers should make 
maximum effort to avoid hindering consumers from trusting ads, as it is known to 

120  Morimoto
influence their perception of the usefulness of marketing efforts (Bleier & Eisen-
beiss, 2015).
Providing Sense of Control to Consumers
Another way to ease reactance is to provide consumers with a sense of con-
trol over advertising and information flow. According to the idea of psychologi-
cal ownership, an individual develops a sense of ownership over objects/items 
because of a strong attachment, and later the sense of right to gain information 
and have a voice in related decisions. Vulnerability arises if the individual feels a 
loss of control (Pierce, Kostova, & Dirks, 2001; Aguirre, Mahr, Grewal, Ruyter, & 
Wetzels, 2015). Thus, digital advertisers should offer options that consumers can 
take to initiate control over their ad exposure and personal information. Tucker 
(2014) stated that when consumers feel they have control over their privacy, they 
tend to click on personalized ads more. The sense of control will assure consum-
ers’ psychological ownership and encourage acceptance of digital ads. The bal-
ance between advertisers’ access to consumer information and consumers’ ability 
to control information and ad flow will play a significant role in enhancing the 
usability and effectiveness of digital advertising.
Striking a Balance between Effective Personalization in 
Digital Advertising and Privacy Concerns
This chapter has discussed the process of how negative responses toward digital 
advertising are formed using the theory of psychological reactance. As digital 
advertisers begin to develop and find more efficient ways to collect and utilize 
consumer data, consumers may start to form defense mechanisms or strong ten-
dencies to ignore advertising efforts. This scenario is unfavorable for advertisers 
who seek utilization of personal information to create relevant ads. Hence, the 
goal for digital advertisers is to identify the fine line between personalization in 
advertising and invasion of consumer privacy to create beneficial ads.
To understand the balance between these two issues, scholars have a responsi-
bility to further investigate this subject. Many researchers are already actively pur-
suing the topic of consumer privacy concerns, and more research will continue to 
cultivate the path in the digital environment. Possible research areas include, but 
are not limited to, testing different degrees of advertising personalization on con-
sumer perceptions, attitudes, and behaviors and interaction effects between per-
sonalization and different media formats and products. Because digital advertising 
transgresses national boundaries, it is also worthwhile to conduct research from a 
global perspective. The world of digital advertising is infinite and offers enormous 
opportunities, where both practitioners and researchers will hopefully continue 
to explore more to serve consumers better in the digital age.

Personalization and Avoidance  121
References
Aaker, D. A., & Bruzzone, D. E. (1985). Causes of irritation in advertising. Journal of Market-
ing, 49(2), 47–57.
Aguirre, E., Mahr, D., Grewal, D., Ruyter, K. D., & Wetzels, M. (2015). Unraveling the per-
sonalization paradox: The effect of information collection and trust-building strategies 
on online advertisement effectiveness. Journal of Retailing, 9(1), 34–49.
Baek, T. H., & Morimoto, M. (2012). Stay away from me: Examining the determinants 
of consumer avoidance of personalized advertising. Journal of Advertising, 41(1), 59–76.
Bauer, R. A., & Greyser, S. A. (1968). Advertising in America: The consumer view. Boston, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Bleier, A., & Eisenbeiss, M. (2015). The importance of trust for personalized online adver-
tising. Journal of Retailing, 91(3), 390–409.
Brehm, J. (1966). A Theory of psychological reactance. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Brehm, J. W. (1989). Psychological reactance: Theory and applications. Advances in Consumer 
Research, 16(1), 72–75.
Bright, L. F., & Daugherty, T. (2012). Does customization impact advertising effectiveness? 
An exploratory study of consumer perceptions of advertising in customized online 
environments. Journal of Marketing Communication, 18(1), 19–37.
Burgoon, M., Alvaro, E., Grandpre, K., & Voulodakis, M. (2002). Revisiting the theory of 
psychological reactance. In J. P. Dillard & M. Pfau (Eds.), The persuasion handbook: Devel-
opments in theory and practice (pp. 213–232). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Chen, Q., & Wells, W. D. (1999). Attitude toward the site. Journal of Advertising Research, 
39(September/October), 27–37.
Cho, C. H., & Cheon, H. J. (2004). Why do people avoid advertising on the internet? Jour-
nal of Advertising, 33(4), 89–97.
Clee, M. A., & Wicklund, R. A. (1980). Consumer behavior and psychological reactance. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 6(4), 389–405.
Corte¯s, G. L.,  & Vela, M. R. (2013). The antecedents of consumers’ negative attitudes 
toward SNS advertising: A theoretical framework and empirical study. Journal of Interac-
tive Advertising, 13(2), 109–117.
Culnan, M. J. (1995). How did they get my name? An exploratory investigation of con-
sumer attitudes toward secondary information use. MIS Quarterly, 17(3), 341–363.
Dunfree, T. W., Smith, N. C., & Ross, W. T. Jr. (1999). Social contracts and marketing ethics. 
Journal of Marketing, 63(July), 14–32.
Edwards, S. M., Li, H., & Lee, J. H. (2002). Forced exposure and psychological reactance: 
Antecedents and consequences of the perceived intrusiveness of pop-up ads. Journal of 
Advertising, 31(3), 83–95.
Foxman, E. R., & Kilcoyne, P. (1993). Information technology, marketing practice, and 
consumer privacy: Ethical issues. Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 12(1), 106–119.
Fransen, M. L., Verlegh, P. W. J., Kirmani, A., & Smit, E. G. (2015). A typology of consumer 
strategies for resisting advertising and a review of mechanism for countering them. 
International Journal of Advertising, 34(1), 6–16.
Gazley, A., Hunt, A., & McLaren, L. (2014). The effects of location-based-services on con-
sumer purchase intention at point of purchase. European Journal of Marketing, 49(9), 
1686–1708.
Goodrich, K., Schiller, S. Z., & Galletta, D. (2015). Consumer reactions to intrusiveness of 
online-video advertisements: Do length, innovativeness, and humor help (or hinder) 
marketing outcomes? Journal of Advertising Research, 55(1), 37–50.

122  Morimoto
Greyser, S. A. (1973). Irritation in advertising. Journal of Advertising Research, 13(1), 3–10.
Ha, L. (1996). Advertising clutter in consumer magazines: Dimensions and effects. Journal of 
Advertising Research, 36(July/August), 76–83.
Heeter, C., & Greenberg, B. S. (1985). Profiling the zappers. Journal of Advertising Research, 
25(2), 15–19.
Hernandez, M. D., Chapa, S., Minor, M. S., Maldonado, C., & Barranzeula, F. (2004). His-
panic attitudes toward advergames: A proposed model of their antecedents. Journal of 
Interactive Advertising, 4(3), 117–131.
Kaye, K. (2015, November 16). Cross-device tracking creates new level of concerns, FTC 
says. Advertising Age. Retrieved from http://adage.com/article/datadriven-marketing/
cross-device-tracking-creates-new-privacy-concerns-ftc/301383/
Kelly, L., Kerr, G., & Drennan, J. (2010). Avoidance of advertising in social networking sites: 
The teenage perspective. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 10(2), 16–27.
Limpf, N., & Voorveld, H. A. M. (2015). Mobile location-based advertising: How informa-
tion privacy concerns influence consumers’ attitude and acceptance. Journal of Interactive 
Advertising, 15(2), 111–123.
Madden, M.,  & Raine, L. (2015, May  20). Americans attitudes about privacy, secu-
rity and surveillance. Pew Research Center. Retrieved from http://www.pewinternet.
org/2015/05/20/americans-attitudes-about-privacy-security-and-surveillance/
Milne, G. R., Culnan, M. J., & Greene, H. (2006). A longitudinal assessment of online pri-
vacy notice readability. Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 255(Fall), 238–249.
Milne, G. R., & Rohm, A. J. (2004). Consumers’ protection of online privacy and identity. 
Journal of Consumer Affairs, 38(2), 217–232.
Morimoto, M., & Chang, S. (2009). Psychological factors affecting perceptions of unsolic-
ited commercial e-mail. Journal of Current Issues and Research in Advertising, 31(1), 63–73.
Morimoto, M., & Macias, W. (2009). A conceptual framework for unsolicited commer-
cial e-mail: Perceived intrusiveness and privacy concerns. Journal of Internet Commerce, 
8(3–4), 137–160.
Obermiller, C., & Spangenberg, E. R. (1998). Development of a scale to measure consumer 
skepticism toward advertising. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 7(2), 159–186.
Park, T., & Salvendy, G. (2012). Emotional factors in advertising via mobile phones. Journal 
of Interactive Advertising, 28(9), 597–612.
Pashkevich, M., Dorai-Raj, S., Kellar, M.,  & Zigmond, D. (2012). Empowering online 
advertisements by empowering viewers with the right to choose. Journal of Advertising 
Research, 52(4), 451–457.
Pember, D. R., & Calvert, C. (2008). Mass media law. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Phelps, J., Nowak, G., & Ferrell, E. (2000). Privacy concerns and consumer willingness to 
provide personal information. Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 19(1), 27–41.
Pierce, J., Kostova, T., & Dirks, K. (2001). Toward a theory of psychological ownership in 
organizations. Academy of Management Review, 26(2), 298–310.
Rapp, J., Hill, R. P., Gaines, J., & Wilson, R. M. (2009). Advertising and consumer privacy. 
Journal of Advertising, 38(4), 51–61.
Ray, M. (1982). Advertising and communication management. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice- 
Hall.
Sheehan, K. B., & Hoy, M. G. (2000). Dimensions of privacy concern among online con-
sumers. Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 19(1), 62–73.
Smit, Edith G., Noort, G. V., & Voorveld, H. A. M. (2014). Understanding online behav-
ioural advertising: User knowledge, privacy concerns and online coping behaviour in 
Europe. Computers in Human Behavior, 32, 15–22.

Personalization and Avoidance  123
Speck, P. S., & Elliott, M. T. (1997). Predictors of advertising avoidance in print and broad-
cast media. Journal of Advertising, 26(3), 61–76.
Sterling, G. (2015, July 10). Most users would reject opportunity to pay to avoid mobile ads. 
Marketing Land. Retrieved from http://marketingland.com/most-users-would-reject- 
opportunity-to-pay-to-avoid-mobile-ads-134777.
Tucker, C. E. (2014). Social networks, personalized advertising, and privacy controls. Journal 
of Marketing Research, 51(5), 546–562.
Van Doorn, J., & Hoekstra, J. C. (2013). Customization of online advertising: The role of 
intrusiveness. Marketing Letters, 24(4), 339–351.
Wang, W., Yang, L., Chen, Y., & Zhang, Q. (2015a). A privacy-aware framework for targeted 
advertising. Computer Networks, 79, 17–59.
Wang, W., Yang, L., & Zhang, W. (2015b). Privacy preservation in location-based advertis-
ing: A contract-based approach. Computer Networks, 93, 213–224.
Warren, S. D., & Brandeis, L. D. (1890). The right of privacy. Harvard Law Review, 4(5), 1–23.
Welch, C. (2015, September  24). Best-selling iOS ad blocker crystal will let com-
panies pay to show you ads. The Verge. Retrieved from http://www.theverge.
com/2015/9/24/9393941/clear-ios-ad-blocker-offering-paid-whitelist.
White, T. B., Zahay, D. L., Thorbjørnsen, H., & Shavitt, S. (2008). Getting too personal: 
Reactance to highly personalized email solicitations. Marketing Letters, 19(1), 39–50.
Ying, L., Korneliussen, T., & Grønhaug, K. (2009). The effect of ad value, ad placement and 
ad execution on the perceived intrusiveness of web advertisements. International Journal 
of Advertising, 28(4), 623–638.
Yoo, C. Y., & Kim, K. (2005). Processing of animation in online banner advertising: The 
role of cognitive and emotional responses. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 19(4), 18–34.
Zajonc, R. (1968). Attitudinal effects of mere exposure. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology Monographs, 9(2), 1–27.

Inevitably, companies increasingly use interactive marketing tools to engage cus-
tomers and remain relevant in the marketplace (Stone & Woodcock, 2013; Rodri-
guez, Dixon, & Peltier, 2014). As the prevalence of the internet and digital media 
ushers in an era of unprecedented, two-way communication between companies 
and consumers, the value of popular websites that provide interactive features has 
skyrocketed (Jung, Hui, Min, & Martin, 2014). At the heart of interactive market-
ing is digital advertising. This chapter introduces a relatively under-researched 
theory called reversal theory (Apter, 2007, 2015) that offers promising utility in 
understanding consumer behavior (Cummins, Peltier, Schibrowsky, & Nill, 2013) 
in the era of social media and digital marketing.
While much research demonstrates that interactive advertisements are effec-
tive (Kim & Forsythe, 2008; Köhler, Rohm, de Ruyter, & Wetzels, 2011), rela-
tively little attention has been devoted to identifying the conditions under which 
the interactivity may harm persuasion (Schlosser, 2003; Jung, Min,  & Kellaris, 
2011; Seyedghorban, Tahernejad, & Matanda, 2016). For instance, Schlosser (2003) 
found that interactivity is effective for casual internet browsers who do not have 
specific goals in mind, but that it is ineffective for searchers with specific goals. 
Jung et al. (2011) further advanced the notion of contingency to game advertising. 
Specifically, they found that for casual internet browsers, interactivity enhances 
persuasion regardless of the user’s need for cognitive closure. For information 
searchers, interactivity’s persuasive effect is contingent upon the searchers’ need 
for cognitive closure. Under high need for cognitive closure, interactivity tends to 
harm persuasion for searchers (see Schlosser, 2003); however, under low level of 
need for cognitive closure, interactivity still facilitates persuasion, even for search-
ers. Thus, Jung et al. (2011) showed that consumer characteristics, such as the need 
for cognitive closure, can determine the effectiveness of interactivity. However, 
these studies assume that consumers remain static and they pursue only one goal.
8
THE ROLE OF REVERSAL THEORY 
IN DIGITAL ADVERTISING
Jae Min Jung, Kyeong Sam Min, and Drew Martin

The Role of Reversal Theory  125
According to reversal theory, individuals’ metamotivational modes fluctuate 
between telic (i.e., serious-minded) and paratelic (i.e., playful-minded) states due 
to situation, frustration, and satiation (Apter, 2007). Taking this multi-static, non-
rational view of consumers (Holbrook, 1994), Rodgers and Thorson’s (2000) 
Interactive Advertising Model (IAM), as explained in Chapter 1, could encap-
sulate reversal theory’s potential role in explaining consumers’ online behaviors 
insofar as motivational states are concerned, explained below. However, to date, 
the advertising and marketing literatures are slow in adopting reversal theory. 
This chapter introduces reversal theory, discusses the theory’s relevance to online 
consumer behavior, reviews the interactive digital advertising literature from the 
reversal theory perspective, and suggests areas for future research.
A Review of Reversal Theory and Implications  
for Online Consumer Behavior
What is Reversal Theory?
In the mid-1970s, Drs. K. C. T. Smith and Michael Apter proposed reversal theory 
to explain the structure of mental life. Reversal theory relates to motivation, emo-
tion, and personality (Apter, 1981, 2007). Apter further developed the theory in 
the 1980s that has generated sustained interests in various fields of psychology 
and other disciplines including marketing and advertising (e.g., Davis, 2009). Sur-
prisingly, the theory remains relatively undeveloped by marketing scholars. Apter 
rejects the notion that people’s motivational states remain static (homeostatic) 
and contends that people’s motivational states fluctuate in two opposite states 
instead. Thus, most individuals display bi-stability such as “serious-mindedness” 
and “playfulness.” Sometimes, people are motivated to achieve goals by minimiz-
ing their felt arousal and engaging in a goal-directed way, which often involves 
planning for the future. Other times, behaviors are directed by pleasurable feelings 
at the present state. Basically, everyone experiences the same universal set of states 
differently not only from each other, but also from within a person at different 
moments. These universal common experiences are metamotivational states oper-
ationalized as four pairs of opposites: 1) telic and paratelic (means-end dimension), 
2) conformist and negativistic (rules dimension), 3) mastery and sympathy (trans-
action dimension), and 4) autic and alloic (relationship dimension) (Apter, 2015). 
Each pair of states has basic psychological value and a different range of emotions. 
The outcome is seeing the world from a particular perspective. Among them, the 
telic and paratelic states are the most widely researched (Apter, 2013) and argu-
ably the most relevant for understanding consumer behavior in the digital world.
An Overview of Telic and Paratelic States
Telic and paratelic metamotivational states display interesting contrasting features. 
Telic states (from Greek, telos meaning a “goal”) refer to a serious-minded state 

126  Jung, Min, and Martin
in which individuals prefer a low level of arousals and seriously engage in a pur-
poseful way to achieve a goal. They also plan carefully and rationally, and do not 
pay attention to emotions. In contrast, paratelic states (para from Greek, meaning 
“alongside”) refer to a playful state. Individuals in a paratelic state engage in an 
activity seeking immediate enjoyment, spontaneously. They prefer a high level of 
arousal and seek to maintain this level as long as possible. Thus, telic and para-
telic states are polar opposite metamotivational states representing a means-ends 
domain (Apter, 1981).
Whereas the telic state focuses on important future goals and planning ahead, 
the paratelic state focuses only on the present. As a result, a telic state seeks achieve-
ment and progress, and a paratelic state prefers fun and immediate gratification. 
Further, telic and paratelic states have a range of emotions associated with the 
arousal level (see Figure 8.1).
Figure 8.1 shows that telic emotions vary from relaxation to anxiety as the 
arousal level individuals feel changes from low to high. Heightened arousal induced 
by a demanding task causes individuals in a telic state to become anxious, but they 
Reversal Theory
Pleasant
Unpleasant
Hedonic 
Tone
Low
High
Arousal
Relaxaon
Boredom
Excitement
Anxiety
Paratelic (Arousal 
Seeking) State
Telic (Arousal 
Avoiding) State
Single Mode of 
Opmal Arousal 
Theory
FIGURE 8.1  The Relationship Between Arousal and Hedonic Tone According to the 
Reversal Theory. The solid line and dashed line presents bi-stable meta-
motivational state, a telic state and a paratelic state, respectively, according 
to the reversal theory. The dotted line is the inverted U-shape that repre-
sents the single mode of optimal arousal theory.
Adapted from Reversal theory: The dynamics of motivation, emotion, and personality by M. J. Apter, 2007, p. 19.

The Role of Reversal Theory  127
become pleasantly relaxed once the task is completed. In contrast, paratelic emo-
tions vary from boredom to excitement as the arousal level changes from low to 
high. When individuals in a paratelic state are highly involved and psychologically 
aroused with an activity, they will be pleasantly excited. When the activity lacks 
enough stimulation, the person in a paratelic state becomes bored. As a result, 
individuals experiencing the same level of arousal may have completely opposite 
emotions depending on the person’s metamotivational state. For example, the 
same high arousal level can be a source of anxiety or excitement, depending on 
the person’s bi-stable state or mode interpreting the motivational experience. This 
condition provides a unique perspective for reversal theory, which differs from 
optimal arousal theory (Hebb, 1955), which posits an inverted u-shaped curve 
with a medium level of arousal showing greater pleasantness than either low or 
high arousal levels (Apter, 2007).
Reversal theory employs a bi-stability concept; both high and low arousal lev-
els are viewed as two opposite points that are optimal at a given time, and either 
arousal level can be effective under certain situations (Apter, 2007). Lastly, telic-
paratelic states provide a different experiential structure. The paratelic state creates 
a “protective frame” (not in a telic state) that helps individuals feel immune from 
the consequences of failure. This feature helps explain why some people engage 
in dangerous sports such as parachuting and rock-climbing (Apter & Batler, 1997). 
While this behavior initially creates anxiety, overcoming the danger creates a pro-
tective frame and induces switching of the person’s mental state from telic to 
paratelic mode. The outcome is excitement as intense as the initial anxiety.
Causes of Reversals in Telic-Paratelic States
According to Apter (2007), psychological conditions including 1) contingency, 2) 
frustration, and 3) satiation may cause reversals in metamotivational states.
Contingency
Contingent conditions refer to situations that give rise to reversals. Specifically, 
faced with a threat or duty, individuals normally switch to a telic state, if not 
already in this mode. Removing a threat or absence of duty leads to a paratelic 
state (Apter, 2007). In addition to this obvious situational condition, other endur-
ing conditions induce the metamotivational mode. For example, different loca-
tions can prompt contingent reversals (Kerr & Tacon, 1999; Tacon & Kerr, 1999). 
A university library and a lecture hall were shown to foster a telic state, whereas 
a university sports center and a student union building triggered a paratelic state. 
Students in a lecture hall, who were in a telic mode, were switched to paratelic 
mode when they were given a surprise break in the middle of a lecture (Kerr & 
Tacon, 2000). Prior studies of competitive sports demonstrate reversals by record-
ing the activities and interviewing the players (Cox & Kerr, 1990; Males, 1999; 

128  Jung, Min, and Martin
Bellew & Thatcher, 2002). Manipulations of metamotivational state in laboratory 
experiments also reveal reversals. When participants were presented with a finan-
cial reward, a telic state was induced, but when they were presented with comedy 
films, a paratelic state was induced (Svebak & Apter, 1987).
Reversals likely occur due to contingency in the digital world too. Filling 
out an online purchase order form presumably would create a telic state, as the 
consumer feels relaxed or anxious. Once the form is completed, the same person 
switches to a paratelic state feeling either bored or excited. In addition to random 
events, online or offline retail or service establishments can produce rather endur-
ing conditions that evoke either telic or paratelic modes.
Frustration
Frustration is the second condition for reversal to occur. When individuals become 
frustrated, they switch from a paratelic to a telic mode (Apter, 2007). For instance, 
a person who simply wants to have fun playing a game online may become 
increasingly frustrated if unable to improve a personal best score. If the person fails 
to achieve a higher score, the player becomes increasingly frustrated as the game 
continues. At a certain point, improving the score outweighs the fun of just play-
ing the game. The game’s excitement gives way to the anxiety of not achieving 
the goal. Frustration results in a reversal from arousal-seeking to arousal-avoidance 
and a concomitant reversal from paratelic to telic states.
Further, frustration can motivate individuals to switch from telic to paratelic 
modes. Suppose Bob wants to buy an air purifier to use at home for his family. 
As Bob searches for product information online, he discovers many brands and 
technologies with prices varying from less than $100 to over $1,000. Each manu-
facturer has a website complete with videos and testimonials claiming superior 
product technology. Information overload leads to simply too many evaluative 
criteria. “What should I look for? What would be the right size? Which technol-
ogy is better for me? Is there any unknown harmful effect of the technology?” Yet, 
he has a limited time to make an informed decision. Bob becomes frustrated and 
gives up searching. He thinks to himself, “Let me just try a product that is priced 
at below median price with an acceptable star rating at a popular ecommerce 
site. How bad could it be? Having any purifier would be better than not having 
anything at all.” Bob suddenly finds himself thinking about goal achievement for 
the family’s welfare. At the start of information search, Bob was in a serious mode, 
but his telic mode is now switched to a playful, paratelic mode as he visualizes goal 
achievement. The unachievable goal of buying the best air purifier loses centrality 
and is replaced by immediate gratification and excitement of anticipating positive 
responses from his family.
An empirical study demonstrates both types of reversals due to frustration 
(Barr, McDermott, & Evans, 1993). The stimulus was a kind of jigsaw puzzle in 
which there were over 300,000 ways of combining the pieces incorrectly and 

The Role of Reversal Theory  129
only one way of combining the pieces correctly. The participants’ metamotiva-
tional states were measured using telic/paratelic state scales before and after they 
attempted to assemble the puzzle. Surprisingly, six out of 30 participants (50 per-
cent female) successfully solved the difficult puzzle. None of these puzzle mas-
ters showed reversals in their metamotivational state probably due to the absence 
of frustration. Most participants (79.2%) who experienced frustration, however, 
experienced reversals. Whereas 41.7 percent reversed from a paratelic to a telic 
state, 37.5 percent reversed from a telic to a paratelic state. Further, the researchers 
confirm that participants’ arousal seeking tendency changed accordingly reflect-
ing their telic/paratelic state before and after the puzzle task.
Satiation
A third reason for reversal could be metamotivational satiation—an internal 
dynamic that leads naturally to reversal unless something else happens. According 
to the theory, satiation is a kind of underlying rhythm that moves forward and 
backward between telic and paratelic states (Apter, 2007). People make a gratui-
tous switch from one state to another for no apparent reason other than being 
“fed up” with current trivial daily activities such as gardening, interior decoration, 
and browsing on social media sites (Apter, 2007). Many consumers spend a sig-
nificant portion of their time on computers almost every day, reading newspapers, 
searching for information on products, visiting blogs about topics of personal 
interest from cooking to politics, and checking their news feeds on social media. 
During the course of these mundane activities, satiation can kick in, and consum-
ers may experience reversals in their metamotivational states. Lafreniere, Cowles, 
and Apter (1988) confirm that indeed such satiation can explain reversals. Stu-
dents from statistics classes were recruited to participate in a study of personality 
and attitudes to computers. Participants were asked to spend for two hours on 
a computer. All participants were given a set of teaching programs on statistics 
and a varied set of video games. Results showed that 80.6 percent of participants 
changed either from a statistics program to video games or vice versa, suggest-
ing reversals in metamotivational states. Subsequent questionnaires and interviews 
revealed that participants offered no reason for wanting to change the materials.
State Dominance and Individual Difference
Walters, Apter, and Svebak (1982) found that some participants’ preferences for 
arousal seeking or avoidance remain unchanged considerably longer than others, 
typically toward one of two polar ends. This behavior does not imply, however, 
that those traits are stable because metamotivational states did reverse in all partic-
ipants despite the differences in duration that the one mode lasted (Apter, 2007). 
This form is so-called state dominance. Individuals can be telic dominant or para-
telic dominant. However, this condition does not mean that those individuals 

130  Jung, Min, and Martin
never experience the opposite state. State dominance differs from many personal-
ity traits such as extraversion or introversion.
Murgatroyd, Rushton, Apter, and Ray (1978) developed the Telic Dominance 
Scale (TDS). Their scale used 42 items to operationalize state dominance of indi-
viduals in terms of telic dominance. Scale instructions asked participants to choose 
one of the two courses of action, telic- versus paratelic-related actions, based on 
which one they would most usually prefer or most closely apply to them. The 
telic dominance scale consisted of three subscales, namely serious-mindedness (14 
items), planning-orientation (14 items), and arousal-avoidance (14 items). Although 
these three dimensions likely correlate, they represent three distinctive phenom-
ena. In addition, Cook and Gerkovich (1993) developed the Paratelic Dominance 
Scale that consists of 30 items. These items primarily employed temporal compo-
nents (e.g., “I often take risks,” “I usually take life seriously”).
Svebak and Murgatroyd (1985) compared extremely telic-dominant individuals 
with extremely paratelic-dominant individuals in in-depth interviews. Paratelic- 
dominant individuals tend to be engaged in a greater variety of activities, act more 
flexible and spontaneous, and appear less well-organized than telic-dominant  
individuals. In contrast, telic-dominant individuals tended to execute their plan­
ned activities more carefully, spend more time carefully monitoring their activi-
ties and performance, and showed concerns about achieving their longer-term 
goals. When describing their account of activities, the two groups were also 
quite different. Telic-dominant individuals were detailed and described events in 
a more systematic way, whereas paratelic-dominant individuals described events 
more generally. In addition, the two groups differed in their language use. Telic-
dominant people tended to use descriptive language, whereas the paratelic- 
dominant group tended to use evaluative language (Apter, 2007).
State Balance, State Dominance, and Change
According to reversal theory, personality is about patterns over a period of time 
rather than fixed traits. Thus, individuals are flexible and change in their metamo-
tivational states. A consumer might spend more time in a paratelic state than in a 
telic state over the weekend. This same person might spend more time in a telic 
state than in a paratelic state on a weekday. Thus, the balance of time spent on one 
state rather than the other can change. This weekday versus weekend partitioning 
is referred to as a “state balance” and the state balance changes over time (Apter & 
Larsen, 1993). State balance differs from state dominance. State balance refers to 
the actual time spent in one state rather than the other. State dominance refers to 
the individual’s innate bias or tendency to be in one state than the other. State bal-
ance and dominance tend to associate strongly; however, they do not necessarily 
move in the same direction all the time (Apter, 2007). Girodo (1985) reports gen-
erally paratelic-dominant individuals changed to telic-dominance after undergo-
ing dramatically serious and potentially traumatic training (e.g. undercover police 

The Role of Reversal Theory  131
training). Further, some evidence suggests consumers’ state dominance changes 
toward telic dominance over the span of their lives. Prior studies find strong, posi-
tive correlations between age and telic dominance; the older consumers are, the 
more they exhibit telic dominance (Murgatroyd, 1985; Tacon & Abner, 1993).
Summary
In sum, the telic state is goal-oriented, serious-minded, and arousal-avoiding, 
whereas the paratelic state is spontaneous, playful, and arousal-seeking (Apter, 
1981). Reversal theory is primarily concerned about how consumers interpret 
experiences (e.g., arousal) rather than the specific content (Apter, 1981). A lot of 
complex and inconsistent behaviors of consumers that traditional psychological 
theory fails to account for can be explained by acknowledging the fact that con-
sumers reverse between those psychological states depending on the particular 
motive they felt at a particular time (Apter & Batler, 1997). Researchers have 
adopted reversal theory to explain individuals’ complex and inconsistent behaviors 
in various contexts such as stress-moderating effects (Martin, Kuiper, Olinger, & 
Dobbin, 1987), design (Fokkinga & Desmet, 2014; Gielen & van Leeuwen, 2014), 
sports (Sit & Lindner, 2006), behavioral counseling (Blaydon, Lindner, & Kerr, 
2004), management (Carter, 2005), and digital advertising (Rodgers & Thorson, 
2000; Davis, 2009; Jung et al., 2014; Seyedghorban et al., 2016).
The Role of Reversal Theory in Digital Advertising
Interactivity in Digital Advertising and Reversal Theory
Online advertising or communication between firms and consumers can be char-
acterized as interactive (Yadav & Varadarajan, 2005). A computer-mediated envi-
ronment allows consumers to control online media and communicate back to 
the sender of the message any time of the day. With digital technology advancing, 
new and innovative interactive technologies extend the capability of computer- 
mediated communication to a whole new level. The literature on online advertising 
shows several researchers investigating how online interactivity affects persuasion  
(Schlosser, 2003; Jung et al., 2011). These studies manipulate goal types (e.g., 
information vs. entertainment) and observe effectiveness of the interactivity in 
the ads from a rather homeostatic, traditional consumer behavior perspective. Tra-
ditional models such as the integrative attitude formation model (MacInnis & 
Jaworski, 1989) may be adequate in a static environment. However, some evidence 
suggests that internet users are different from traditional consumers. Internet con-
sumers tend to be more active searching for information (Hoffman, Novak & 
Schlosser, 2000; Rosenkrans, 2009). Consumers appear to be multi-static and non-
rational (Holbrook, 1994), especially when using technology (Mick & Fournier, 
1998). Rodgers and Thorson (2000) integrate the psychological reversals into 

132  Jung, Min, and Martin
the consumer-controlled aspect “internet user mode” as part of their Interactive 
Advertising Model (IAM).
According to the IAM, internet users’ motives (e.g., research vs. entertainment) 
interact with the likely user mode, which in turn transpires information process-
ing (i.e., attention, memory, and attitude). The user’s motives also interact directly 
with information processing because motives encourage that the user puts effort 
into carrying out any online activity. Based on motives such as researching, shop-
ping, entertaining, communicating, or socializing, online users differentially attend 
to, comprehend, and form attitudes about interactive advertisements (Rodgers & 
Thorson, 2000). Further, an internet user’s motives closely relate to user mode 
(e.g., serious vs. playful). An internet user searching for product information 
arguably is serious-minded. In contrast, a user seeking entertainment is play-
ful. Because the user’s motive changes more frequently while using the internet 
than traditional media, an online user’s mode likely changes frequently as well. 
Hence, the IAM incorporates reversal theory and classifies an internet user mode 
as “telic” (high goal-oriented, seriousness, and present-oriented) and “paratelic” 
(low goal-oriented, playfulness, and future-oriented) along the goal-directedness 
continuum. Further, building on multi-stability (Apter, 1981; Mick & Fournier, 
1998), Davis (2009) tests reversal theory and finds coexistence of two reversal 
states, such as telic and paratelic states, when consumers encounter multimedia 
messaging services.
Online Consumers’ Mode and Advertising Interactivity
Despite its presumed importance (Rodgers & Thorson, 2000), few studies investi-
gate the relationship between online consumer mode and advertising interactivity. 
Li and Bukovac (1999) found that larger banner ads invited a higher click-through 
rate from playful versus serious mode online users. The IAM suggests that para-
telic users may respond more positively to interactive online advertising, whereas 
telic users may respond more negatively to interactive online advertising because 
interactive features interfere with telic users’ goal pursuit process.
Drawing on reversal theory and the IAM, Jung et al. (2014) conducted a field 
experiment to examine how online consumers’ user mode influences their evalu-
ation of advertisements that vary in its interactivity. They used a 2 (advertising 
interactivity: high vs. low) x 2 (user mode: telic vs. paratelic) between-subjects 
design. Advertising interactivity was manipulated with a banner ad embedded 
on a cell phone section of a fictitious online retailer. Under the high interactiv-
ity condition, each banner component came to life as the banner expanded to a 
larger size and each component appeared one at a time when participants moved 
the mouse over the banner. Under the low interactivity condition, the banner 
remained static without any interactive components activated. The user mode 
was measured using an adapted version of the Telic/Paratelic Statement Instru-
ment (T/PSI) (O’Connell & Calhoun, 2001). Jung et al. (2014) modified this 

The Role of Reversal Theory  133
seven-item, serious-mindedness/playfulness subscale of the T/PSI into a 10-item, 
7-point semantic differential scale: five items for serious-mindedness and five items 
for playfulness. Before responding to the scale, participants read the instructions, 
“Please click on the number that best indicates how you were feeling in the last 
few minutes, just before you started this survey.” Since the telic and paratelic states 
should be mutually exclusive (Apter, 2007) and dichotomization determines the 
two states (O’Connell & Calhoun, 2001), the authors dichotomized the sample 
on each dimension based on the neural point of four, and determined telic users 
(those who score high on serious-mindedness and low on playfulness) and para-
telic users (those who score high on playfulness and low on serious-mindedness).
In addition, Jung et  al. (2014) measured perceived advertising interactiv-
ity using a four-item modified scale from McMillan and Hwang (2002). They 
also measured arousal-seeking tendency using 19 items adopted from Xie and 
Lee (2008). Some of the arousal-seeking tendency scale items were: “I prefer an 
unpredictable life full of change to a more routine one,” “I sometimes like to do 
things that are a little frightening,” and “I like to experience novelty and change 
in my daily routine.”
Results of Jung et al. (2014) showed that an interactive effect exists between 
user mode and advertising interactivity such that telic state online viewers formed 
a more favorable attitude toward the low interactivity ad, whereas paratelic state 
online viewers formed a more favorable attitude toward the high interactivity 
ad. Further, the study finds that when exposed to the low (high) interactive ad, 
the telic (paratelic) state online viewers formed a more positive ad attitude than 
the paratelic (telic) state online viewers. Consistent with a mediation hypoth-
esis, the study confirms that the impact of user mode (telic vs. paratelic) on ad 
attitude is mediated through an arousal seeking tendency. When exposed to a 
low interactivity ad, paratelic state consumers, compared with telic consumers, 
formed a less favorable attitude toward the ad because paratelic state consumers 
had a greater level of arousal seeking tendency, which made them evaluate the 
ad with low interactivity less favorably. When exposed to a high interactivity ad, 
however, paratelic state consumers, compared with telic state consumers, formed 
a more favorable attitude toward the ad because paratelic state consumers had a 
greater level of arousal seeking tendency, which prompted them to evaluate the 
ad with high interactivity more favorably.
Conclusion
This chapter argues that reversal theory provides a valuable framework relevant to 
online consumer behavior in general, and digital advertising in particular. While 
reversal theory is a well-established psychological theory, historical background, 
causes, state dominance, and state balance demonstrate applications to consumer 
behavior. Reviewing the interactive advertising literature from a reversal theory 
perspective, the results of the present chapter were to show how only a paucity 

134  Jung, Min, and Martin
of research using reversal theory has been applied to digital advertising (e.g., Li & 
Bukovac, 1999; Rodgers & Thorson, 2000; Davis, 2009; Jung et al., 2014). Jung 
et al.’s (2014) research is one of the first empirical studies rooted on the reversal 
theory in marketing and contributes to the literature by incorporating the meta-
motivational state’s role in the context of an interactive ad. This research demon-
strates that the users’ metamotivational state and arousal seeking tendency affect 
persuasiveness of digital advertising that varies in interactivity.
Results also have significant implications for practitioners. Since online con-
sumers’ metamotivational state changes from telic to paratelic or vice versa dur-
ing the course of their digital experience, and the user mode at the time of their 
exposure to an ad influences the persuasiveness of an interactive ad, digital adver-
tising professionals should include both high and low interactivity advertisements 
available (Jung et al., 2014). Advancements in digital technology potentially help 
to identify the metamotivational state of online consumers. Enlightened digital 
advertisers can show either high or low interactive advertising that match online 
consumers’ modes to maximize ad effectiveness.
Despite reversal theory’s relevance and the importance to digital advertising, 
adoption of this approach remains limited. Since Rodgers and Thorson (2000) 
incorporate telic versus paratelic user modes as an important part of the IAM, 
surprisingly few known researchers employ reversal theory in exploring the 
effectiveness of digital advertising. As the relationship between digital advertising 
and firm success continues to grow, researchers need to pay more attention to 
the value of reversal theory as a plausible explanation for changeable bi-stability 
of human behavior. This chapter only examines one dimension, telic-paratelic 
dimension, but three more dimensions (conformity-negativity, autocentric- 
allocentric, mastery-sympathy) remain unexplored in this context. An essential 
first step is developing scales to measure these constructs. Further, more experi-
ments are needed to show different types of metamotivational states that affect 
different types of advertisements beyond interactivity.
References
Apter, M. J. (1981). The possibility of a structural phenomenology: The case of reversal 
theory. Journal of Phenomenological Psychology, 12, 173–187.
Apter, M. J. (2007). Reversal theory: The dynamics of motivation, emotion, and personality (2nd 
ed.). Oxford, England: Oneworld.
Apter, M. J. (2013). Developing reversal theory: Some suggestions for future research. Jour-
nal of Motivation, Emotion, and Personality, 1(1), 1–8.
Apter, M. J. (2015). Exploring the concept of focus in reversal theory. Journal of Motivation, 
Emotion, and Personality, 4(4), 1–8.
Apter, M. J., & Batler, R. (1997). Gratuitous risk: A study of parachuting. In S. Svebak & 
M. J. Apter (Eds.), Stress and health: A reversal theory perspective (pp. 119–129). Washington, 
DC: Taylor & Francis.
Apter, M. J., & Larsen, R. (1993). Sixty consecutive days: Telic and paratelic states in every-
day life. In J. H. Kerr, S. Murgatroyd, & M. J. Apter (Eds.), Advances in reversal theory (pp. 
107–122). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Swets & Zeitlinger.

The Role of Reversal Theory  135
Barr, S. A., McDermott, M. R., & Evans, P. (1993). Predicting persistence: A study of telic 
and paratelic frustration. In J. H. Kerr, S. Murgatroyd, & M. J. Apter (Eds.), Advances in 
reversal theory (pp. 123–136). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Swets & Zeitlinger.
Bellew, M., & Thatcher, J. (2002). Metamotivational state reversals in competitive sport. 
Social Behavior and Personality, 30(6), 613–624.
Blaydon, M. J., Lindner, K. J., & Kerr, J. H. (2004). Metamotivational characteristics of 
exercise dependence and eating disorders in highly active amateur sport participants. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 36, 1419–1432.
Carter, S. (2005). Reversal theory: Changing you and your organization for the better. 
Training Journal, 2, 20–22.
Cook, M. R., & Gerkovich, M. M. (1993). The development of a paratelic dominance 
scale. In J. H. Kerr, S. Murgatroyd, & M. J. Apter (Eds.), Advances in reversal theory (pp. 
177–188). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Swets & Zeitlinger.
Cox, T., & Kerr, J. H. (1990). Self-reported mood in competitive squash. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 11, 199–203.
Cummins, S., Peltier, J. W., Schibrowsky, J. A., & Nill, A. (2013). Consumer behavior in the 
online context. Journal of Research in Interactive Marketing, 8(3), 169–202.
Davis, R. (2009). Do consumers experience a reversal state when encountering mobile 
commerce services? In Proceedings from ANZMAC ’09: Australian and New Zealand Mar-
keting Academy Annual Conference. Melbourne: Australia and New Zealand.
Fokkinga, S., & Desmet, P. (2014). Reversal theory from a design perspective. Journal of 
Motivation, Emotion, and Personality, 2(2), 12–26.
Gielen, M. A., & van Leeuwen, L. (2014). Found in translation: Bringing reversal theory to 
design for play. Journal of Motivation, Emotion, and Personality, 2(2), 27–40.
Girodo, M. (1985, May). Telic and paratelic modes in operational undercover and field narcotics 
agents. Paper presented at the Second International Conference on Reversal Theory, 
York University, Toronto.
Hebb, D. O. (1955). Drives and the C.N.S. (Conceptual nervous system). Psychological 
Review, 62, 243–254.
Hoffman, D. L., Novak, T. P., & Schlosser, A. E. (2000). Consumer control in online environ-
ments. Nashville, TN: Owen Graduate School of Management, Vanderbilt University.
Holbrook, M. B. (1994). The nature of customer value. In T. R. Roland & L. O. Richard 
(Eds.), Service quality: New directions in theory and practice (pp. 21–71). Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage Publications.
Jung, J. M., Hui, H. C., Min, K. S., & Martin, D. (2014). Does telic/paratelic user mode mat-
ter on the effectiveness of interactive Internet advertising? A reversal theory perspective. 
Journal of Business Research, 67, 1303–1309.
Jung, J. M., Min, K. S., & Kellaris, J. J. (2011). The games people play: How the entertainment 
value of online ads helps or harms persuasion. Psychology & Marketing, 28(7), 661–681.
Kerr, J. H., & Tacon, P. (1999). Psychological responses to different types of locations and 
activities. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 19, 287–294.
Kerr, J. H., & Tacon, P. (2000). Environmental events and induction of metamotivational 
reversals. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 91, 337–338.
Kim, J., & Forsythe, S. (2008). Adoption of virtual try-on technology for online apparel 
shopping. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 22(2), 45–59.
Köhler, C. F., Rohm, A. J., de Ruyter, K., & Wetzels, M. (2011). Return on interactivity: The 
impact of online agents on newcomer adjustment. Journal of Marketing, 75(2), 93–108.
Lafreniere, K. D., Cowles, M. P., & Apter, M. J. (1988). The reversal phenomenon: Reflec-
tions on a laboratory study. In M. J. Apter, J. H. Kerr, & M. P. Cowles (Eds.), Progress in 
reversal theory (pp. 247–254). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier Science.

136  Jung, Min, and Martin
Li, H., & Bukovac, J. L. (1999). Cognitive impact of banner ad characteristics: An experi-
mental study. Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly, 76(2), 341–353.
MacInnis, D. J.,  & Jaworski, B. J. (1989). Information processing from advertisements: 
Toward an integrative framework. Journal of Marketing, 53(4), 1–23.
Males, J. R. (1999). Individual experience in slalom canoeing. In J. H. Kerr (Ed.), Experienc-
ing sport: Reversal theory (pp. 189–208). Chichester, England: Wiley Publications.
Martin, R. A., Kuiper, N. A., Olinger, L. J., & Dobbin, J. (1987). Is stress always bad? Telic 
versus paratelic dominance as a stress-moderating variable. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 53(5), 970–982.
McMillan, S. J., & Hwang, J. (2002). Measures of perceived interactivity: An exploration of 
the role of direction of communication, user control, and time in shaping perceptions 
of interactivity. Journal of Advertising, 31(3), 29–42.
Mick, D. G., & Fournier, S. (1998). Paradoxes of technology: Consumer cognizance, emo-
tions, and coping strategies. Journal of Consumer Research, 25(2), 123–143.
Murgatroyd, S. (1985). The nature of telic dominance. In M. J. Apter, D. Fontana, & S. Mur-
gatroyd (Eds.), Reversal theory: Applications and developments (pp. 20–41). Cardiff: Univer-
sity College Cardiff Press.
Murgatroyd, S., Rushton, C., Apter, M. J., & Ray, C. (1978). The development of the telic 
dominance scale. Journal of Personality Assessment, 42(5), 519–528.
O’Connell, K. A., & Calhoun, J. E. (2001). The telic/paratelic state instrument (T/PSI): 
Validating a reversal theory measure. Personality and Individual Differences, 30, 193–204.
Rodgers, S., & Thorson, E. (2000). The interactive advertising model: How users perceive 
and process online adv. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 1(1), 42–61.
Rodriguez, M., Dixon, A. L., & Peltier, J. W. (2014). A review of the interactive marketing 
literature in the context of personal selling and sales management. Journal of Research in 
Interactive Marketing, 8(4), 294–308.
Rosenkrans, G. (2009). The creativeness and effectiveness of online interactive rich media 
advertising. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 9(2), 18–31.
Schlosser, A. E. (2003). Experiencing products in the virtual world: The role of goal and 
imagery in influencing attitudes versus purchase intentions. Journal of Consumer Research, 
30, 184–198.
Seyedghorban, Z., Tahernejad, H., & Matanda, M. J. (2016). Reinquiry into advertising 
avoidance on the Internet: A conceptual replication and extension. Journal of Advertising, 
45(1), 120–129.
Sit, C., & Lindner, K. J. (2006). Situational state balances and participation motivation in 
youth sport: A reversal theory perspective. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 76(2), 
369–384.
Stone, M. D., & Woodcock, N. D. (2013). Interactive, direct and digital marketing: A future 
that depends on better use of business intelligence. Journal of Research in Interactive Mar-
keting, 8(1), 4–17.
Svebak, S.,  & Apter, M. J. (1987). Laughter: An empirical test of some reversal theory 
hypotheses. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 28, 189–198.
Svebak, S., & Murgatroyd, S. (1985). Metamotivational dominance: A multimethod vali-
dation of reversal theory constructs. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 48(1), 
107–116.
Tacon, P., & Abner, B. (1993). Normative and other data for the telic dominance and nega-
tivism dominance scales. In J. H. Kerr, S. Murgatroyd, & M. J. Apter (Eds.), Advances in 
reversal theory (pp. 165–176). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Swets & Zeitlinger.

The Role of Reversal Theory  137
Tacon, P., & Kerr, J. H. (1999). Metamotivational states in sport locations and activities. In 
J. H. Kerr (Ed.), Experiencing sport: Reversal theory (pp. 175–187). Chichester, England: 
Wiley Publications.
Walters, J., Apter, M. J., & Svebak, S. (1982). Colour preference, arousal and the theory of 
psychological reversals. Motivation and Emotion, 6, 193–215.
Xie, G. X., & Lee, M. J. (2008). Anticipated violence, arousal, and enjoyment of movies: 
Viewers’ reactions to violent previews based on arousal-seeking tendency. The Journal of 
Social Psychology, 148(3), 277–292.
Yadav, M. S., & Varadarajan, R. (2005). Interactivity in the electronic marketplace: An expo-
sition of the concept and implication for research. Journal of the Academy of Marketing 
Science, 33(4), 585–603.

Introduction
New technologies and media are making access, interaction, and creation of 
media content increasingly under audience control. Similarly, advertising is trying 
to integrate into new formats with video pre-roll ads, native advertising, fan com-
munities and consumer reviews, photo filters, emoji creation, apps, etc. As noted in 
Chapter 2, these ads and ad formats are intended to enable consumers to become 
active participants—curators, creators, and disseminators—of advertising messages 
in the same way that they are with other media content. However, messages may 
not be perceived the same way when they initially come from advertisers. Greater 
involvement can lead to greater feelings of ownership, control, and satisfaction, 
but could also lead to pushback on advertising.
Consumers increasingly expect control of their media experience and along 
with that comes control over the advertising experience. At the most basic level, 
this means having control over one’s own exposure and attention to advertising. 
Before higher levels of message engagement can occur, exposure and awareness 
of the advertiser must occur. Thus, the role of attention in media effects, par-
ticularly in terms of brand messages, is more important than ever. In fact, at the 
2016 Cannes Lions advertising festival, generally a celebration of advertising, there 
was a focus beyond the award-winning ads. According to The Wall Street Journal, 
“One of the biggest topics at Cannes this week has been how to win consumers’ 
attention amid a swiftly changing technology landscape and backlash against a 
perceived overload of advertising” (Perlberg, 2016, n.p.).
So why might an old topic—attention to advertising—turn into such an 
important topic in the advertising industry? In the past, media content was more 
clearly a product to be consumed. Companies created content, and to help pay 
9
ADVERTISING (IN)ATTENTION IN 
THE DIGITAL ENVIRONMENT
Brittany R. L. Duff and Yuliya Lutchyn

Advertising (In)attention  139
for the cost of creating and distributing this content, advertising was placed in it. 
Thus, there was an understanding of an exchange between audience and media 
companies that, in order to have free or subsidized content, the audience would 
give their attention, or at least the possibility of attention, to ads. Ad placement 
costs are based largely on the size of an audience, with terms such as CPM (cost 
per thousand) and reach being used, or discussions about how many people will 
be exposed to an ad in a particular buy. However, increased audience control over 
media content and experiences means that this exchange has become less clear. 
Consumers might be asking themselves the following questions: If I am an active 
participant in creating content then why should I also subsidize my access to that 
content with my attention? Whereas attention may have operated like a discount 
on media content in the past, if I help to create that content, why should I also be 
paying with my attention to ads?
As people have more ways to access media on their own time and in varied 
formats (different screens, devices), they are finding new ways to exert control 
over content. In social media and many online venues, people are the active crea-
tors of the content, and little content is actually created beyond what the audi-
ence is creating. Thus, the role of creator and consumer of content is blurred. 
As illustrated in Figure 2.2 of Chapter 2, technology is also making it possible 
to alter or change even content that is created in a more traditional manner for 
consumption. For example, if you do not want to see the name “Trump” in news 
articles online, you can install a browser extension that will change “Trump” to 
“Drumpf” each time that it appears, thus automatically changing media content 
to fit personal preferences (Romano, 2016, n.p.).
Along with the new ways of interacting with media content generally has 
come a broader range of ways to engage with advertising. Traditionally, this trend 
is interpreted in terms of increased user abilities and greater engagement with 
advertising. However, increased control and interaction also mean that consum-
ers are now better able to control how they do not interact with ads. Of course, 
consumers’ desire to control exposure and attention to ads is not new. People 
have flipped past magazine ads or turned the channel during a TV commercial 
for decades. However, the use and the ease of consumers’ ad control tactics 
have increased dramatically. With participation, content creation, and manipula-
tion increasingly becoming a part of the media experience, it is more critical 
than ever to understand the role of control over ad exposure and attention 
to advertising. Researchers need to understand the changes to media, look at 
what is truly new, and use theory to conduct research and predict outcomes for 
advertising.
In this chapter, we will discuss advertising exposure and attention in the new 
digital environment, particularly media multitasking and advertising avoidance. 
What we currently know, as well as critical questions that remain unanswered, 
will be discussed. Additionally, the potential for disruptive new technologies could 
again throw into question how we think of audience and attention to ads.

140  Duff and Lutchyn
Attention
Attention forms the base of how advertising “works” and is often seen as occur-
ring before any other effects of advertising can happen. The influential advertising 
hierarchy of effects model has been used in various forms for over 100 years (see 
Barry, 1987). Hierarchy of effects models generally follow a series of “steps” that 
begin with attention/awareness of the advertisement. Once one has been exposed 
to an ad and is aware of it, then they are able to form an interest or attitude toward 
the subject of the ad message. This interest/attitude then forms the basis for action 
toward the product. While this model has been debated, it forms the basis of how 
we think of more modern models of customer journeys to action or sales funnels, 
which specify a series of steps after awareness that eventually lead to taking an 
action toward the product. There are a number of critiques of specifying adver-
tising effects as occurring in a linear manner or across all types of products (e.g., 
Ehrenberg, 1974), and newer critiques in light of media flexibility and consumer 
control (John, 2016). However, this debate about the process of advertising effects 
is largely about what occurs after ad exposure/awareness/attention. Because expo-
sure and attention are widely acknowledged as being crucial base steps for any 
message effects that follow (Slater, 2004), a better understanding of those serve as 
a base for effects in a digital environment—where control, access, and interaction 
with media are rapidly changing—which is key to understanding how ads might 
(not) work.
It is important to begin by looking at what attention is, to understand what it 
might mean in new media contexts. In 1890, William James defined attention as 
“the taking possession of the mind, in clear and vivid form, of one out of what 
may seem several simultaneously possible objects or trains of thought” (p. 403). 
In the time since this definition, not much has changed. Currently, the American 
Psychological Association’s term glossary defines attention as “a state of focused 
awareness on a subset of the available perceptual information” (Attention, 2016, 
n.p.). While there are some minor differences in these definitions, attention can 
be seen as a cognitive processing response that is selective (a focus on some things 
to the exclusion of others). For example, think about all that is going on around 
you right now. You may be focused on reading this chapter but there are many, 
many other perceptual inputs competing for your attention. If you are sitting 
comfortably, you might not be thinking about how it feels to be in contact with 
the chair, but you can focus on it now. There are also many things you can see 
in your visual field and probably many sounds competing for attention. Turning 
your focus to any one of them can move it to the forefront and push other things 
(like this chapter) to the background. Thus, attention helps us more systematically 
process our world by limiting the amount of information we are processing at 
any given time.
In terms of the perceptual information that we may attend to, we can look at 
both bottom-up and top-down attention. Top-down attention is goal-directed, 

Advertising (In)attention  141
“internally driven” attention (Johnston & Dark, 1986, p. 44). Essentially, top-down 
attention imposes your goals like a filter on how the perceptual environment is 
perceived by you. If you are searching for an app on your phone screen that has 
a blue and white logo, you also might seem to notice those apps that look similar 
(blue and white logo). Because you are selecting items that match your goal item, 
you may not even notice other apps that look different (e.g., brown and white 
logos). For an excellent video illustration of top-down selective attention, please 
see Dan Simons’ (n.d.) video, “The Monkey Business Illusion.”
Bottom-up, or “data-driven” (Johnston & Dark, 1986, p. 44) attention is hap-
pening at some level at all times; all of those perceptual inputs that you are not 
focusing on while reading this chapter are still monitored at a low level. How-
ever, for media research, it is most important to think about bottom-up attention 
when something in the perceptual environment attracts or “grabs” your attention. 
Bottom-up processing can occur when you are browsing without a direct goal 
(looking for interesting images), or it can also occur when something in the envi-
ronment attracts attention (e.g., a flashing ad). When something unusual, different, 
or relevant to you (like your name) gains attention, this is an example of operating 
in a more bottom-up manner, which comes from the perceptual environment and 
is up to you for processing.
Attention can be categorized as selective, divided, switching, or sustained. 
Selective attention is when a person focuses on one input while filtering out oth-
ers; divided attention involves focusing on more than one input at the same time; 
attention switching involves multiple inputs but with a focus on only one input 
at a time while switching focus between inputs; and sustained attention, which 
involves simply monitoring an input for a sustained length of time (McDowd & 
Birren, 1990). At its most basic level, it is useful to think of attention to media as 
being either selective or divided/switching. For example, you might be in a lec-
ture taking notes on your computer when a chat window pops up with a message 
from a friend. You might be trying to concentrate exclusively on the class content 
and, thus, ignore the chat window, or you might try to type a response to your 
friend while also watching the lecture. In the first case, you have a goal of con-
centrating only on the lecture and thus you will selectively attend only to that goal 
and try to ignore everything else, including the chat. However, if you have goals 
of both concentrating on the lecture and also chatting with your friend, you will 
be dividing attentional focus between the two. There is some debate on the role of 
switching versus dividing attention, whether we are really able to divide focus or 
if we switch very rapidly in a way that makes it seem as if we are focusing on more 
than one thing. For media research, the distinction is more important in terms of 
whether there is a physical switching, such as if you must look at a tablet screen 
and also a television screen while they are in different locations.
As we have discussed, attention to advertising is seen as an important basic 
response. However, the digital media environment has created many shifts that 
have placed particular importance on how audience members are avoiding ads 

142  Duff and Lutchyn
and also how they might be exposed to them in more competitive media environ-
ments than previously thought.
Media Multitasking and Advertising
Avoidance in the digital domain has, thus far, largely evolved in terms of the 
mechanical means that people have for eliminating advertising. However, shifts in 
media technology and access have also changed the way that people behave and 
interact with media and content. One such change that has presented a challenge 
for advertisers is the rise of media multitasking. Changes in audience measure-
ment and shifts in how ads might be perceived and received under varied levels of 
attention are now being explored by practitioners and researchers alike.
The Growth of Multitasking
Media multitasking is growing quickly as a behavior. Simultaneous media use 
now adds six hours to the average mediated day; a 30-hour “extended” day would 
be needed to sequentially try and fit in all of the media content being consumed 
(Ipsos MediaCT & IAB, 2012). In 2015, adults spent 27 percent more time on 
their computers and mobile devices than they had two years previously (Nielsen, 
2012). Deloitte (2015) found that 90  percent of people now multitask while 
watching TV, and people ages 14 to 48 were doing an average of three additional 
activities during that multitasking. A survey of 12,000 people in 30 countries 
showed that we now spend an average of 109 minutes each day simultaneously 
watching TV and another digital screen (Millward Brown, 2014). Additionally, 
with content fluidity, more people may complete multiple tasks within a sin-
gle media device but with additional screens (e.g., multiple computer monitors; 
Richtel, 2012) or multiple windows open in a single screen that are dedicated to 
different media tasks.
The rising prevalence of media multitasking has resulted in anxiety by advertis-
ers about the accuracy of reach and effectiveness metrics, as well as questions about 
what it might mean for advertising now that it is often exposed in a competitive 
media environment. According to Google, 81 percent of internet users multitask 
to avoid ads (Heussner, 2012). Media measurement companies are now trying to 
measure multiscreen media use in order to better understand how it affects adver-
tising (GfK MRI, 2012; Nielsen, 2012). Ipsos MediaCT and the IAB (2012) have 
said that to guide ad content and format recommendations, understanding mul-
titasking mind-sets and motives will be crucial; similar calls for increased research 
have been issued by media scholars (e.g., Roberts & Foehr, 2008).
To date, most studies on how consumers experience media content and ads 
have primarily looked at exposure to one medium/message, in isolation or as part 
of a sequential media experience. However, this is no longer how many message 
exposures are actually experienced.

Advertising (In)attention  143
Defining Media Multitasking
Increased portability of devices and ease of accessing content on demand are mak-
ing it easier to multitask with media and content. Because this area of research 
is relatively new and is growing at a rapid pace, it is necessary to think about 
how to conceptually define media multitasking to provide a solid foundation 
for future research to draw upon. Past definitions of media multitasking have 
included distinctions between media and/or devices as a criteria for engaging in 
the behavior of media multitasking. These definitions include Consuming two 
or more media simultaneously (Roberts & Foehr, 2008; Ophir, Nass, & Wagner, 
2009), or using a medium while engaging in a non-mediated task (e.g., watching 
TV while cleaning; Jeong & Fishbein, 2007). Others have defined it in terms of 
number of devices and the properties of devices such as “multiscreening,” or the 
simultaneous use of multiple screens (Segijn, Voorveld, & Smit, 2016). While these 
definitions have been useful to help begin research on media multitasking, they all 
define media multitasking with an emphasis on the medium, content, or device 
(the media) rather than on the process (the multitasking). A definition based on 
the process that occurs during media multitasking could help bridge existing and 
future advertising research, even as media change.
Media used to be largely delivered in distinct formats and disseminated through 
separate channels so that the medium was the delivery system. Media multitask-
ing can now just as easily occur within a medium as between media. If a person 
has a computer with multiple windows open (e.g., TV show and social media) 
they might not be considered to be media multitasking based on past definitions 
because they are only using one computer and one screen. For example, in the 
Media Multitasking Index (Ophir, Nass, & Wagner, 2009), the amount of media 
multitasking that a person engages in is determined by how often they use 12 
different media forms (e.g., print-based media) at the same time as other media 
(e.g., television). Because media devices are becoming more flexible in terms 
of content access, people may be multitasking with different mediated content 
within a device or between devices. The perceptions of media format might then 
change based on the perceptions of the people answering the multitasking ques-
tion: would they consider reading an e-book to be print media? Thus, the concept 
of “media multitasking” may now actually be “mediated multitasking.”
Media and interactions with media are changing quickly, particularly in regard 
to content fluidity, so a person-centered definition may be more useful and more 
able to evolve as media change. Sanbonmatsu, Strayer, Medeiros-Ward, and Wat-
son (2013) defined multitasking as concurrent performance of at least two tasks 
with each task having its own unique goal (see also Duff & Sar, 2015). Past defini-
tions of media multitasking depend on distinctions between devices and media 
that may be blurred by changes in media. For this reason, we will define multi-
tasking as simultaneously engaging in more than one task (at least one of which 
is mediated) that each have separate goals. Note that with this definition, a person 

144  Duff and Lutchyn
should be involved in more than one task, but this definition does not specify 
that there needs to be more than one medium or device used. Also note that the 
task is defined by the goals of the person. Thus, one could have a task of being 
entertained or alleviating boredom. Using this definition in the context of media 
lets us as researchers focus on the process and motives of the person doing the 
media multitasking while leaving it open to fit new ways of multitasking with 
media. This could also allow people to be multitasking within or between devices. 
In a fluid media environment, conceptualizing this definition can help us to bet-
ter specify similarities and differences in media multitasking studies and findings.
It is important to think about how a broader, process-focused definition of 
media multitasking means that there is also a need to be specific about the media, 
content, people, and processes being studied. For example, different content uti-
lizes different modalities. A study on the medium of television used to be able 
to assume audio/visual elements based on the device capabilities and design of 
television content. However, with device flexibility, we should now look at the 
elements of the mediated content or interaction. You could use your smartphone 
to access social media, play a video game, text friends, look up directions, read 
a book, etc. You could even do more than one of these things at the same time 
on that same device. Therefore, content and the use of the content is somewhat 
divorced from thinking of the mode of access.
A study in which a person is reading a blog while also listening to the radio 
would utilize separate modalities (hearing vs. seeing), and there is evidence that 
there may be separate pools of processing resources for different modalities 
(Navon & Miller, 1987). Therefore, the results of that study may point to a far 
different conclusion about how multitasking affects ads placed on that blog than 
a study about reading a blog while also watching a video. Additionally, the moti-
vation and goals of the person matter. What are the simultaneous goals that they 
hold for their tasks? Are they trying to find a specific news story (top-down) or 
perhaps they are just browsing around to see if anything interesting is happening 
(bottom-up). Are they using media to do some work, to find information, or to 
be entertained? The various aspects of the person, their goals, and the content will 
need to be identified in order for work in media multitasking to provide mean-
ingful predictions.
Media Multitasking and Advertising Effects
Despite the increasing importance of media multitasking there have been few 
advertising studies in the context of multitasking and divided attention (see 
Kazakova & Cauberghe, 2013). Researchers have begun to identify some of the 
potential advertising effects under conditions of media multitasking, mostly using 
predictions based on the limited capacity framework (Lang, 2000). Additionally, 
we are beginning to explore media multitaskers as an audience, looking at traits 
and preferences that might predict heavy media multitasking. However, there are 

Advertising (In)attention  145
still a very limited number of studies that have been conducted in an advertising 
context and, as you will see, there are conflicting findings even among the few 
studies that exist. After reviewing the existing literature, we will discuss reasons 
why some results might seem to conflict and also identify a few of the many 
avenues for media multitasking research that remain unexamined.
Limited Capacity
Because limited capacity processing is the dominant framework used in research 
on the effect of multitasking on advertising, it is useful to understand the basis 
of limited capacity as it applies to multitasking. Divided attention has been the 
most widely used construct to explain performance in simultaneous task research 
(Craik, Govoni, Naveh-Benjamin, & Anderson, 1996; Konig, Buhner, & Murling, 
2005). It is thought that mental resources are shared by tasks competing for atten-
tion and action (Kahneman, 1973), and thus multiple tasks may interfere with 
one another (Pashler, 1994; Monsell, 2003). Divided attention usually leads to a 
decrease in the performance on at least one task because less attention is likely to 
be allocated to each task due to people’s limited resource capacity (Lang, 2000). 
These interference effects are thought to be most pronounced when the tasks 
utilize the same sensory resources, such as two visual tasks (Navon & Miller, 1987).
Lang’s (2000) limited capacity model of mediated message (LC4MP) is the 
most widely used processing model in advertising studies of media multitasking. 
This model posits that there are three sub-processes in the processing and storing 
of information: encoding, storage, and retrieval processing (Lang, 2000). Because 
there are limited resources available at each stage, a distraction from your target 
could require some of those limited processing resources, and thus, take them 
away from processing the target at any stage. This would then result in a failure to 
encode, store, or retrieve that information.
For example: You are looking at a map on your phone for the street you need to 
turn at and just as you spot the street name (“Sa . . . ”), you hear a loud crash and look 
up. Because you were interrupted before you could fully read it, you were not able 
to successfully encode it. If you look at the street name and as you are repeating it to 
yourself (rehearsing it in working memory; “Sawyer Avenue, Sawyer, Sawyer”), and 
you suddenly hear a loud crash, you might turn your attention to the crash instead 
of trying to remember the street name. So while you initially encoded the street 
name, you forgot it before it could enter long-term memory, and therefore, failed at 
storing it. Or perhaps you see the name, repeat it to yourself, successfully remember 
the street, and get to your destination. An hour later your friend messages you and 
asks what street they need to turn on to meet you. You remember that it started with 
an “S” but not much more. Thus, while you encoded it and stored it, you did not 
process it sufficiently to immediately retrieve it from long-term memory.
Each sub-process is thought to be indexed by a specific memory measure. If 
you were able to recognize the street name when asked if “Sawyer Avenue” was 

146  Duff and Lutchyn
the street that you need to turn at, you encoded it successfully. If you were given 
a hint or cued recall to remember it (e.g., “It started with an ‘S’ ”) and successfully 
named it, we would know that you had stored the name in working memory. 
If you were asked simply to recall the name of the street and replied that it was 
“Sawyer,” you would have successfully retrieved it. Because the process is thought 
to be hierarchical, knowing at what stage the process was disrupted and whether 
the information was easily accessible can be ascertained. For example, if I asked 
you to recall the name of the street and you could not remember, I would know 
that you were not able to retrieve it, but that does not mean that there is not some 
level of memory for the name. If I follow up by reminding you that it started with 
an “S” and you then remember that the street was “Sawyer,” we would know that 
you encoded and stored the name, so you did process it enough to have some 
memory of it; however, it is not highly accessible in your memory so it is difficult 
to retrieve on command.
Memory
Using a limited capacity cognitive framework, it is not surprising that many of the 
studies that have been conducted on media multitasking have looked at how mul-
titasking might affect memory for ads. Because multitasking involves more inputs 
to be processed (compared to single-tasking) it would seem to be a straightfor-
ward prediction that media multitasking would lead to decreased memory for ads, 
particularly if the ad is exposed during the multitasking (during encoding).
Studies that have used memory for the ads have generally found what was 
expected: decreased explicit memory compared to single-task performance. Find-
ings from multitasking research indicate that when secondary tasks are cognitively 
demanding, individuals’ explicit memory for ad messages generally decreases 
(Naveh-Benjamin, Craik, Parretta,  & Tonev, 2000; Shapiro  & Krishnan, 2001; 
Zhang, Jeong, & Fishbein, 2010). This is assumed to be due to the competition for 
limited cognitive resources.
Others have also found that adding tasks can decrease explicit memory. Duff 
and Sar (2015) found a main effect of decreased recognition memory for groups 
multitasking with either one, two, or three windows open to different tasks on a 
large computer screen. Voorveld (2011) showed banner ad recall and recognition 
was lower for a group that listened to the radio while browsing the web page 
compared to a group that just browsed the web page. Likewise, Segijn, Voorveld, 
and Smit (2016) found that ad recognition memory decreased with simultaneous 
use of a tablet and TV compared to single tasking. In addition to the lab stud-
ies, Angell, Gorton, Sauer, Bottomley, and White (2016) used a survey the day 
after a televised soccer match to look at recognition and recall for billboard ads 
that appeared in the game. They found that for people who were doing multi-
tasking with tasks unrelated to the game or that had low social interaction and 

Advertising (In)attention  147
accountability (e.g., looking at a website) showed impaired recall and recognition 
of the ads.
While these results present a general pattern of decreased performance on 
memory tests for ads exposed while multitasking, it might be that there is still an 
effect of the ad during multitasking, but it is not shown through explicit mem-
ory tests. Implicit memory is memory without conscious awareness that can be 
evidenced by changing task performance (Schacter, 1987) or affective response 
(Zajonc, 2001). It is thought to be free from some of the limits of explicit memory 
in that it does not need to be stored and retrieved in the same way. The exposure 
might simply prime or activate an association that is shown through behavior but 
even without any ability to remember the exposure (Shapiro & Krishnan, 2001).
Shapiro and Krishnan (2001) asked participants either to pay attention to both 
an audio message and print advertisements at the same time (divided attention) 
or to just pay attention to the print message while ignoring the audio message 
(selective attention). While both conditions had multiple media exposed simulta-
neously, only one group had goals of attending to both, making them the multi-
tasking group. Explicit memory, measured by the number of correctly identified 
brands, was lower for the multitasking group compared with the single task group. 
Implicit memory, measured by asking participants to select from several brands as 
if they were making a purchase in a store, did not differ between the multi- and 
single-task groups. However, Segijn, Voorveld, and Smit (2016) also looked at 
implicit memory, measured by having people try to identify as quickly as possible 
degraded images of the brand name, and found that it decreased with simultane-
ous screen tasks compared to a single task.
Affect, Evaluation, and Attitude
Using the same framework of limited cognitive processing resources, several stud-
ies have looked at affective or evaluative outcomes for the ad or brand. While 
memory was expected to be impaired due to increased use of processing resources, 
it has generally been predicted that people would have a more positive reaction 
to ads exposed during multitasking. This has been thought to be due to a lack of 
resources available that would normally be used to generate counterarguments 
against the persuasive message.
Chowdhury, Finn, and Olsen (2007) looked at people’s ability to either support 
or counter argue with the message in an ad. In their study, people watched a TV 
program and, for one group, ads played during a commercial break (sequential pres-
entation) while for the other group, the ads played at the same time as the program 
via a split screen (simultaneous presentation). Participants made the same number 
of support statements or counterarguments when the arguments in the ads were 
weak. However, for strong argument ads, participants made fewer support state-
ments in the simultaneous presentation group compared to the sequential group.

148  Duff and Lutchyn
Other researchers have also found that media multitasking leads to less counter 
arguing (Petty, Wells, & Brock, 1976) and also more positive attitude toward the 
persuasive message seen during multitasking compared to single-tasking (Jeong & 
Hwang, 2012, 2015). While these studies found fewer counterarguments and 
higher attitude toward the ad, Segijn, Voorveld, and Smit (2016) found a relation-
ship between the two and showed that the decrease in counter arguing serves as 
a mediator of the effects of multitasking on increased ad attitude and purchase 
intent.
Other studies have also looked at the effects of information overload on pro-
cessing of product messages. These studies used a non-mediated cognitive load 
manipulation to change processing (high cognitive load participants rehearse 
something in working memory, such as remembering an 8-digit number while 
doing the task) but their similar theoretical background, utilizing limited capac-
ity, helps to connect these studies with the media multitasking studies. Amongst 
the findings are that high cognitive load (dual task) participants respond more 
positively to intrusive brand placements in a movie whereas low cognitive load 
participants find the placements too obvious and distracting (Yoon, Choi, & Song, 
2011). Others have found that high cognitive load leads to lowered ability to 
imagine product use (Shiv & Huber, 2000) and decreases the effectiveness of ads 
that engage multiple senses due to lessened ability to think about the sensory mes-
sage in the ad (Elder & Krishna, 2010).
Individual Differences and Audience Level Factors
The increasing use of data in advertising means that targeting will be used more 
than ever. While demographic data was generally used in the past, individual 
interests, motivations, and personality are now more easily used to define an 
audience. Most advertising research on media multitasking has focused on the 
performance aspects of multitasking; however, there are some important impli-
cations for understanding media multitaskers as an audience. Media multitasking 
is growing at a fast pace, but why do people multitask? Why do some people 
prefer multitasking while some find it aversive or overwhelming? In advertising, 
understanding your audience is important in decisions of placement, format, 
and content, and, as noted previously, industry has identified the need to explore 
and understand multitaskers’ “mindset and motivation” (Ipsos MediaCT &  
IAB, 2012, n.p.). Additionally, it is important for us to understand both the 
predictors of this behavior as well as potential downstream effects. In particular, 
people who tend to engage in more frequent media multitasking may also have 
identifiable traits that help to understand them as people in a media context as 
well as show how they may respond and attend to tasks differently than people 
who are less likely to multitask. Beyond implications for ads, it is important for 
multitasking researchers to know potential differences that could affect their 
research outcomes.

Advertising (In)attention  149
Age and Gender
One of the more studied predictors of multitasking is age. Many studies on media 
multitasking are carried out on college students, but studies looking at groups 
beyond college students consistently find that age predicts media multitask-
ing propensity (Carrier, Cheever, Rosen, Benitez, & Chang, 2009; Duff, Yoon, 
Wang,  & Anghelcev, 2014). This makes sense at an intuitive level; generations 
differ in the media environment that they grew up in and therefore what seems 
natural or standard in terms of media use is different. However, it is also possible 
that another cause is cognitive elements of aging that affect ability to multitask. 
Older adults may have increased disruption in working memory due to multitask-
ing and may have lowered flexibility in attention allocation (Prakash et al., 2009). 
It could also be a combination, where the current media environment is actually 
altering the ability of young people to split their attention (Yap & Lim, 2013). If 
the difference is due to the media environment that one grows up in, we would 
expect there to be fewer age-related differences when people who grew up with 
a flexible media environment are themselves older. On the other hand, if it is 
due to cognitive changes that occur to everyone as they age, we would expect 
to continue to see differences by age, even as people who grew up with media 
multitasking become older. It is clear that this is an important area and one that 
deserves further exploration. It also points to the need to do media multitasking 
research on groups outside of college students.
The majority of studies on media multitasking have failed to find differences 
in preferences or performance based on gender (Ophir, Nass, & Wagner, 2009; 
Zhong, Hardin, & Sun, 2011; Sanbonmatsu, Strayer, Medeiros-Ward, & Watson, 
2013). One study did find a difference in 14 to 16 year olds, where females self-
reported more media multitasking than did males (Jeong & Fishbein, 2007). In 
a survey comparing a national sample and a college student sample, it was found 
that gender predicted multitasking in the national sample but not in the college 
sample (Duff et al., 2014). Some unpublished data from our lab suggests that this 
gender difference might exist when asked to say how often one multitasks with 
various media (e.g., “Never-Always”) but disappears when the measure assesses 
how many hours each week one multitasks with those same media. However, it is 
unclear why gender differences only appear on on one of the self-report measures. 
Thus, more work is needed in this area.
Traits and Preferences
Most work on traits that predict media multitasking has been done with col-
lege students. These studies have found several predictive traits, such as technol-
ogy innovativeness and use of SNS (Zhong et al., 2011), neuroticism (Poposki, 
Oswald, & Chen, 2009; Wang & Tchernev, 2012), and attentional impulsiveness 
(Sanbonmatsu et al., 2013). Duff et al. (2014) found that creativity, personal control, 

150  Duff and Lutchyn
and need for simplicity were also predictors of media multitasking in college stu-
dents. However, of those three, only creativity was a predictor of multitasking in 
a national sample. Even in the subset of the national sample that was matched for 
age to the college sample (18–29), personal control and need for simplicity were 
not predictors. This means that we might need to be careful about generalizing 
results from college students to the larger population.
The trait most consistently found to correlate with high levels of media mul-
titasking is sensation seeking. Sensation seeking is “the need for varied, novel, and 
complex sensations and experiences” (Zuckerman, 1979, p. 10). It has been found 
to be a significant predictor of media multitasking in college students (Strayer & 
Watson, 2012; Sanbonmatsu et al., 2013; Duff et al., 2014), 14 to 16 year olds 
(Jeong & Fishbein, 2007), and a U.S. national sample (Duff et al., 2014). It is inter-
esting that sensation seeking is a consistent predictor even outside of college-age 
students because sensation seeking tends to generally decline with age (Roth, 
Hammelstein, & Brähler, 2007). It has been found that the sensation value of mes-
sage content should match with the need for sensation in the audience (Dono-
hew, Lorch, & Palmgreen, 2006) thus sensation seeking could be an important 
area for future work in advertising.
Only one study that we are aware of has looked at advertising-specific behav-
iors with media multitaskers. Duff et al. (2014) found that higher media multitask-
ing was a predictor of belief in advertising utility. Both a college student sample 
and a national sample showed a significant correlation between multitasking pro-
pensity and the belief that advertising could be useful. Because this is a correla-
tion, it is not possible to know if this is due to increased exposure to media and 
advertising or if it is due to a separate factor that underlies both. We will discuss 
this finding later but it is clear that more work needs to be done connecting 
advertising and message-specific variables to media multitasking.
Task Performance
In addition to work identifying traits that may contribute to, or be outcomes of, 
media multitasking, there is research identifying whether there are behavioral 
and performance differences in heavy media multitaskers (HMM) versus light 
media multitaskers (LMM), particularly in terms of attention. This work can be 
thought of in terms of limited capacity in that it generally takes the perspective 
that media multitasking will overwhelm or overload users and thus deplete learn-
ing or performance.
Educational performance is one area that has been studied in connection with 
multitasking. In an observational study of middle, high school, and college stu-
dents during a 15-minute session of studying, those who were more likely to 
move off-task from their homework were also more likely to have stated a prefer-
ence for task switching (Rosen, Carrier, & Cheever, 2013). Another study found 

Advertising (In)attention  151
that multitasking with social technologies during class time was negatively related 
to GPA (Junco, 2012).
In terms of performance ability, perhaps the most influential study on media 
multitaskers showed that heavy media multitaskers (HMM) actually perform 
worse on focusing and attention-switching tasks compared to light media multi-
taskers (LMM), though the authors note that HMM should have more practice 
with switching attention (Ophir et al., 2009). Slower, less efficient task switching 
and less ability to focus on a target while ignoring distractors may be a result of 
HMMs’ inability to filter out task-irrelevant information and involuntary atten-
tional breadth (Lin, 2009; Ophir et al., 2009). Other research has also shown 
HMMs perform worse on tasks that involve focusing and blocking out distrac-
tions, suggesting lowered executive control (Sanbonmatsu et al., 2013). Other 
research has shown potential interventions such as mindfulness training that can 
help HMM increase their short-term ability to focus on a single task (Gorman & 
Green, 2016).
Unanswered Questions and Future Research
While limited capacity is clearly a useful framework for multitasking research, 
this is not the only way to think about it. The interactions between people and 
media are complex, and there are multiple facets that need to be understood. An 
overreliance on limited capacity as the guiding force behind media multitasking 
research is concerning in that it creates a narrative that may lead to accepting the 
findings from those studies as the way that multitasking affects persuasive messages. 
However, using other perspectives and frames could lead to future research using 
different manipulations, or different outcome variables and considering other fac-
tors in media and people and provide a more full picture of multitasking causes 
and effects.
A few studies have used additional variables or perspectives outside of lim-
ited capacity and have found outcomes that would not necessarily be predicted 
using a one-size-fits-all version of limited capacity. Angell et al. (2016) conducted 
a survey to look at memory for soccer sponsor ads during multitasking. They 
found the typically expected lowered ad memory for people who multitasked 
during the game, except in one group who multitasked with media that were 
relevant to the game and had high social accountability (e.g., tweeting about the 
game). For this group, memory for the ads exposed during the game was actually 
improved. The authors note that it might be because the content of both tasks 
was congruent so it reinforced, rather than detracted from, memory formation.
Other factors may also change ad memory while multitasking. People who 
tend to be analytic processers tend to focus on the features of specific items and 
divorce them from context. Holistic processers tend to focus more on context 
and the relationship between objects and their field (Masuda, Gonzalez, Kwan, & 

152  Duff and Lutchyn
Nisbett, 2008). In terms of perceptual processing, holistic processors tend to dis-
tribute visual attention more broadly (McKone et al., 2010) whereas analytic 
processors show more concentrated eye movements on focal items (Masuda & 
Nisbett, 2001). Analytic and holistic processing is a trait in that people have a 
tendency to process more one way or another. This difference is largely studied in 
terms of differences between cultures, but processing can also change temporarily 
with context. For example, people in a positive mood tend to process more holis-
tically, while people in a negative mood process more analytically (Gasper, 2004).
In a study using multiple windows with separate tasks, it was shown that while 
analytic processors performed as would be expected, showing a decrease in ad 
memory when adding tasks, holistic processors showed no decrease in memory 
when adding tasks. A follow-up study found that people in a positive mood who 
were processing the screen more holistically showed no drop off in ad memory 
whether they had one, two, or three tasks on screen (Duff & Sar, 2015). In this 
case, the difference was found when multitasking was thought of as a perceptual 
process and not just a cognitive process. Processing style is just one factor that 
may change how people respond in a multitasking situation; there are likely many 
more that will affect how people process ads while multitasking. Differences in 
the type of ad message, the goals of the person in why they are engaging with 
media, the properties of the media, and myriad other unexplored areas are in need 
of research.
Similar to memory outcomes, a focus on limited capacity may not reveal fac-
tors in improved liking for ads exposed during multitasking. The current work 
shows a strong pattern of increased evaluation of ads, with the explanation that 
overloaded capacity keeps people from being able to generate counterarguments 
against a message. However, this would also seem to imply that the ads themselves 
are highly persuasive and people simply accept things that they do not gener-
ate conscious counterarguments against. Yet there are likely many other reasons 
as well. The only study to look specifically at the connection between the lack 
of counterarguments and increased evaluation (Segijn, Voorveld, & Smit, 2016) 
noted that the model only explained 11.5 percent of the variance. Just a few other 
studies have looked at alternative explanations.
Voorveld (2011) found more positive attitude toward ads exposed in more 
than one medium simultaneously (radio and web display ad) with the rationale 
that they prime one another, and similar messages in different formats could con-
tribute to complexity. Chinchanchokchai, Duff, and Sar (2015) looked at mul-
titasking as increasing overall task enjoyment. Multitaskers focused less on the 
passage of time and felt that time was passing more quickly than did people who 
did a single task. This feeling of time passing quickly led to greater task enjoy-
ment and more positive attitude toward the ads exposed to during the task. We 
are exposed to thousands of brand messages each day and likely do not form 
counterarguments against most of them, so what else might be happening during 
multitasking that could lead to improved liking of ads?

Advertising (In)attention  153
Limited Capacity
The application of limited capacity to media multitasking can be problematic 
when there is an assumption of multiple task demand, i.e., that any two tasks 
would be worse than performing any single task. This ignores the reality of media 
in which any given experience or content varies widely on how perceptually 
complex it is, what senses are engaged, how much interaction there is, if it is active 
or passive to use, motivation to use, etc. Additionally, it can be tempting to think 
of the resource pool as starting with a baseline of all resources free and ready to 
devote to a task and that adding task demand creates a linear shift up to a depleted 
pool with no resources left to devote to tasks. Media content varies widely in 
terms of cognitive demand as well as perceptual demand. Motivation and ability 
will interact with this demand from the media being used. For example, if you 
are a chemist and see an academic article on your area of chemistry, you would 
eagerly dive in. If another person with no interest and/or knowledge in chemistry 
had to read the same thing, it would feel like a chore. In these two cases, the same 
amount of resources are not likely to be utilized, and it is also likely that one may 
more eagerly embrace a secondary task.
While it is common to see the term “overload” in the context of media mul-
titasking, it is interesting to think about drivers of media use to begin with. In 
fact, it is likely that “underload” is a more apt driver of much media use, including 
media multitasking. In one psychology study, people had to listen to a long phone 
message about who would be attending an upcoming event (Andrade, 2009). One 
group simply listened to the message and did nothing else while the other group 
was told that they should copy shapes while listening. Even though the listening-
only group had more spare resources, they had worse memory for the names from 
the message. In this case, adding a small additional task actually helped people 
keep their focus on the uninteresting primary task (Andrade, 2009).
One study on motivations for task switching while doing homework showed 
that boredom was one of the most common reasons given (Rosen et al., 2013). 
This is important because it highlights that we cannot assume that any single task 
is a baseline of optimal load and anything above it is overload. In fact, people may 
be using media in a very active and intentional way, multitasking in order to reach 
optimal processing or engagement when the first task is not interesting or engag-
ing enough. Adding tasks in this context may mean that the additional tasks are 
actually improving the situation from underload to optimal load.
Optimal stimulation levels (e.g., Mehrabian & Russell, 1974) could speak to 
the idea of both low and high load being experienced as aversive. One study 
found that people would rather administer electric shocks to themselves rather 
than be alone in an empty room with nothing else to do (Wilson et al., 2014). 
Multitasking is one way to increase stimulation, and as noted earlier, higher need 
for sensation or stimulation is correlated with heavier media multitasking (San-
bonmatsu et al., 2013; Duff et al., 2014), indicating that they may be self-correcting  
the lack of stimulation from single tasks.

154  Duff and Lutchyn
When doing a dull or unengaging primary task, people may also turn inward 
to mind-wandering or task-unrelated thought. Mind wandering is “a shift in the 
focus of attention away from the here and now toward one’s private thoughts and 
feelings” (Smallwood, O’Connor, Sudberry, & Obonsawin, 2007, p. 818). Mind 
wandering can actually use a large amount of cognitive resources when it occurs 
(Smallwood et al., 2007). There is some evidence that memory for an unengag-
ing ad is improved by adding a second task, thus decreasing the mind wandering 
that occurred while sitting through the uninteresting ads. This is particularly true 
when those secondary tasks were perceptual rather than cognitive (Chinchana-
chokchai, 2013).
Breadth vs. Depth
The other area that will be useful to rethink for multitasking research is the idea of 
desired outcomes. Media multitasking often means that there are fewer resources 
available for a task and that attention may be diffused rather than focused. Much 
of the current work in the field looks at what resources that might take away 
from a specific primary task; however, it is also possible that there are positives to 
that distributed attention, that instead of just one thing losing, that other things 
could gain.
Heavy media multitaskers (HMM) tend to be slower and less efficient at task 
switching, (Ophir et al., 2009) and this may be due to their inability to filter 
out irrelevant or distracting information (Sanbonmatsu et al., 2013). This means 
that HMM are worse at focusing on a single task because they have a hard time 
ignoring non-task information (distracters). However, while this implies that they 
might be worse at “depth” tasks, their “breadth” sampling of information may be 
a more democratic information processing in that any information could poten-
tially be of use rather than selectively processing only certain goal items (Lin, 
2009). This can hurt performance on goal-directed tasks of focus, but it might be 
useful in other ways. In one study, people were told to complete a task and not to 
focus on an “irrelevant” sound which actually helped to predict when the target 
would appear (Lui & Wong, 2012). This sound was used better by the HMM, 
giving them better performance than LMM; however, when the sound was not 
present, HMM performed worse on the task than LMM (Lui & Wong, 2012).
For advertising, this could mean that ads, which are not the focus of most 
people, could be better used by HMM. Indeed, perceptions of the usefulness of 
advertising in general are higher for HMM than LMM (Duff et al., 2014). Addi-
tonally, sampling broadly (versus deeply) could have other benefits. For example, 
high creative achievement has been shown to negatively correlate with ability to 
screen out irrelevant stimuli (Carson, Peterson, & Higgins, 2003). This has been 
similarly shown with creative mentality being a predictor of heavy media multi-
tasking (Duff et al., 2014). The role of creativity, content, and multitasking could 
be an interesting area for advertising researchers to explore in the future. There are 

Advertising (In)attention  155
likely other benefits, drawbacks, and overall implications for media in considering 
breadth versus depth approaches to media interactions.
Technology and Advertising Avoidance: The 
“Adpocalypse”
People are finding new ways to do old things. One growing response to advertis-
ing is to avoid it through ad blocking (Sloane, 2015). While one could previously 
limit exposure to advertising by fast forwarding past the ads in a recorded TV 
show or quickly turning the page of a magazine, there was usually some minimal 
level of exposure to the ad, and it took effort to reduce ad exposure each time 
ads were presented. Now selective exposure to advertising can be accomplished 
through more automatic and complete means such as using ad-blocking software 
or by paying premium prices for ad-free content. Use of these methods to avoid 
ads means that the ads are never even presented to the audience, and avoidance is 
complete so there is no exposure. As the use of these methods grows, anxiety on 
the part of advertisers has grown as well.
Whether using an automated or mechanical way to limit exposure or how 
much attention is given to an ad, this response to advertising is termed “advertis-
ing avoidance” and has been defined as all the actions that media users employ 
to reduce exposure to ad content (Speck & Elliott, 1997, pp. 61–62). In addition 
to more mechanical means of limiting exposure to ads, such as using ad-blocking 
software or hitting the Skip button a few seconds into a video pre-roll ad, people 
can also selectively attend to and ignore ads to which they are exposed. When 
exposure is completely avoided (such as when the ad is blocked), an ad cannot 
have any effect. When exposure exists but avoidance occurs by selective attention, 
there is the potential for effects, but there is debate about whether those effects 
may be positive or negative for ads.
When Apple announced that their iOS would support ad-blocking apps, the 
ad world exploded with concern. Headlines read, “Confusion reigns as Apple puts 
the spotlight on mobile ad blocking” (Morrison, 2015) and “Advertisers sweat as 
ad blockers proliferate” (Gillies, 2015). In the U.S. it has been estimated that more 
than 25 percent of internet users have downloaded ad-blocking software (Sloane, 
2015), and additional ad-blocking capabilities for mobile browsing could further 
facilitate adoption of ad blocking. Some websites, such as The Washington Post, 
have responded to this by blocking content for those users who were using ad 
blockers (Zeitlin, 2015). The Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB) has considered 
multiple options, including suing ad-blocking companies. Others have suggested 
that consumers see ads as a distraction and that education about how the revenue 
from ads is used to support the individuals who create the content or run the site 
could be a way to stem the tide of ad blocking (Peterson & Fishman, 2015). In 
fact, the most popular ad-blocking app, Peace, was pulled from the iTunes store 
after the developer said that he realized how it might hurt the revenue of smaller 

156  Duff and Lutchyn
online content creators who depend on ad dollars (Hern, 2016). The ad industry 
has suggested that more meaningful content, more creativity, and relevance will 
help stem the problem (Perlberg, 2016).
Ignoring Ads
Seeing an ad is usually not the primary reason to access content. Rather, there are 
other reasons to use media: to watch a show, read a blog, post an update for friends, 
etc. So an ad that is not directly part of the content could be seen as distracting the 
audience from the purpose for using that media. Limiting exposure or attention 
to ads could help limit that distraction and free up the audience for their intended 
purpose of the media use, engaging with the primary content. Speck and Elliott 
(1997) found that search hindrance is a significant predictor of ad avoidance in all 
media. A similar variable, perceived goal impediment, was also found to explain 
ad avoidance on the internet (Cho & Cheon, 2004). Edwards, Li, and Lee (2002) 
also found that perceived intrusiveness leads viewers to avoid ads. However, most 
of this research relied only on a consumer’s retrospective self-reports of why they 
think that they avoid ads. While this is useful for us to begin understanding the 
reasons why people might avoid ads, if they are not always aware of the ads that 
they are ignoring, there might be effects that are not connected to the conscious 
choice to ignore ads. Instead, it might be that people simply ignore the ads with-
out processing them because they are not what they want to see.
While completely eliminating exposure to an ad would lead to no effects of 
the ad, exposure to the ad while concentrating on other content should lead 
to some outcome for the exposed advertisement. Most studies looking at ads 
that appear without being a part of the main content looked at the ads as being 
incidental or passive exposures. The idea being that they were not actively being 
processed or attended to, but they may gain some effect simply by being present 
and processed at a very low level. Ads are sold based on exposure, and the cur-
rent main concerns for digital ads are ad-blocking and viewability, both of which 
are related to basic exposure of the ad (Peterson & Fishman, 2015). Ads that are 
exposed but not fully processed have been thought to potentially lead to positive 
outcomes through the mere exposure effect or perceptual fluency.
Passive Exposure or Active Avoidance?
So what happens when an ad appears, but the person is trying to do something 
that does not involve that ad? For example, if they are playing a game on their 
phone and a banner appears at the bottom of the screen, do they notice the ad 
and process it? Do they simply not notice it, or do they actively fight paying 
attention to it, knowing that it could cause them to lose focus on the game? The 
literature would suggest that the positive or negative outcome could depend on 
the response, even at a pre-conscious level.

Advertising (In)attention  157
The first response, consciously noticing the ad (in our example, noticing the 
banner at the bottom of the videogame screen) has been the most commonly 
studied response. This assumes attention has been directed toward the ad and the 
person is consciously processing the ad. Because we are more interested in explor-
ing inattention, we will not go into detail of these responses. However, research 
using the persuasion knowledge model (PKM) might suggest that the person 
would register the ad as being put there to persuade them, and they may then have 
a negative or positive attitude toward the ad based on their judgment of the ad’s 
appropriateness, etc. (see Ham, Nelson, & Das, 2015 for an overview of measuring 
persuasion knowledge). Others have used reactance theory to look at whether ads 
that are unable to be avoided (e.g. pop-ups) cause a feeling of lack of control and 
backlash against the ad/brand (e.g. Edwards, Li, & Lee, 2002). However, there is 
evidence that people do not look directly at most display ads and are often not 
consciously aware of the ads that appeared.
The mere exposure effect (MEE) and perceptual fluency are used to explain 
why we might expect effects for ads that are exposed but not attended to by 
the audience. MEE suggests that simply by being exposed, a stimulus becomes 
more familiar and this increased familiarity increases feelings of approach that is 
attached to the object at a pre-conscious level (Zajonc, 2001). Similarly, percep-
tual fluency predicts positive exposure effects but through an increased ease in 
processing the exposed item. This increased ease in processing the next time the 
object is encountered is interpreted as “liking.” In fact, positive effects have been 
found for ads incidentally exposed in magazines, product placements, and online 
(Janiszewski, 1990; Shapiro, MacInnis,  & Heckler, 1997; Matthes, Schemer,  & 
Wirth, 2007).
However, another line of work, distractor devaluation and inhibition, suggests 
opposite effects. Objects that are ignored are rated as less liked than objects that 
were attended to or never seen before (Raymond, Fenske,  & Tavassoli, 2003). 
This is thought to be due to the inhibition of items that are not part of the goal; 
thus, an ad that appeared on a web page might not be liked, it might actually be 
disliked more after the exposure even without awareness of having been exposed 
to the ad before. Indeed, Duff and Faber (2011) found that people who had goals 
of finding specific information on a news site disliked ads that had appeared on 
those pages even though they did not have a conscious memory of them (they 
could not recognize them). So when might there be positive effects, and when 
might there be negative effects of ad exposure? One thing to look at is the goal 
of the user. If they have no specific goal, they are simply browsing or looking for 
whatever might catch their interest in a bottom-up way, the ad will more likely to 
have a positive outcome. However, if they had a specific goal, they are engaging 
in a top-down manner, the ad is more likely to have a negative outcome. In that 
case, the user’s goals would dictate the outcome even for the same content. Addi-
tionally, properties of the media also matter; a more perceptually complex video 
game led to negative ratings for display ads whereas a perceptually simple video 

158  Duff and Lutchyn
game led to more positive ratings. Many other factors might also help to predict 
what the outcome could be, and hopefully future research will continue to shed 
light on these factors.
Tech Trends
How we think about attention in advertising—from the consumers’, the research-
ers’, and the practitioners’ perspectives—will likely change in the near future due 
to some dramatic developments in the technology (i.e., proliferation of smart 
devices, and increasing adoption of personal digital assistants powered by artificial 
intelligence). Smart objects are products that are equipped with sensors and are 
able to modify their performance based on their environment, task, and various 
user-related parameters, such as mood, arousal, and many others. More and more 
objects, in our everyday lives—from phones to cars, refrigerators, and even entire 
homes—are re-engineered to become “smart” and able to capture many types of 
rich data in real time, from the user’s location, vitals and posture, to his mood, gaze, 
and speech (Darwish & Hassanien, 2011).
Smart interconnected objects—both public and personal—will produce a very 
large volume of data in real time, all of which will need to be integrated, inter-
preted, and presented to the consumer in a usable format. This task is mainly 
imposed on personal digital assistants powered by artificial intelligence. The effi-
ciency and quality of the data analysis made by artificial intelligence can be very 
impressive. For example, Cortana, Microsoft’s virtual agent powered by artificial 
intelligence, correctly predicted the winners of the first 14 matches of the 2014 
FIFA World Cup knockout stage, including the semi-finals (Backaitis, 2014).
Virtual agents like Cortana, Apple’s Siri, Google Now, and Amazon’s Alexa will 
serve as a primary interface through which consumers will interact with their 
smart devices and, more broadly, the world around them (Nadella, 2015). At the 
writing of this chapter, virtual assistants have relatively limited capabilities. For 
example, Cortana can help you set a reminder, find files on your PC, manage your 
calendar, send a message or dial a number for you, solve a mathematical equation, 
convert currency, search the internet, and select news based on your interests. 
Admittedly, these are rather simple actions. However, due to massive ongoing 
efforts in sensing, connectivity, and machine learning, agents will eventually turn 
into a true gateway to the internet of things and people, relatively independent 
and able to make decisions. Ultimately, an agent will be able to not only respond 
to its owner’s needs, but it will even anticipate them and be proactive in present-
ing information and services to its owner.
A world full of smart connected devices and curated by personal intelligent 
agents will bring dramatic changes to how consumers interact with the media, 
with the ads, and the products—affecting the issues we discussed above. If the 
objects around us, including media-viewing devices, recognize who we are, 
understand our speech, can continuously read our mood and vitals, know our 

Advertising (In)attention  159
likes and needs, obtain similar information from other smart objects, and then act 
upon this knowledge, the relevance and timeliness of the promotional content 
presented to consumers can become unprecedented.
Consider the following scenario: A consumer enters a supermarket, her smart-
phone automatically recognizes the location, and compiles a shopping list from 
several sources. It sends a request to the smart refrigerator for information on 
what is needed. Then it retrieves information about the upcoming child’s birthday 
party from its calendar, and adds “cake and party supplies” to the list. Finally, it also 
checks the consumer’s daily vitals and the doctor’s notes, and then recommends 
foods that meet certain criteria (e.g., are rich in iron or low in sodium). As the 
consumer is walking between the aisles, the display ads around her change in real 
time, and her smartphone immediately receives coupons for the most relevant 
products. At the same time, the digital assistant alerts the consumer that the prices 
in another grocery store are lower and calculates how much the consumer would 
save if she shops elsewhere.
Of course, the idea of the personalized just-in-time message is not new; most 
e-commerce websites (e.g., Amazon, Netflix) already use technology that allows 
them to identify and track individual shoppers to provide them with a person-
alized service and shopping suggestions. However, smart products and personal 
digital assistants are taking this experience to a new level. First, information col-
lected by the digital agent will not be limited to options available from a single 
retailer, like those at Amazon or Netflix. Second, new technologies will be more 
timely or even proactive in their suggestions, anticipating needs rather than wait-
ing for a consumer to start shopping (“I see that you are in the retail store. Ron’s 
birthday is coming. Do you want to buy him a card?”). Third, they will be sig-
nificantly more insightful, as they can access and integrate additional information 
about the consumer that is usually not available to e-commerce websites (or even 
to the consumer’s self-introspection), e.g., current location, mood, calendar, family 
needs, dietary restrictions, vitals, and so on.
Finally, because digital assistants can communicate with a number of smart 
objects and then integrate all relevant information about the user, they can poten-
tially modify our overall media consumption experience, e.g., stop and resume 
video based on the user’s (in)attention, display ads based on the user’s current 
needs or interests, select the ad version to match the person’s mood, and so on. 
When the promotional content is highly relevant, tailored and timely, advertis-
ing becomes much less intrusive, and the consumer is less motivated to avoid it. 
However, it is also possible that this makes advertising more integrated and more 
difficult to ignore, leading people to work harder to eliminate its effects. Addi-
tionally, if every ad one sees is relevant, timely, and engaging, on what basis will 
a person ultimately make their decision? In this way, advertising would be more 
akin to information and much less like persuasion.
Avoidance of advertising, especially by mechanical means, will continue to 
grow along with technology and should be kept in mind. As advertising messages 

160  Duff and Lutchyn
are seen in different places, from different sources, and as a source of media con-
tent (instead of just being placed in that content), there is an element of increased 
engagement and interest on behalf of the user. However, it is likely that there will 
also be increased pushback as people find it more difficult to escape from ads. For 
example, one augmented reality app allows users to block ads from their everyday 
environment—a friend’s bottle of Coca-Cola would simply look like a bottle 
with a blurry red label (Cuthbertson, 2015)
Advertising formats are changing and will continue to become more engaging, 
relevant, and integrated into content. However, many people do not consider ads 
to be the main thing that they want to interact with. Media multitasking as a way 
to control and shift attention will continue to rise, though it is likely that we will 
see new technologies that will allow for that attention management to be done 
in a more intentional way, alerting the user when attention seems to wane or 
even switching for the person. Understanding how indirect and partial attention 
change advertising effects will continue to be important.
References
Andrade, J. (2009). What does doodling do? Applied Cognitive Psychology, 24(1), 100–106.
Angell, R., Gorton, M., Sauer, J., Bottomley, P., & White, J. (2016). Don’t distract me when 
I’m media multitasking: Toward a theory for raising advertising recall and recognition. 
Journal of Advertising, 45(2), 198–210.
Attention. (2016). American psychological society’s glossary of psychological terms. 
Retrieved from http://www.apa.org/research/action/glossary.aspx.
Backaitis, V. (2014, July  11). Why Microsoft’s Cortana is 14 for 14 calling World Cup 
matches. CMS Wire. Retrieved from http://www.cmswire.com/cms/big-data/why-
microsofts-cortana-is-14-for-14-calling-world-cup-matches-025853.php.
Barry, T. E. (1987). The development of the hierarchy of effects: An historical perspective. 
Current Issues and Research in Advertising, 10(2), 251–296.
Carrier, L. M., Cheever, N. A., Rosen, L. D., Benitez, S., & Chang, J. (2009). Multitasking 
across generations: Multitasking choices and difficulty ratings in three generations of 
Americans. Computers in Human Behavior, 25(2), 483–489.
Carson, S. H., Peterson, J. B., & Higgins, D. M. (2003). Decreased latent inhibition is asso-
ciated with increased creative achievement in high-functioning individuals. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 85(3), 499–506.
Chinchanachokchai, B. (2013). Where was my mind? The role of perceptual load on mind wan-
dering and consumer memory for advertising content. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation. 
Urbana, IL: University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Chinchanachokchai, S., Duff, B. R., & Sar, S. (2015). The effect of multitasking on time 
perception, enjoyment, and ad evaluation. Computers in Human Behavior, 45, 185–191.
Cho, C. H., & Cheon, H. J. (2004). Why do people avoid advertising on the internet? Jour-
nal of Advertising, 33(4), 89–97.
Chowdhury, R., Finn, A., & Olsen, D. G. (2007). Investigating the simultaneous presenta-
tion of advertising and television programming. Journal of Advertising, 36(3), 85–96.
Craik, F. I. M., Govoni, R., Naveh-Benjamin, M., & Anderson, N. D. (1996). The effects 
of divided attention on encoding and retrieval processes in human memory. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General, 125(2), 159–180.

Advertising (In)attention  161
Cuthbertson, A. (2015, January 23). Brand Killer: Augmented reality goggles create real-
world AdBlock. International Business Times. Retrieved from http://www.ibtimes.
co.uk/brand-killer-augmented-reality-goggles-create-real-world-adblock-1484844.
Darwish, A., & Hassanien, A. E. (2011). Wearable and implantable wireless sensor network 
solutions for healthcare monitoring. Sensors, 11(6), 5561–5595.
Deloitte. (2015). Digital democracy survey: A multi-generational view of consumer tech-
nology, media and telecom trends. Retrieved from http://www.deloitte.com/us/
tmttrends.
Donohew, L., Lorch, E. P., & Palmgreen, P. (2006). Applications of a theoretic model of 
information exposure to health interventions. Human Communication Research, 24(3), 
454–468.
Duff, B. R. L., & Faber, R. J. (2011). Missing the mark: Advertising avoidance and distractor 
devaluation. Journal of Advertising, 40(2), 51–62.
Duff, B. R. L., & Sar, S. (2015). Seeing the big picture: Multitasking and perceptual process-
ing influences on ad recognition. Journal of Advertising, 44(3), 173–184.
Duff, B. R. L., Yoon, G., Wang, Z., & Anghelcev, G. (2014). Doing it all: An exploratory 
study of predictors of media multitasking. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 14(1), 1–13.
Edwards, S. M., Li, H., & Lee, J. H. (2002). Forced exposure and psychological reactance: 
Antecedents and consequences of the perceived intrusiveness of pop-up ads. Journal of 
Advertising, 31(3), 83–95.
Ehrenberg, A. S. C. (1974). Repetitive advertising and the consumer. Journal of Advertising 
Research, 14(2), 25–34.
Elder, R. S., & Krishna, A. (2010). The effects of advertising copy on sensory thoughts and 
perceived taste. Journal of Consumer Research, 36(5), 748–756.
Gasper, K. (2004). Do you see what I see? Affect and visual information processing. Cogni-
tion and Emotion, 18(3), 405–421.
GfK MRI. (2012). Tablets and multi-tasking. The GfK MRI iPanel reporter: A quarterly 
report on consumers, tablets and e-readers. Retrieved from http://www.gfkmri.com/
assets/PDF/iPanelReporter_Tablets%20&%20Multitasking.pdf.
Gillies, T. (2015, October 25). Advertisers sweat as ad blockers proliferate. CNBC. Retrieved 
from http://www.cnbc.com/2015/10/23/advertisers-sweat-as-ad-blockers-proliferate. 
html.
Gorman, T. E., & Green, C. S. (2016). Short-term mindfulness intervention reduces the 
negative attentional effects associated with heavy media multitasking. Scientific Reports, 
6, 24542.
Ham, C. D., Nelson, M. R., & Das, S. (2015). How to measure persuasion knowledge. Inter-
national Journal of Advertising, 34(1), 17–53.
Hern, A. (2016, January 1). A proxy war: Apple ad-blocking software scares publishers but 
rival Google is target. The Guardian. Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/
technology/2016/jan/01/publishers-apple-ad-blockers-target-google.
Heussner, K. M. (2012, February  28). Americans are the biggest mobile multitaskers. 
Adweek. Retrieved from http://www.adweek.com/news/technology/americans-are- 
biggest-mobile-multitaskers-138593.
Ipsos MediaCT & IAB. (2012). Screens: What are people doing. . . and why? Presentation of 
findings. Retrieved from http://www.iab.net/media/file/Simultaneous-screen-IAB-
Innovation-Day-v19.pdf.
James, W. (1890). Principles of psychology. New York, NY: Dover.
Janiszewski, C. (1990). The influence of nonattended material on the processing of adver-
tising claims. Journal of Marketing Research, 27, 263–278.

162  Duff and Lutchyn
Jeong, S., & Fishbein, F. (2007). Predictors of multitasking with media: Media factors and 
audience factors. Media Psychology, 10(3), 364–384.
Jeong, S., & Hwang, Y. (2012). Does multitasking increase or decrease persuasion? Effects 
of multitasking on comprehension and counterarguing. Journal of Communication, 62, 
571–587.
Jeong, S., & Hwang, Y. (2015). Multitasking and persuasion: The role of structural interfer-
ence. Media Psychology, 18(4), 451–474.
John, J. (2016, March  29). In today’s digital world, the sales funnel is dead. Advertising 
Age. Retrieved from http://adage.com/article/digitalnext/today-s-digital-world-sales- 
funnel-dead/303301/
Johnston, W. A., & Dark, V. J. (1986). Selective attention. Annual Review of Psychology, 37(1), 
43–75.
Junco, R. (2012). In-class multitasking and academic performance. Computers in Human 
Behavior, 28(6), 2236–2243.
Kahneman, D. (1973). Attention and effort. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Kazakova, S., & Cauberghe, V. (2013). Media convergence and media multitasking. In S. 
Diehl & M. Karmasin (Eds.), Media and convergence management (pp. 177–188). Berlin: 
Springer.
Konig, C. J., Buhner, M., & Murling, G. (2005). Working memory, fluid intelligence, and 
attention are predictors of multitasking performance, but polychronicity and extraver-
sion are not. Human Performance, 18(3), 243–266.
Lang, A. (2000). The limited capacity model of mediated message processing. Journal of 
Communication, 50(1), 46–70.
Lin, L. (2009). Breadth-biased versus focused cognitive control in media multitasking 
behaviors. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(37), 15521–15522.
Lui, K. F., & Wong, A. C. N. (2012). Does media multitasking always hurt? A positive cor-
relation between multitasking and multisensory integration. Psychonomic Bulletin  & 
Review, 19(4), 647–653.
Masuda, T., Gonzalez, R., Kwan, L., & Nisbett, R. E. (2008). Culture and aesthetic prefer-
ence: Comparing the attention to context of East Asians and Americans. Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 34(9), 1260–1275.
Masuda, T., & Nisbett, R. E. (2001). Attending holistically versus analytically: Comparing 
the context sensitivity of Japanese and Americans. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 81(5), 922–934.
Matthes, J., Schemer, C., & Wirth, W. (2007). More than meets the eye: Investigating the 
hidden impact of brand placements in television magazines. International Journal of 
Advertising, 26(4), 477–503.
McDowd, J. M., & Birren, J. E. (1990). Aging and attentional process. In J. E. Birren & K. 
W. Schaie (Eds.), Handbook of the psychology of aging (3rd ed., pp. 222–233). New York, 
NY: Academic Press.
McKone, E., Davies, A. A., Fernando, D., Aalders, R., Leung, H., Wickramariyaratne, T., & 
Platow, M. J. (2010). Asia has the global advantage: Race and visual attention. Vision 
Research, 50(16), 1540–1549.
Mehrabian, A., & Russell, J. A. (1974). An approach to environmental psychology. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Millward Brown. (2014). AdReaction: Marketing in a multiscreen world. Retrieved from 
https://www.millwardbrown.com/AdReaction/2014/#/
Monsell, S. (2003). Task switching. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(3), 134–140.

Advertising (In)attention  163
Morrison, M. (2015, September  8). Confusion reigns as Apple puts the spotlight on 
mobile ad blocking. Advertising Age. Retrieved from http://adage.com/article/digital/
confusion-reigns-apple-spotlight-mobile-ad-blocking/300167/
Nadella, S. (2015, May). Speech presented at Lenovo Tech World 2015 conference in Bei-
jing, China.
Naveh-Benjamin, M., Craik, F. I., Perretta, J. G., & Tonev, S. T. (2000). The effects of divided 
attention on encoding and retrieval processes: The resiliency of retrieval processes. The 
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology: Section A, 53(3), 609–625.
Navon, D., & Miller, J. (1987). Role of outcome conflict in dual-task interference. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 13(3), 435–448.
Nielsen Cross Platform Report. (2012). The cross-platform community: A  new con-
nected community. Nielsen. Retrieved from http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/
news/2012/the-cross-platform-report-a-new-connected-community.html.
Ophir, E., Nass, C., & Wagner, A. D. (2009). Cognitive control in media multitaskers. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(37), 15583–15587.
Pashler, H. (1994). Dual-task interference in simple tasks: Data and theory. Psychological 
Bulletin, 116(2), 220–244.
Perlberg, S. (2016, June 22). Advertising isn’t dead, but market is changing. The Wall Street Jour-
nal. Retrieved from http://www.wsj.com/articles/advertising-isnt-dead-but-market- 
is-changing-1466610850.
Peterson, T.,  & Fishman, C. (2015, June  19). Ad blocking is a growing problem. 
What’s the fix? Advertising Age. Retrieved from http://adage.com/article/media/
publishers-weigh-ways-fight-ad-blocking/299116/
Petty, R. E., Wells, G. L., & Brock, T. C. (1976). Distraction can enhance or reduce yielding 
to propaganda: Thought disruption versus effort justification. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 34(5), 874–884.
Poposki, E., Frederick Oswald, F., & Chen, H. (2009). Neuroticism negatively affects multi-
tasking performance through state anxiety. Navy Personnel Research, Studies and Technology, 
9(3), 29. Retrieved from http://www.nprst.navy.mil/Reports/NPRST-TN-09–3.pdf.
Prakash, R. S., Erickson, K. I., Colcombe, S. J., Kim, J. S., Voss, M. W., & Kramer, A. F. (2009). 
Age-related differences in the involvement of the prefrontal cortex in attentional con-
trol. Brain and Cognition, 71(3), 328–335.
Raymond, J. E., Fenske, M. J., & Tavassoli, N. T. (2003). Selective attention determines emo-
tional responses to novel visual stimuli. Psychological Science, 14(6), 537–542.
Richtel, M. (2012, May 29). Wasting time is new divide in digital era. The New York Times. 
Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/2012/05/30/us/new-digital-divide-seen-
in-wasting-time-online.html?_r=0.
Roberts, D. F., & Foehr, U. G. (2008). Trends in media use. The Future of Children, 18(1), 
11–37.
Romano, A. (2016, February  29). Truly American Chrome extension will change 
“Trump” to “Drumpf.” Mashable. Retrieved from http://mashable.com/2016/02/29/
donald-drumpf-chrome-extension/#bsMRD0LkBaq0.
Rosen, L. D., Carrier, L. M., & Cheever, N. A. (2013). Facebook and texting made me do 
it: Media-induced task-switching while studying. Computers in Human Behavior, 29(3), 
948–958.
Roth, M., Hammelstein, P., & Brähler, E. (2007). Beyond a youthful behavior style: Age 
and sex differences in sensation seeking based on need theory. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 43(7), 1839–1850.

164  Duff and Lutchyn
Sanbonmatsu, D. M., Strayer, D., Medeiros-Ward, N., & Watson, J. (2013). Who multi-tasks 
and why? Multi-tasking ability, perceived multi-tasking ability, impulsivity, and sensa-
tion seeking. PloSONE, 8(1), e54402.
Schacter, D. L. (1987). Implicit expressions of memory in organic amnesia: Learning of new 
facts and associations. Human Neurobiology, 6(2), 107–118.
Segijn, C. M., Voorveld, H. A., & Smit, E. G. (2016). The underlying mechanisms of mul-
tiscreening effects. Journal of Advertising, 1–12, doi: 10.1080/00913367.2016.1172386.
Shapiro, S., & Krishnan, H. S. (2001). Memory-based measures for assessing advertising 
effects: A  comparison of explicit and implicit memory effects. Journal of Advertising, 
30(3), 1–13.
Shapiro, S., MacInnis, D. J., & Heckler, S. E. (1997). The effects of incidental ad exposure on 
the formation of consideration sets. Journal of Consumer Research, 24(1), 94–104.
Shiv, B., & Huber, J. (2000). The impact of anticipating satisfaction on consumer choice. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 27(2), 202–216.
Simons, D. (n.d.). The invisible gorilla. Retrieved from http://www.theinvisiblegorilla.
com/videos.html.
Slater, M. D. (2004). Operationalizing and analyzing exposure: The foundation of media 
effects research. Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, 81(1), 168–183.
Sloane, G. (2015, April 9). As ad blocker usage explodes, can YouTube win back scoff-
laws with a subscription model? Users revolt against pre-roll. AdWeek. Retrieved from  
http://www.adweek.com/news/technology/how-ad-blocking-could-affect-youtubes- 
subscription-model-163983.
Smallwood, J., O’Connor, R. C., Sudberry, M. V., & Obonsawin, M. C. (2007). Mind wan-
dering and dysphoria. Cognition & Emotion, 21, 816–842.
Speck, P. S., & Elliott, M. T. (1997). Predictors of advertising avoidance in print and broad-
cast media. Journal of Advertising, 26, 61–76.
Strayer, D., & Watson, J. (2012). Supertaskers and the multitasking brain. Scientific American 
Mind, 23(1), 22–29.
Voorveld, H. (2011). Media multitasking and the effectiveness of combining online and 
radio advertising. Computers in Human Behavior, 27, 2200–2206.
Wang, Z., & Tchernev, J. (2012). The “myth” of media multitasking: Reciprocal dynamics 
of media multitasking, personal needs, and gratifications. Journal of Communication, 62, 
493–513.
Wilson, T. D., Reinhard, D. A., Westgate, E. C., Gilbert, D. T., Ellerbeck, N., Hahn, C., 
Brown, C., & Shaked, A. (2014). Just think: The challenges of the disengaged mind. Sci-
ence, 345(6192), 75–77.
Yap, J. Y., & Lim, S. W. H. (2013). Splitting visual focal attention? It probably depends on 
who you are. In Proceedings of the 2nd Annual International Conference on Cognitive and 
Behavioral Psychology, Singapore.
Yoon, S., Choi, Y. K., & Song, S. (2011). When intrusive can be likable. Journal of Advertising, 
40(2), 63–76.
Zajonc, R. B. (2001). Mere exposure: A gateway to the subliminal. Current Directions in 
Psychological Science, 10(6), 224–228.
Zeitlin, M. (2015, September 9). Washington Post declares war on ad blockers. Buzzfeed. 
Retrieved from https://www.buzzfeed.com/matthewzeitlin/the-washington-post-
begins-blocking-ad-blockers?utm_term=.stOok9LbKY#.puwAK9xGbD.
Zhang, W., Jeong, S. H., & Fishbein, M. (2010). Situational factors competing for attention: 
The interaction effect between multitasking and sexual explicitness on TV recognition. 
Journal of Media Psychology, 22(1), 2–13.

Advertising (In)attention  165
Zhong, B., Hardin, M., & Sun, T. (2011). Less effortful thinking leads to more social net-
working? The associations between the use of social network sites and personality traits. 
Computers in Human Behavior, 27(3), 1265–1271.
Zuckerman, M. (1979). Sensation seeking: Beyond the optimal level of arousal. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc.


PART III
New Approaches  
to Research


Introduction
Using what Sharp is calling “eye-catching software” on their digital advertis-
ing displays, [the device] creates the illusion that a passer-by’s reflection can be 
seen in the image as they walk near or past it. On top of this, the displays are 
also able to understand the type of person approaching and choose an advert 
befitting to his/her demographic. . . . [The device] makes advertising a more 
personalised experience; something that businesses could soon be snapping up 
in an attempt to engage the public.
—(Humans Invent, 2013)
“Our goal with Quantico from a VR standpoint was to make sure the story-
telling was front and center,” [Jerry] Weinstock [vice president and creative 
director at ABC Integrated Marketing] says. “With VR, the viewer is in the car 
with our actors. It’s a much deeper level of engagement for a sponsor while still 
remaining organic and true to the storyline.”
—(Gaudiosi, 2016)
This new [#LookingForYou] campaign for Battersea Dogs & Cats Home, the 
U.K. rescue and rehoming charity, features the very sweet pup, Barley, on a 
series of digital billboards at Westfield shopping mall in Stratford, London. Peo-
ple entering the mall are handed leaflets but, unbeknownst to them, the leaflet 
contains an RFID chip. As they walk round the mall, the chip activates videos 
on digital billboards when they pass by. Barley appears to interact directly with 
the shoppers and his antics apparently get increasingly cute with every step. 
(Jack, 2015); The campaign generated 2,500 unique visits to the campaign’s 
microsite, 320,000 video views, 99% positive social sentiment, new visitors to 
the site, and 200 new inquiries about rehoming dogs.
—(Warc, n.d.)
10
DIGITAL ADVERTISING IN  
A NEW AGE
The Power of (Tele)Presence
Matthew Lombard and Jennifer Snyder-Duch

170  Lombard and Snyder-Duch
Advertising in the traditional media environment is defined as “a form of con-
trolled communication that attempts to persuade consumers, through use of a 
variety of strategies and appeals, to buy or use a particular product or service” 
(Defleur & Dennis, 1996, p. 564) and relatedly, “paid nonpersonal communication 
from an identified sponsor using mass media to persuade or influence an audi-
ence” (Wells, Burnett, & Moriarity, 1998, p. 13). As the examples above suggest, 
we have entered a new age in which advertising is much more interactive and 
personalized to consumers. In addition, advances in technology have prompted 
users to engage much differently in their media environment, and this has pre-
sented advertisers with substantial challenges and opportunities in developing the 
relationship between consumers and brands.
In this chapter, we describe key characteristics of advertising today, and explain 
how the concept of telepresence, or presence, in which media users overlook or 
misperceive the role of technology in their experience, offers a valuable frame-
work for the study and practice of advertising today and in the future.
The Changing Nature of Advertising
In 2001, we argued that advertisers had an opportunity to take advantage of 
emerging technologies to provide a new advertising experience:
The internet and other interactive technologies make it possible to create 
ads that are not only more targeted, but more personal, in which advertising 
is an experience in which the consumer participates and is engaged. Thus, 
the model of advertising as communication that is nonpersonal and con-
trolled exclusively by the sponsor seems to be evolving into one in which 
advertising is personal and interactive. Interactive advertising gives consum-
ers more control by giving them a range of choices in their experience 
with product information. And it produces a sense that the communication 
is more personal than traditional media ads because it creates or simulates a 
one-on-one interaction.
(Lombard & Snyder-Duch, 2001, p. 56)
Over the past 15  years, advertising has certainly evolved in the ways that we 
predicted. The ultimate goal of consumer advertising—to persuade individu-
als to purchase a product or service—remains the same. However, technological 
advances have drastically changed the nature of ads. Based on academic and indus-
try literature, three characteristics strongly distinguish digital advertising from 
advertising in traditional media: interactivity, personalization, and engagement.
Interactivity
Interactivity is perhaps the most prominent attribute of media in the digital age 
(Kim  & McMillan, 2008) and can be defined simply as “a characteristic of a 

The Power of (Tele)Presence  171
medium in which the user can influence the form and/or content of the medi-
ated presentation or experience” (Lombard & Snyder-Duch, 2001, p. 57). Related 
to advertising, Bezjian-Avery, Calder, and Iacobucci (1998) explain, “Whereas in 
traditional advertising, the presentation is linear and the consumer is passively 
exposed to product information, for interactive advertising, the consumer instead 
actively traverses the information. The pieces of information the consumer sees 
depends on where the consumer wants to go” (p. 24). Lombard and Snyder-Duch 
(2001) explain that media interactivity is not dichotomous, but can vary in degree 
from not interactive to highly interactive based on several variables. While a ban-
ner ad is interactive in that it allows a user to click through for more information, 
the ads described in the opening of this chapter allows users to enter a real-time, 
realistic experience where they feel as if they are using the product (see Table 10.1 
for a description and examples of variables that affect degree of interactivity).
TABLE 10.1 Variables that Influence the Degree of Interactivity of a Mediated Experience
Variable
Examples
The number of inputs from the 
user that the medium accepts 
and to which it responds.
A basic website accepts cursor movement and selection 
via keyboard/mouse while virtual reality may accept 
head movement via tracking sensors, movement 
and selection via position, and button-presses via a 
controller/joystick, and even audio/voice input, text 
via virtual keyboard, body movement, hand and 
finger movement, haptic pressure, eye movement, 
facial expression, or physiological inputs such as 
heart rate, muscle tension, and skin conductance.
The number and type of 
characteristics of the mediated 
presentation or experience that 
can be modified by the user.
A viewer of streaming video (e.g., on YouTube) can 
modify image size and resolution, amount of text on 
the screen, volume and pace. A videogame player can 
modify these, along with their avatar’s appearance, 
content (e.g., the course of the adventure, which parts 
of the game-world are explored, etc.), and duration.
The range or amount of change 
possible in each characteristic.
Users of basic videogames can select among a small 
set of generic virtual representations (avatars) and 
environment while users of virtual worlds such as 
Second Life can select and modify many elements of 
their avatar and environment.
The speed at which the medium 
responds to user inputs 
(asynchronous vs. synchronous, 
long vs. short lag).
Responses to an email message may take hours or days 
(asynchronous) while responses in a chatroom are 
immediate (synchronous). Responses to actions in 
an operating system or other software while using 
an older, slower computer can be noticeably slower 
than the responses to the same actions while using a 
modern, faster computer.
The degree of correspondence 
between the type of user 
input and the type of medium 
response (natural mapping).
Using a combination of keystrokes or moving a joystick 
to cause a player to kick a soccer ball in a basic video 
game represents unnatural mapping while making a 
kicking movement with one’s leg and foot to cause 
the same action represents natural mapping.

172  Lombard and Snyder-Duch
Research and commentary about interactive advertising are ultimately about 
control: the amount and nature of control given to the consumer in the digital 
environment. The literature makes it clear that digital media allows for a level 
of interactivity that has changed the relationship between the advertiser and the 
consumer (Jenkins, Ford, & Green, 2013; Turow & Draper, 2014), and research 
suggests that interactive ads promote more positive attitudes toward products 
and brands (Sundar & Kim, 2005) and contribute to ad effectiveness (Arroyo-
Cañada & Gil-Lafuente, 2012). In fact, ads that disrupt a consumer’s media use—
as traditional television and radio ads did—are often judged as annoying and may 
cause negative attitudes toward a brand (Edwards, Li, & Lee, 2002; Bright, 2011; 
Smith, 2012; Tanyel, Stuart, & Griffin, 2013). Rodgers and Thorson (2000) offer 
a model to explain interactive advertising. Their model is useful in that it moves 
beyond ad structure to integrate function: the motives (research, shopping, com-
munication, entertainment, etc.) and mode (serious versus playful) of users as they 
encounter advertising messages (Rodgers & Thorson, 2000).
Personalization
Personalization can be described broadly as the “tailoring of message content and 
delivery based on data collection or covert observation of users, to increase the 
personal relevance of the message” (Bang & Wojdynski, 2016, p. 868). Personali-
zation has long been central to consumer advertising strategy. Advertisers want 
consumers to feel that ads are meant specifically for them. For decades, they have 
aimed to make advertising appeals seem personal through their media placement 
and through storytelling that addresses consumers’ specific needs and depicts how 
products fit perfectly into their lives. But digital technology has provided the 
marketing and advertising industries with sophisticated new methods to assess 
consumers’ demographics, media habits, and lifestyles and use the information 
to personalize messages. “As a consumer travels in the virtual, or digital world, 
everywhere he or she goes, and everything he or she does, leaves a trail of bits 
of information because almost all actions and activities are recorded” (Dickey & 
Lewis, 2011, p. 25).
The strong trend, then, has been toward more and more personal advertising. 
Today we find companies investing in sophisticated and expensive tracking and 
creative techniques such as “real-time bidding,” which allows online advertisers 
to adapt content—including price, product details, and product variations—at the 
moment when users interact with the ad (Minsker, 2013). As another example, 
Sharp’s eye-catching software described in the opening of this chapter incorpo-
rates passers-by into the content of a digital display ad and adapts content based 
on their demographics.
The research on the effectiveness of personalization is still in its early phase. 
Some research indicates that such techniques are perceived as off-putting. For 
example, Turow, King, Hoofnagle, Bleakley, and Hennessy (2009) surveyed 

The Power of (Tele)Presence  173
American adults and found that a majority are not in favor of personalized adver-
tising, and the percentage of those who report that they do not want personalized 
ads is even higher when they are made aware of the techniques used by marketers 
and advertisers to gather personal data. Other studies indicate that personalization 
is effective but is mediated by other variables including the user’s personal disposi-
tion, in particular the need for cognition (Tam & Ho, 2005), congruency between 
media content and ad content (Simola, Kivikangas, Kuisma, & Krause, 2013), the 
clarity and strength of product attributes in the ad (Howard & Kerin, 2004), con-
sumer trust in the retailer (Bleier & Eisenbeiss, 2015), and the cognitive demand 
of the user’s primary task when encountering the ad (Bang & Wojdynski, 2016).
Engagement
In addition to the changes in consumers’ experiences as individual ads become 
more interactive and personalized, advertisers realize that changes in the media 
environment at large provide challenges and opportunities. In the advertising 
industry, engagement has come to describe consumers’ interactions with brands 
through social media, a measure that goes beyond the traditional measure of 
advertising reach or impressions. As Gangadharbatla (2012) explains, engagement:
roughly translates to some evidence that the individual, i.e., the audience 
member, an advertiser is trying to reach is responding in some way to the 
message, e.g., by clicking the Like button or by commenting on the adver-
tisers’ wall on Facebook or by writing a review or by retweeting (RT) or 
downloading an app.
(p. 409)
It can be described as “a two-way conversation between the brand and its fans” 
(Schoenfeld, 2012, para. 8). How the industry should measure this kind of engage-
ment in order to determine ROI is still being debated. Advertisers can certainly 
count clicks and retweets, but further research is needed to understand what 
causes those behaviors and what they indicate. It seems that some combination of 
information processing and emotional response variables characterizes consumers’ 
engagement with a brand (Wang, 2006; Brandow, 2016).
Jenkins et  al. (2013) also use the term engagement. They argue that an 
“appointment model” no longer characterizes consumer media use, where con-
tent is offered at particular times. Rather, the user experience can be described as 
“engagement,” where media users are “a collective of active agents whose labor 
may generate alternative forms of market value” (Jenkins et al., 2013, p. 116). 
This approach to engagement acknowledges that audiences interact with content 
across multiple channels. “Such models value the spread of media texts as these 
engaged audiences are more likely to recommend, discuss, research, pass along, 
and even generate new material in response” (Jenkins et al., 2013, p. 116). This 

174  Lombard and Snyder-Duch
means that advertisers have to work differently to understand and shape the rela-
tionship between consumers and products or brands.
What is needed—in both academic research and industry practice—is a frame-
work to better understand and take advantage of the interactivity, personalization, 
and engagement of modern (and future) digital advertising. The concept and phe-
nomena of (tele)presence provide such a framework.
Digital Advertising: The Role of Presence
The term presence (short for telepresence) emerged in technology studies as early 
as 1980 (Minsky, 1980) as virtual reality and teleoperation (operation of tech-
nology at a distance) emerged, and to some extent in the public sphere in the 
mid-2000s as companies including Cisco launched high-end teleconferencing 
equipment designed to replicate the in-person meeting experience (Cisco, 2006). 
Among academics, the idea of mediated experiences that mimic non-mediated 
ones extends back many more decades, to at least Horton and Wohl’s (1956) work 
on parasocial interaction and relationships with radio and television personalities. 
The term is often used imprecisely to refer to one or more different related phe-
nomena, but in 2000 a panel of scholars associated with what would become the 
International Society for Presence Research (ISPR) developed a detailed defini-
tion and explication, which begins this way:
Presence (a shortened version of the term “telepresence”) is a psychological 
state or subjective perception in which even though part or all of an indi-
vidual’s current experience is generated by and/or filtered through human-
made technology, part or all of the individual’s perception fails to accurately 
acknowledge the role of the technology in the experience. Except in the 
most extreme cases, the individual can indicate correctly that s/he is using 
the technology, but at “some level” and to “some degree”, her/his percep-
tions overlook that knowledge and objects, events, entities, and environ-
ments are perceived as if the technology was not involved in the experience.
(ISPR, 2000)
Since then, many authors have developed variations of this definition, describing 
different subsets of types or dimensions of presence (see Lombard & Jones, 2015 
for a detailed review). A current project (Lombard & Sun, 2016) designed to 
assess presence experiences as they occur in the course of peoples’ everyday lives 
presented ten of these different but overlapping types of presence (see Table 10.2).
Despite these disparate forms of presence, most scholars (see ISPR, 2000) seem 
to agree that the primary and most inclusive forms are spatial (a sense of being in 
the media-created physical environment) and social (a sense of being in the media-
created social environment). A third form of presence particularly relevant in the 
context of advertising is presence as engagement: “ ‘Engagement,’ ‘involvement,’ 

The Power of (Tele)Presence  175
TABLE 10.2 Types of Presence (adapted from Lombard & Sun, 2016)
Presence Type
First-person descriptor
Spatial vs. Social 
Emphasis
Spatial Presence
I felt like I was in the space or 
environment created by the 
technology.
Spatial
Transportation
I felt like I went somewhere 
else, people or things 
came to me, or we went 
somewhere else together.
Spatial and social
Engagement
I felt mentally immersed; I was 
focused on or absorbed in 
the experience.
Spatial and social
Perceptual Realism
The people, things, and events 
I experienced through the 
technology looked, sounded, 
and/or felt as they would in 
the real world.
Spatial and social
Inverse Presence
Even though I wasn’t using 
technology, I felt like I was (for 
example: I felt like I was in 
a movie when I was really 
walking in the street).
Spatial and social
Social Presence
I felt I was actually with the 
people who were available 
via technology.
Social
Social Realism
The people, things, and events 
I experienced through the 
technology could (or did) 
occur in the real world.
Spatial and social
Medium As Social Actor
The technology itself seemed to 
have a personality (including 
computers, phones, robots, 
mannequins, etc.).
Social
Actor Within Medium
Even though I couldn’t interact 
with them, I felt I was actually 
with the people or characters 
who were available via the 
technology.
Social
Self-Presence
I felt connected to the avatar 
or other representation of me 
in the world created by the 
technology.
Social
Note: These types of presence are identified in the literature as distinct, but they are not mutually 
exclusive—most presence experiences involve more than one and sometimes many of them.
and ‘psychological immersion’ occur when part or all of a person’s perception 
is directed toward objects, events, and/or people created by the technology, and 
away from objects, events, and/or people in the physical world” (ISPR, 2000). 
This form of presence is measured in presence questionnaire items that ask media 

176  Lombard and Snyder-Duch
users to rate how much they felt “involved” and “enjoyed” their experience and 
how intense it was (Lessiter, Freeman, Keogh,  & Davidoff, 2001, p. 293), and 
how much they felt “mentally immersed,” had their “senses engaged,” and felt a 
“sensation of reality,” how “relaxing or exciting” it was, and how “engaging [the 
story] was” (TPI; Lombard, Weinstein, & Ditton, 2011, pp. 293–294). This type of 
engagement is distinct from the behavioral-based and more nuanced accounts of 
engagement from the advertising industry and literature as discussed above, but it 
is clearly related, since presence as engagement is likely to be associated with user 
responses to advertising messages within and across media (see Mollen & Wilson, 
2010 for a detailed explication of how interactivity, telepresence, and engagement 
have been defined and measured in different contexts and may be related).
A common view among scholars has been that presence, especially spatial pres-
ence, requires sophisticated and expensive technology that as nearly-as-possible 
reproduces our non-mediated experience. Much of the early scholarly work on 
the topic focused on nascent virtual reality and teleoperation systems that were 
most often only available in laboratories and specialized industry settings (note the 
subtitle of the MIT Press journal founded in 1992, Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual 
Environments). But researchers observed that even a good novel can produce sensa-
tions of spatial and social presence, which they identified as “the book problem” 
(Schubert & Crusius, 2002; Biocca, 2003). And as far back as the 1950s, Horton 
and Wohl (1956) wrote about radio and television audience members experienc-
ing a “simulacrum” of social interaction with presenters and entertainers. Today, 
some of the most compelling social presence experiences come from text and 
images in social media, including ephemeral, low-production value live-streaming 
video (e.g., via Snapchat). A logical explanation for the seeming contradiction is 
the fact that we do not respond directly to our sensory inputs but to our mental 
recreations of those inputs.
Regardless of the sophistication of the technology, any mediated experience, 
including an advertising experience, that evokes strong spatial and social pres-
ence features vivid and compelling places, people and events that create a sense 
of psychological, and even physiological, connection for the user. But technology 
that allows advertising to become more interactive, personal, and engaging, for 
example giving them the experience of shopping in an interesting (virtual) store 
environment; examining and trying out a product they care about; talking to a real 
or artificial salesperson or favorite person; being the main character in an event 
or story related to the product, service, or brand; and any of the scenarios at the 
beginning of this chapter, is likely to evoke stronger presence.
Research on Digital Advertising and Presence
From telling vivid stories by firelight and in novels, to painting and sculpture, 
photography, the electronic media of the 20th century, and today’s rapidly evolv-
ing immersive, social, and hyper-realistic digital media, humans have always sought 

The Power of (Tele)Presence  177
to make mediated experiences seem more direct and non-mediated. Reeves and 
Nass (1996) are among those who argue that our responses to these technolo-
gies are based in evolution; others point to aspects of our embodied experience 
(Haans & IJsselsteijn, 2012). In any case it’s clear that presence is both an impor-
tant motivator and goal in human experience, and that presence experiences lead 
to a series of responses many of which are valuable to advertisers.
Even though the definitions and measures of presence and the impacts of 
presence experiences examined have varied across studies, the results of disparate 
research point to an important mediating role of (tele)presence in advertising 
effects. When ad messages and experiences are designed to evoke presence, those 
presence responses lead to a variety of cognitive, affective, and behavioral effects 
desired by advertisers, including enjoyment, attitude toward the ad and product, 
product knowledge, and purchase intention. This is the case with manipulations 
of different types of presence in different contexts. Researchers have examined 
media contexts including online advertising (Choi, Miracle, & Biocca, 2001; Li, 
Daugherty & Biocca, 2002; Klein, 2003; Hopkins, Raymond, & Mitra, 2004; For-
tin & Dholakia, 2005; Yang, 2006; Debbabi, Daassi, & Baile, 2010), indoor (Yim, 
Cicchirillo, & Drumwright, 2012) and outdoor (de Boer, Verleur, Heuvelman, & 
Heynderickx, 2010) 3D displays, noninteractive (Russell  & Stern, 2006) and 
interactive (Cauberghe, Geuens, & De Pelsmacker, 2011) television, video games 
(Nelson, Yaros, & Keum, 2006), and virtual worlds (Grigorovici, 2003; Jin, 2009; 
Tikkanen, Hietanen, Henttonen, & Rokka, 2009). A consistent pattern in the 
results is the fact that presence plays a key role in the positive effects of interactiv-
ity, anthropomorphic agents, modality (audio vs. text), and the use of 3D displays.
Presence-Evoking Marketing and Advertising Experiences
As presence-evoking technologies become more effective, practical, and wide-
spread (at least in developed nations), they will present important opportunities 
for digital advertisers. The exact nature of these opportunities, especially in the 
far term, is difficult to predict, but we can look to examples (including the ones 
at the beginning of this chapter) of how advertisers are utilizing emerging pres-
ence technologies now, and consider research findings and technology forecasts 
to predict how they may be utilized in the distant future. These technologies can 
be distinguished by their emphasis on evoking spatial and social presence as well 
as presence as engagement.
Spatial Presence
Home and Public Virtual Reality
VR, from 360-degree navigable spaces to fully interactive motion-tracked head-
mounted displays at home or in public spaces (malls, hotels, bars, etc.), can be used 

178  Lombard and Snyder-Duch
to transport users to travel destinations and allow them to interact with and cus-
tomize products (e.g., cars, appliances, home decor, make-up, fashion, etc.) (e.g., 
Robertson, 2015; Johnson, 2015a; Li, 2016). Longer-form virtual experiences 
centered on a product or brand (e.g., Johnson, 2015b) can be used to engage, 
entertain, and persuade.
Holographic Product Displays and Demonstrations
In interactive signage and in store displays, these can be personalized based on 
information provided actively or passively via sensors (as in Minority Report) 
(see Genuth, 2013).
Virtual Shopping Environments
Virtual and augmented reality can allow users to have a version of the brick- 
and-mortar shopping experience. The shopping cart icon used by most retail 
websites can be made more literal, as the separate web pages for lists of products 
and product details and reviews can be made to match the physical space of a retail 
store (e.g., Buss, 2012).
Product Placement
Widely used in film and television, and more recently in videogames, this tech-
nique in which a product or brand appears as a major or minor part of the story 
or environment is being extended to other presence-evoking experiences includ-
ing virtual reality (Takahashi, 2014). The specific products/brands displayed are 
likely to be personalized based on information provided actively or passively by 
users, and even the prominence of the appearance might be adjusted based on 
such knowledge.
Social Presence
Customer Service Via Real or Virtual Agents
The evolution of video conferencing services such as Skype and FaceTime 
and the rise of mobile media will continue to make it easier and less expensive 
to communicate with customers and potential customers from home, brick- 
and-mortar stores, or anywhere in ways that create a sense of face-to-face interaction.  
Given the power of these interactions, especially for high-involvement products 
and services, advertisers and businesses will likely make available and initiate more 
of them. Some banks are already experimenting with ATMs with telepresence 
equipment that connects users to remote human tellers (Ginovsky, 2013), and 
the logic can be extended to other financial services, luxury purchases, and many 

The Power of (Tele)Presence  179
others. The “person” at the other end of the conversation need not be human; 
Amtrak has used an artificially intelligent voice-based agent named Julie to take 
rail reservations (Amtrak, n.d.). Given the rise of Siri and other audio AI agents, 
the public will likely become more accustomed to these interactions, and it’s 
extremely likely that realistic images will soon accompany the voices (see Kolbe, 
Salomann, & Brenner, 2006).
Robots and Androids as Product/Brand/Retail Representatives
Service robots like Lowe’s OSHbot (Rodriguez, 2014) are already helping cus-
tomers find and buy the right products, while other service robots guide airport 
visitors (Blackman, 2012) and serve hotel guests (Lewis-Kraus, 2016). Robots and 
androids evoke not only delight and interest, but presence scholars have estab-
lished that we cannot help responding to them in many of the ways we respond 
to humans and animals (Reeves & Nass, 1996; Xu & Lombard, 2016). Robots and 
androids can therefore be used to advise and persuade customers and prospective 
customers in a variety of settings.
Engagement
Engaging Form: Virtual/Mixed Reality and Theme Parks
Technologies that require users’ complete attention and shut out distractions are 
more likely to evoke presence as engagement. Virtual reality that utilizes head-
mounted displays to replace the sights and sounds from the non-mediated world 
encourages users to become mentally immersed in messages, including advertis-
ing messages. Mixed reality technology such as Microsoft’s Hololens (n.d.), in 
which virtual objects seem to interact with real ones in interesting ways and users 
can interact with either, should produce a similarly high level of engagement pres-
ence. Theme parks such as Disneyland, sections of other parks devoted to “Harry 
Potter,” “Star Trek,” and many others (Thorpe, 2016), and individual theme park 
rides create a cohesive, immersive world for attendees to engage with and rep-
resent a logical context for sponsored messages (see Olson, 2004). Of course, the 
technologies must work properly and not draw attention to their operation to 
fully engage users.
Engaging Content: Supplementary and Transmedia
Media products are increasingly deemed successful not just because they reach 
a large audience, but because the audience members they do reach are devoted 
and passionate about the products (Napoli, 2011; Jenkins et al., 2013; Arvids-
son  & Bonini, 2015). Indicators of this passion include posting comments, 
images, and reviews to social media, in real-time or otherwise; producing fan 

180  Lombard and Snyder-Duch
fiction based on content characters and storylines; etc. Media, and specifically 
advertisers, can encourage and take advantage of this type of passion first with 
compelling storylines, characters, and dialogue in media products and then 
by providing additional opportunities to interact with the media content. It 
is common to provide behind-the-scenes and outtake videos, “extra” content 
online, and fan convention appearances; increasingly producers are creating 
content-related experience-based promotions across media platforms from 
websites to VR (e.g., Knowles, 2016; Lazzaro, 2016). These techniques within 
and across media should increase audience mental immersion (engagement), 
loyalty, and receptiveness to (appropriately designed and placed) advertising 
messages.
Parasocial Interaction and Authenticity
As noted above, an effective presence experience need not rely on expensive 
technology and high production values. Low-fi, raw, imperfect but intimate first-
person videos, as from news/weather/sports presenters, actors, program creators/
writers, gamers, and others can be extremely engaging because they evoke a sense 
of authenticity and personal connection. These represent key opportunities to 
enhance engagement and, if used wisely, promote products and services.
Presence in the More Distant Future
We can imagine all three types of presence reaching their full potential in the 
context of advertising in the more distant future. Here is one possible scenario:
You return home and enter your ironically named “Reality Room,” an 
otherwise empty space containing the well-hidden holography generator 
technology that can create or recreate vivid, interactive representations of 
any combination of places, objects, people, and events. You ask the virtual 
assistant (who has a human name) to put you in the living room of your 
favorite dramedy series with your favorite fictional character from your 
collection of stories. The father of the series’ family appears on the couch 
next to you. Both the physical environment and your companion are utterly 
realistic, and you begin to relax as you and he carry on a warm conversa-
tion. The topic eventually turns to the latest models of transport vehicle; the 
character describes the model he thinks you should consider purchasing. 
He makes a compelling argument, and though you realize he’s likely been 
programmed to persuade you, it’s hard to resist him given your fondness 
for him and his (fictional) family. Together you visit a virtual showroom 
where you take a test ride, feeling every aspect of being inside the vehicle as  
it speeds down familiar sun-drenched streets, as onlookers smile in admira-
tion. On returning to the living room, you thank your companion and say 

The Power of (Tele)Presence  181
goodbye. Your virtual assistant asks you if you enjoyed your experience and 
where you would like to go next, and as the room becomes a restful nature 
scene, you sit by the mountain stream, listen to the birds happily chirping 
back and forth with each other, and decide that you will buy the vehicle 
your friend introduced you to.
Ethical Considerations
It is important to acknowledge that the incredible possibilities created by emerg-
ing technologies also produce a number of ethical considerations. First, our 
environment is increasingly cluttered with persuasive media messages, including 
consumer advertisements. Advertisers and media owners must act responsibly in 
avoiding interruptive ads (Manluccia, 2015). Secondly, beyond the inconvenience 
and invasiveness of clutter, the interactivity of new media allows advertisers access 
to our personal information. A condition to using media content today, it seems, 
is giving up our rights to privacy. Turow et al. (2009) found that consumers do 
not accept this invasion of privacy for the sake of personalized ads, as the industry 
argues. At the same time, media users—citizens—often find it difficult to know 
the extent to which they are being monitored (Stole, 2014). Transparency should 
be the guiding principle, along with giving users the ability to establish the scope 
and parameters of the personalization. Finally, the power of presence to blur the 
line between reality and fiction could be easily abused, with potential serious 
effects on individuals and even cultures (see Olson, 2004). Again, transparency 
is critical; users need to be reminded before and after high presence experiences 
about the nature of the illusions.
Conclusion
Presence is not a new phenomenon, but emerging technologies are bringing it to 
the forefront of media experiences as they allow a range of possibilities for media 
users to enter more and more interesting, realistic, personalized, and interactive 
environments. Much of the industry and academic research on digital advertising 
does not adequately examine the complexity of users’ perceptual experience with 
media and how this might impact advertiser-consumer interactions. Presence adds 
a layer of understanding by addressing the ways that people are socially and spa-
tially immersed in all types of mediated experiences. Further, presence may help 
explain the appeal of interactive and personalized ads, as research indicates that 
people desire a sense of connection with the people and places they encounter 
in media.
Of course, the causes and consequences of presence experiences depend in 
complex ways on the form and content of the media presentation, attributes, 
and motivations of the viewer or user; the type of product or service (or idea) 
being promoted; and likely, many other factors (see Lombard & Ditton, 1997). 

182  Lombard and Snyder-Duch
Researchers are just beginning to catalog, much less understand, the role of each 
of these factors (see Cummings & Bailenson, 2015). At the same time the technol-
ogies that evoke presence are changing: Advertisers have moved from a relatively 
few, distinct options (print ads featuring combinations of text and image, radio ads 
featuring voice and music, and network and local television ads featuring all of 
these) to a complex, fragmented, digital media environment with a vast array of 
options including everything from social media apps to immersive virtual worlds. 
In many cases the presence-evoking technologies and the experiences they create 
are novel (at this writing, VR headsets have just begun to enter the consumer mar-
ket), and their ability to maintain their power to delight and persuade is unknown. 
But the evidence suggests (Reeves & Nass, 1996) and we strongly believe that 
because presence itself is a basic motivation, even as we adjust to each technology, 
a new “better” one will take its place. And advertisers, and all content producers, 
will need to adjust.
References
Amtrak. (n.d.). Meet Julie: Your virtual assistant. Retrieved May 1, 2016 from https://www.
amtrak.com/about-julie-amtrak-virtual-travel-assistant.
Arroyo-Cañada, F. J., & Gil-Lafuente, J. (2012). Considerations of interactive digital televi-
sion as advertising media. Journal of Promotion Management, 18(3), 306–318. http://doi.
org/10.1080/10496491.2012.696456.
Arvidsson, A., & Bonini, T. (2015). Valuing audience passions: From Smythe to Tarde. Euro-
pean Journal of Cultural Studies, 18(2), 158–173. doi: 10.1177/1367549414563297.
Bang, H., & Wojdynski, B. W. (2016). Tracking users’ visual attention and responses to per-
sonalized advertising based on task cognitive demand. Computers in Human Behavior, 55, 
867–876. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2015.10.025.
Bezjian-Avery, A., Calder, B., & Iacobucci, D. (1998). New media interactive advertising vs. 
traditional advertising. Journal of Advertising Research, 38(4), 23–32.
Biocca, F. (2003, May). Can we resolve the book, the physical reality, and the dream state 
problems? From the two-pole to a three-pole model of shifts in presence. In EU Future 
and Emerging Technologies, Presence Initiative Meeting.
Blackman, S. (2012, August 21). Rise of the holograms: The next generation of airport  
employees. Airport Technology. Retrieved May 1, 2016 from http://www.airport-technology. 
com/features/featureholograms-next-generation-airport-employees/
Bleier, A., & Eisenbeiss, M. (2015). The importance of trust for personalized online adver-
tising. Journal of Retailing, 91(3), 390–409. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jretai.2015.04.001.
Brandow, M. (2016, March 14). Engagement matters. Emotion sells. Data fuels [Web log post].  
Retrieved from http://www.mediapost.com/publications/article/271175/engagement- 
matters-emotion-sells-data-fuels.html.
Bright, L. F. (2011). Media evolution and web 2.0 technologies. In M. S. Eastin, T. D. 
Daugherty, & N. M. Burns (Eds.), Handbook of research on digital media and advertising: 
User generated content consumption (pp. 32–51). Hershey, PA: IGI-Global. Retrieved from 
Ebscohost ebook collection.
Buss, D., (2012, May 10). Peapod expands virtual grocery shopping to Chicago. Brand Channel.  
Retrieved from http://brandchannel.com/2012/05/10/peapod-expands-virtual-grocery- 
shopping-to-chicago/

The Power of (Tele)Presence  183
Cauberghe, V., Geuens, M., & De Pelsmacker, P. (2011). Context effects of TV programme-
induced interactivity and telepresence on advertising responses. International Journal of 
Advertising, 30(4), 641–663. doi: 10.2501/IJA-30–4–641–663.
Choi, Y. K., Miracle, G. E., & Biocca, F. (2001). The effects of anthropomorphic agents on 
advertising effectiveness and the mediating role of presence. Journal of Interactive Advertis-
ing, 2(1), 19–32. doi: 10.1080/15252019.2001.10722055.
Cisco. (2006, October 23). Cisco announces the Cisco telepresence meeting solution—A 
breakthrough “in-person” experience for real-time, remote, business communication 
and collaboration [Press release]. Retrieved from http://www.cisco.com/cisco/web/
UK/news/archive/2006/102306.html.
Cummings, J. J., & Bailenson, J. N. (2015). How immersive is enough? A meta-analysis of 
the effect of immersive technology on user presence. Media Psychology, 19(2), 272–309. 
doi: 10.1080/15213269.2015.1015740.
Debbabi, S., Daassi, M., & Baile, S. (2010). Effect of online 3D advertising on consumer 
responses: The mediating role of telepresence. Journal of Marketing Management, 26(9–
10), 967–992. doi: 10.1080/02672570903498819.
de Boer, C. N., Verleur, R., Heuvelman, A., & Heynderickx, I. (2010). Added value of an 
autostereoscopic multiview 3-D display for advertising in a public environment. Dis-
plays, 31(1), 1–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.displa.2009.09.001.
DeFleur, M. L., & Dennis, E. E. (1996). Understanding mass communication. Boston, MA: 
Houghton Mifflin Company.
Dickey, I., & Lewis, W. (2011). An overview of digital media and advertising. In M. S. Eastin, 
T. D. Daugherty, & N. M. Burns (Eds.), Handbook of research on digital media and advertis-
ing: User generated content consumption (pp. 1–31). Hershey, PA: IGI-Global. Retrieved 
from Ebscohost ebook collection.
Edwards, S. M., Li, H., & Lee, J. H. (2002). Forced exposure and psychological reactance: 
Antecedents and consequences of the perceived intrusiveness of pop-up ads. Journal of 
Advertising, 31(3), 83–95. http://doi.org/10.1080/00913367.2002.10673678.
Fortin, D. R., & Dholakia, R. R. (2005). Interactivity and vividness effects on social pres-
ence and involvement with a web-based advertisement. Journal of Business Research, 
58(3), 387–396. doi: 10.1016/S0148–2963(03)00106–1.
Gangadharbatla, H. (2012). Social media and advertising theory. In S. Rodgers & E. Thor-
son (Eds.), Advertising theory (pp. 402–416). New York, NY: Routledge.
Gaudiosi, J. (2016, March 5). ABC and Lexus launch “Quantico” virtual reality experience.  
Fortune. Retrieved from http://fortune.com/2016/03/05/abc-and-lexus-launch-quan 
tico-vr/
Genuth, I. (2013, April  11). Nike launched a holographic 3D advertising cam-
paign. The Future of Things. Retrieved May  1, 2016 from http://thefutureofthings.
com/5069-nike-launched-a-holographic-3d-advertising-campaign/
Ginovsky, J. (2013, August 27). Banks need to rethink telepresence approach: Use it to 
improve customer engagement, not reinvent teller experience. Banking Exchange. 
Retrieved May 1, 2016 from http://www.bankingexchange.com/news-feed/item/ 
3898-banks-need-to-rethink-telepresence-approach.
Grigorovici, D. (2003). Persuasive effects of presence in immersive virtual environments. 
In G. Riva, F. Davide, & W. A. Ijsselsteijn (Eds.), Being there: Concepts, effects and measure-
ment of user presence in synthetic environments. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: IOS Press. 
Retrieved from http://www.neurovr.org/emerging/book4/4_13GRIGOR.PDF.
Haans, A., & IJsselsteijn, W. A. (2012). Embodiment and telepresence: Toward a comprehen-
sive theoretical framework. Interacting with Computers, 24(4), 211–218. doi: 10.1016/j.
intcom.2012.04.010.

184  Lombard and Snyder-Duch
Hopkins, C. D., Raymond, M. A., & Mitra, A. (2004). Consumer responses to perceived tel-
epresence in the online advertising environment: The moderating role of involvement. 
Marketing Theory, 4(1), 137–162. doi: 10.1177/1470593104044090.
Horton, D.,  & Wohl, R. (1956). Mass communication and para-social interac-
tion: Observations on intimacy at a distance. Psychiatry, 19(3), 215–229. doi: 
10.1521/00332747.1956.11023049.
Howard, D. J., & Kerin, R. A. (2004). The effects of personalized product recommendations 
on advertisement response rates: The “try this. It works!” technique. Journal of Consumer 
Psychology, 14(3), 271–279. doi: 10.1207/s15327663jcp1403_8.
Humans Invent. (2013, February  11). The future of advertising will stop you in your  
tracks. Gizmodo UK. Retrieved from http://www.gizmodo.co.uk/2013/02/the-future- 
of-advertising-looks-creepy/
International Society for Presence Research. (2000). The concept of presence: Explication state-
ment. Retrieved from https://ispr.info/about-presence-2/about-presence/
Jack, L. (2015, May 4). An adorable homeless dog follows people around, via a new interac-
tive billboard. Fast Company. Retrieved from http://www.fastcocreate.com/3045876/
an-adorable-homeless-dog-follows-people-around-via-a-new-interactive-billboard.
Jenkins, H., Ford, S., & Green, J. (2013). Spreadable media: Creating value and meaning in a 
networked culture. New York, NY: New York University Press.
Jin, S. A. (2009). Modality effects in second life: The mediating role of social presence 
and the moderating role of product involvement. Cyberpsychology & Behavior, 12(6), 
717–721. doi: 10.1089/cpb.2008.0273.
Johnson, L. (2015a, April 9). Is virtual reality the next big form of in-bar entertainment? 
Jim Beam and Dos Equis have been quick to embrace the trend. AdWeek. Retrieved 
from http://www.adweek.com/news/technology/virtual-reality-next-big-form-bar- 
entertainment-163963.
Johnson, L. (2015b, May  1). Drones are filming seriously jaw-dropping virtual reality 
video for brands: Patrón goes inside the agave field. AdWeek. Retrieved from http:// 
www.adweek.com/news/technology/drones-are-filming-seriously-jaw-dropping-virtual- 
reality-video-brands-164433.
Kim, J., & McMillan, S. J. (2008). Evaluation of internet advertising research. Journal of 
Advertising, 37(1), 99–112. http://doi.org/10.2753/JOA0091–3367370108.
Klein, L. R. (2003). Creating virtual product experiences: The role of telepresence. Journal 
of Interactive Marketing, 17(1), 41–55. doi: 10.1002/dir.10046.
Knowles, K. (2016, April 27). Step into a spy’s shoes: Top TV series launches first virtual 
reality spin-off. The Memo. Retrieved from http://www.thememo.com/2016/04/27/
vr-le-bureau-des-legendes-virtual-reality-le-bureau-des-legendes-360-video/
Kolbe, L., Salomann, H.,  & Brenner, W. (2006). Self-services in customer relationships: 
Balancing high-tech and high-touch today and tomorrow. e-Service Journal, 4(2), 65–84. 
doi: 10.2979/esj.2006.4.2.65.
Lazzaro, S. (2016, March 28). 7 movies you can experience in virtual reality. Observer. Retrieved 
from http://observer.com/2016/03/7-movies-you-can-experience-in-virtual-reality/
Lessiter, J., Freeman, J., Keogh, E., & Davidoff, J. (2001). A cross-media presence ques-
tionnaire: The ITC-sense of presence inventory. Presence, 10(3), 282–297. doi: 
10.1162/105474601300343612.
Lewis-Kraus, G. (2016, March  2). Check in with the velociraptor at the world’s first  
robot hotel. Wired. Retrieved from http://www.wired.com/2016/03/robot-henn- 
na-hotel-japan/

The Power of (Tele)Presence  185
Li, S. (2016, April 10). How retail stores are using virtual reality to make shopping more 
fun. Los Angeles Times. Retrieved from http://www.latimes.com/business/la-fi-retail-
vr-20160410-story.html.
Li, H., Daugherty, T., & Biocca, F. (2002). Impact of 3-D advertising on product knowledge, 
brand attitude, and purchase intention: The mediating role of presence. Journal of Adver-
tising, 31(3), 43–57. doi: 10.1080/00913367.2002.10673675.
Lombard, M., & Ditton, T. B. (1997). At the heart of it all: The concept of presence. Jour-
nal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 3(2), n.p. doi: 10.1111/j.1083–6101.1997.
tb00072.x.
Lombard, M., & Jones, M. T. (2015). Defining presence. In M. Lombard, F. Biocca, W. A. 
Ijsselsteijn, J. Freeman, & R. Schaevitz (Eds.), Immersed in media: Telepresence theory, meas-
urement and technology (pp. 13–34). London: Springer.
Lombard, M., & Snyder-Duch, J. (2001). Interactive advertising and presence: A framework. 
Journal of Interactive Advertising, 1(2), 56–65. doi: 10.1080/15252019.2001.10722051.
Lombard, M., & Sun, W. (2016). Outside the lab: A direct, mixed-method approach to 
examining telepresence experiences in everyday life. Unpublished manuscript.
Lombard, M., Weinstein, L., & Ditton, T. (2011, October). Measuring telepresence: The 
validity of the Temple Presence Inventory (TPI) in a gaming context. In Proceedings of 
the 2011 Annual Conference of the International Society for Presence Research (ISPR), Edin-
burgh, Scotland. Retrieved from http://astro.temple.edu/~lombard/ISPR/Proceed-
ings/2011/Lombard_etal.pdf.
Manluccia, N. (2015, October 30). How to avoid the potential horrors of virtual reality  
marketing: Don’t let virtual reality ads become virtual prisons for consumers. Advertis-
ing Age. Retrieved from http://adage.com/article/digitalnext/avoid-horrors-virtual- 
reality-marketing/301135/
Microsoft HoloLens (n.d.). Official site. Retrieved on May 4, 2016 from https://www.
microsoft.com/microsoft-hololens/en-us.
Minsker, M. (2013). Digital advertising gets personal. CRM Magazine, 17(10), 22–26. 
Retrieved from Ebscohost Academic Search Premiere database.
Minsky, M. (1980). Telepresence. OMNI Magazine. Retrieved from http://web.media.mit.
edu/~minsky/papers/Telepresence.html.
Mollen, A.,  & Wilson, H. (2010). Engagement, telepresence and interactivity in online 
consumer experience: Reconciling scholastic and managerial perspectives. Journal of 
Business Research, 63(9/10), 919–925. doi: 10.1016/j.jbusres.2009.05.014.
Napoli, P. M. (2011). Audience evolution: New technologies and the transformation of media audi-
ences. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Nelson, M. R., Yaros, R. A., & Keum, H. (2006). Examining the influence of telepresence 
on spectator and player processing of real and fictitious brands in a computer game. 
Journal of Advertising, 35(4), 87–99. doi: 10.2753/JOA0091–3367350406.
Olson, S. R. (2004). The extensions of synergy: Product placement through theming 
and environmental simulacra. Journal of Promotion Management, 10(1–2), 65–87. doi: 
10.1300/J057v10n01_06.
Reeves, B., & Nass, C. (1996). The media equation: How people treat computers, televisions, and 
new media as real people and places. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Robertson, A. (2015, September 10). What virtual reality postcards can tell us about the future 
of travel. The Verge. Retrieved from http://www.theverge.com/2015/9/10/9289073/
marriott-virtual-reality-postcard-samsung-gear-vr.

186  Lombard and Snyder-Duch
Rodgers, S., & Thorson, E. (2000). The interactive advertising model: How users perceive  
and process online ads. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 1(1), 42–61. doi: 10.1080/ 
15252019.2000.10722043.
Rodriguez, A. (2014, October 28). Meet Lowe’s newest sales associate—OSHbot, the robot.  
Advertising Age. Retrieved from http://adage.com/article/cmo-strategy/meet-lowe-s- 
newest-sales-associate-oshbot-robot/295591/
Russell, C. A., & Stern, B. B. (2006). Consumers, characters, and products—a balance model 
of sitcom product placement effects. Journal of Advertising, 35(1), 7–21. doi: 10.2753/
JOA0091–3367350101.
Schoenfeld, A. (2012, February  1). 5 ways to report on engagement [Web log post]. 
Retrieved from http://simplymeasured.com/blog/5-ways-to-report-on-engagement/
Schubert, T., & Crusius, J. (2002). Five theses on the book problem: Presence in books, film 
and VR. In PRESENCE 2002-Proceedings of the Fifth International Workshop on Presence. 
Porto, Portugal: Universidad Fernando Pessoa.
Simola, J., Kivikangas, M., Kuisma, J., & Krause, C. M. (2013). Attention and memory 
for newspaper advertisements: Effects of ad-editorial congruency and location. Applied 
Cognitive Psychology, 27(4), 429–442. doi: 10.1002/acp.2918.
Smith, K. T. (2012). Longitudinal study of digital marketing strategies targeting mille- 
nnials. The Journal of Consumer Marketing, 29(2), 86–92. http://doi.org/10.1108/ 
07363761211206339.
Stole, I. L. (2014). Persistent pursuit of personal information: A historical perspective on 
digital advertising strategies. Critical Studies in Media Communication, 31(2), 129–133. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/15295036.2014.921319.
Sundar, S. S., & Kim, J. (2005). Interactivity and persuasion: Influencing attitudes with 
information and involvement. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 5(2), 5–18. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1080/15252019.2005.10722097.
Takahashi, D. (2014, December 8). MediaSpike creates cool in-game native ads for virtual 
reality. VentureBeat. Retrieved from http://venturebeat.com/2014/12/08/mediaspike- 
creates-cool-in-game-native-ads-for-virtual-reality/
Tam, K. Y., & Ho, S. Y. (2005). Web personalization as a persuasion strategy: An elabora-
tion likelihood model perspective. Information Systems Research, 16(3), 271–291. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1287/isre.1050.0058.
Tanyel, F., Stuart, E. W., & Griffin, J. (2013). Have “millennials” embraced digital advertising 
as they have embraced digital media? Journal of Promotion Management, 19(5), 652–673. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/10496491.2013.829161.
Thorpe, V. (2016, April 30). BBC in race with theme park giants to build hi-tech visitor 
attractions. The Guardian. Retrieved from http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/
apr/30/bbc-theme-park-doctor-who-visitor-attractions.
Tikkanen, H., Hietanen, J., Henttonen, T., & Rokka, J. (2009). Exploring virtual worlds: 
Success factors in virtual world marketing. Management Decision, 47(8), 1357–1381. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/00251740910984596.
Turow, J., & Draper, N. (2014). Industry conceptions of audience in the digital space. Cul-
tural Studies, 28(4), 643–656. http://doi.org/10.1080/09502386.2014.888929.
Turow, J., King, J., Hoofnagle, C. J., Bleakley, A., & Hennessy, M. (2009, September 29). 
Americans reject tailored advertising and three activities that enable it. Retrieved from 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1478214 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1478214.
Wang, A. (2006). Advertising engagement: A driver of message involvement on message 
effects. Journal of Advertising Research, 46(4), 355–368. doi: 10.2501/S0021849906060429.

The Power of (Tele)Presence  187
Warc. (n.d.). Case study summary: Battersea cats and dogs home: Looking for you. 
Retrieved from http://www.warc.com/Pages/Taxonomy/Marketing%20Intelligence/
Brands/Battersea%20Dogs%20and%20Cats%20Home/Results.Index?DVals=4294633
669&Sort=ContentDate|1&Filter=All.
Wells, W., Burnett, J., & Moriarity, S. (1998). Advertising principles & practices (4th ed.). Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Xu, K., & Lombard, M. (2016, June). Media are social actors: Expanding the CASA paradigm 
in the 21st century. Paper presented at the International Communication Association 
conference, Fukuoka, Japan.
Yang, K. C. (2006). The influence of humanlike navigation interface on users’ responses to 
internet advertising. Telematics and Informatics, 23(1), 38–55. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.tele.2005.03.001.
Yim, M. Y. C., Cicchirillo, V. J., & Drumwright, M. E. (2012). The impact of stereoscopic 
three-dimensional (3-D) advertising. Journal of Advertising, 41(2), 113–128. http://
dx.doi.org/10.2753/JOA0091–3367410208.

As our society is increasingly plagued by a plethora of chronic diseases, effective 
health communication appears more important than ever. For example, obesity 
runs rampant across the U.S. among both adults and children (Ogden, Carroll, 
Kit, & Flegal, 2014), and diabetes is on the rise (CDC, 2014). Many Americans 
do not exercise on a regular basis and often fail to adhere to a healthy diet. These 
problems and others are often caused by unhealthy lifestyle choices, sometimes 
due to a lack of knowledge about the importance of healthy behaviors and how 
to more easily integrate them into busy lives. As such, it is important for health 
messages to be more effective in message and media strategies, as well as in reach-
ing the target audience.
With these diseases becoming more prevalent in society, it requires consum-
ers to become more engaged in their own healthcare. To accomplish this, they 
will need deeper knowledge of health issues. One way this may be done is for 
public health professionals to begin to market public health information in the 
same way corporations market their products (Royne & Levy, 2011). While cor-
porations have had great success implementing sound persuasion strategy, such 
approaches have not been utilized as effectively in public health (Royne & Levy, 
2011). Although marketing is used by corporations as a potentially powerful tool 
that can influence consumers’ purchase behaviors, creative marketing approaches 
are less common in public health (Royne & Levy, 2011). If public health were to 
use more effective corporate marketing techniques by using contemporary digital 
media and creative messages to reach those in need of important information, it 
could help to improve individuals’ lives and well being.
Based on this premise, the purpose of this chapter is to discuss how digital media 
can be used to effectively deliver health communications in a world of chang-
ing healthcare and increased chronic disease. Specifically, this chapter provides an 
11
USING DIGITAL MEDIA TO 
IMPROVE PUBLIC HEALTH 
COMMUNICATION
Marla B. Royne, Kathrynn Pounders, Marian Levy, 
and Amy Rebecca Jones

Improve Public Health Communication  189
overview of some pressing healthcare issues in our society and discusses various 
digital media and how they may be used to provide health information. This is 
followed by a discussion of message strategies and how message strategies may 
be used by digital media to further improve the provision of important health 
information.
Intractable Problems Related to Lifestyle
The U.S. currently faces a public health crisis that has critical personal, societal, 
and economic implications. Four of the 10 leading causes of death in the U.S. (i.e., 
heart disease, cancer, diabetes, and stroke) are due to chronic diseases, with heart 
disease and cancer accounting for nearly one-half of all deaths (CDC, 2011; CDC, 
2013). More than one-half of all Americans suffer from at least one prevent-
able chronic condition (Ward, Schiller, & Goodman, 2014), and the cost of seven 
major chronic diseases (i.e., cancer, heart disease, hypertension, stroke, diabetes, 
pulmonary, and mental conditions) has been estimated at $1.3 trillion annually in 
human capital, medical expenditures, and loss of economic productivity (Devol & 
Bedroussian, 2007).
Many chronic diseases share risk factors related to three modifiable lifestyle 
behaviors: tobacco use, unhealthy diet, and physical inactivity (Arbeit, Johnson, & 
Mott, 1992). Obesity is a significant and underlying factor in these conditions, 
and has been fueled by substantial increases in food intake and sedentary behavior 
over the past few decades. Currently, 35 percent of U.S. adults are obese (Ogden, 
et al., 2014), and the direct and indirect cost of adult obesity is estimated at 
$209 billion, representing more than one-fifth of U.S. healthcare expenditures 
(Cawley & Meyerhoefer, 2012). Further, nearly 17 percent of U.S. children and 
adolescents aged 2–19 are obese (Ogden, et al., 2014). This is cause for concern 
because obesity in childhood often continues into adulthood (Ogden, Carroll, 
Kit, & Flegal, 2012), and childhood obesity is associated with a number of nega-
tive health consequences (Freedman, Mei, Srinivasan, Berenson, & Dietz, 2007; 
Puhl & Latner, 2007; Sutherland, 2008; Han, Lawlor, & Kimm, 2010). Moreover, 
few Americans consume a healthy diet. The typical food intake of 80–99 percent 
of Americans fails to meet recommended levels of fruits, vegetables, whole grains, 
and reduced-fat dairy products (Krebs-Smith, Guenther, Subar, Kirkpatrick, & 
Dodd, 2010).
Unhealthy lifestyles fueled by poor consumer choices are the result of a myr-
iad of social and environmental influences, including television viewing habits 
(Dietz & Gortmaker, 1985), sweetened beverages (Malik, Schulze, & Hu, 2006), 
and diets consisting of fast food (Rosenheck, 2008), all of which have been exam-
ined in the larger, ecological context of social, physical, and media environments 
(Reisch et al., 2013). Clearly, environment is a major influence on individual 
behaviors, and today’s environment includes a significant digital component that 
permeates all levels of society.

190  Royne, Pounders, Levy, and Jones
Targeted Marketing of Unhealthy Products to  
Vulnerable Populations
The advertising industry has played a substantial role in creating an environ-
ment that can adversely affect health behaviors (Royne & Levy, 2011). For exam-
ple, the successful marketing of unhealthy food and beverages, as well as tobacco 
and alcohol products (Moore, Williams, & Qualls, 1996), has contributed to the 
development of adverse health outcomes (Grier & Kumanyika, 2008). Vulner-
able populations, such as children and minorities, have been targeted by food 
marketers in the form of popular characters on packaging, product placement, 
toys, interactive marketing, and more recently, digital media (Story  & French, 
2004; Grier & Kumanyika, 2008; Culp, Bell, & Cassady, 2010; IOM, 2013). In 
2009, the food industry spent $1.79 billion on marketing to youth aged 2–17 
(FTC, 2012). Even with the proposed guidelines of Interagency Working Group 
on Foods Marketed to Children, the “IWG,” designed to regulate the nutritional 
quality of foods advertised to children, only 1.4 percent of television advertise-
ments comply with all aspects of IWG guidelines (Hingle, Castonguay, Ambuel, 
Smith, & Kunkel, 2015).
Not surprisingly, national data indicate that adolescents obtain an increasingly 
higher proportion of calories through snacking (Piernas & Popkin, 2010), and 
a recent study found disparities persist in snacking patterns among vulnerable 
populations (Larson, Story, Eisenberg, & Nuemark-Sztainer, 2016). For example, 
consumption of energy dense, nutrient-poor snacks and sugary beverages were 
highest among low-income, African American, Native American, and adolescents 
of mixed origin (Larson et al., 2016). Substantial disparities also exist in the preva-
lence of childhood obesity by socio-demographic characteristics including age, 
sex, race/ethnicity, and socioeconomic status. For instance, the largest disparities 
in childhood obesity occur between non-Hispanic black girls (22%) compared 
to non-Hispanic white girls (13%) and between Mexican American boys (24%) 
compared to non-Hispanic white boys (15%) (CDC, 2013).
The public health community points out the detrimental impact of food and 
beverage marketing to children adversely affecting food knowledge, dietary intake, 
consumption behaviors, and health, including obesity (WHO, 2009). In response 
to the finding that television advertisements market foods high in nutrients that 
promote chronic disease (e.g., fat, saturated fat, sodium) and undersupply protec-
tive nutrients (e.g., fiber, vitamins, antioxidants), health professionals suggest strat-
egies related to education, coalition building with the food industry, and policy 
change (Mink, Evans, Moore, Calderon, & Degar, 2010). However, this approach 
fails to capitalize on the potential of marketing and emphasizes the need for alter-
native approaches to traditional health communication strategies.
As noted by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, health communi-
cation “includes using multiple behavioral and social learning theories and models 
to advance program planning, and identifying steps to influence audience attitudes 

Improve Public Health Communication  191
and behavior” (CDC, 2016, n.p.). With this definition in mind, we provide a brief 
discussion of a social-ecological model that is useful for health promotion.
Social-Ecological Model for Health Promotion
The social-ecological model for health promotion is based on the understand-
ing that behavior change is a function not only of educational activities, but also 
advocacy, organizational change, policy development, economic support, envi-
ronmental change, and multi-method strategies (see McLeroy, Bibeau, Steckler, & 
Glantz, 1988; Stokols, 1996). Specifically, individuals interact within multiple lev-
els of influence; they exist within social networks, which in turn exist within 
surrounding environments (McLeroy et al., 1988).
This ecological perspective focuses attention on both individual and social 
environmental factors as targets for health promotion interventions. It highlights 
the importance of approaching public health problems at multiple levels and 
advocates the simultaneous, concurrent change across five more complex lev-
els of influence: individual, interpersonal, organizational, community, and public 
policy (McLeRoy, Bibeau, Steckler, & Glantz, 1988; Stokols, 1996). The model 
assumes that appropriate changes in the social environment will produce changes 
in individuals, and that mutual and interdependent support of individuals within 
the population is essential for implementing environmental changes (McLeroy  
et al., 1988).
According to McLeroy et al. (1988), the first level of influence is comprised 
of individual factors. This includes specific personal characteristics that influence 
behaviors, such as knowledge, attitudes, beliefs, and preferences. The second level 
includes interpersonal factors and involves interpersonal processes and primary 
relationships with family, friends, and peers that provide social identity, support, 
and role definition (McLeroy et al., 1988). For example, parents help shape youth 
attitudes and behaviors by modeling food behaviors. The next level, organiza-
tional factors, includes rules, policies, environmental, and informal structures 
within an institution or system, such as schools, worksites, and neighborhoods, in 
which social relationships occur. Community factors refer to the social networks, 
norms, standards, and practices that exist formally or informally in relationships 
among organizations, such as church groups. Finally, public policy factors include 
local, state, and federal policies and laws that regulate or support desired behaviors 
(McLeroy et al., 1988). And, of course, all of these factors may inhibit or promote 
desirable behaviors.
In sum, although the social-ecological model briefly reviewed here was con-
ceptualized long before digital media, it can still be used for understanding health 
communication that relates to digital advertising. First, the social-ecological per-
spective of effective health communication stresses the interaction and integration 
of factors both within and across all five levels (McLeroy et al., 1988). Second, 
the theoretical framework recognizes behavior is influenced by the complex and 

192  Royne, Pounders, Levy, and Jones
interwoven relationships that exist between an individual and his/her environ-
ment. Last, the model acknowledges that while consumers are responsible for 
their lifestyle choices, consumer behavior is also largely influenced by social and 
environmental influences related to community norms, regulations, and policies. 
As such, health messages from health practitioners should start at the individual 
level of the social-ecological model and capitalize on digital tools and appropri-
ate messages to reach the social networks at a greater level, several of which are 
reviewed next.
Digital Media and Public Health Messages
The growth and acceptance of digital media along with the increased need for public 
health information suggests the use of today’s newest marketing techniques may be 
highly appropriate for health communication in today’s society. About 92 percent 
of all adults use digital media (Pew Internet, 2015). At the same time, vulnerable 
populations and ethnic groups, who at one time were less likely to use technology, 
are now regular users of digital media. For example, the Pew Research Center 
(2015) notes, “Blacks and whites are on more equal footing when it comes to . . .  
mobile platforms” (n.p.). About 92  percent of African Americans, 93  percent 
of Hispanics, and 91 percent of whites have a cell phone (Pew Internet, 2015). 
Moreover, 68 percent of African Americans, 64 percent of Hispanics, and 66 per-
cent of whites have a smartphone (Pew Internet, 2015).
Clearly, digital media continue to evolve, and a wide range of digital tools is 
available to reach the public and provide informative messages that can encourage 
healthy lifestyles. Digital tools, such as exercise apps and digital personal assis-
tants that send doctors’ reminders, represent an intersection between interper-
sonal communication and mass media. This is noteworthy because interpersonal 
communication has been related to health behavior change (Seo & Matsaganis, 
2013). Thus, using digital media platforms and technologies such as Facebook, 
YouTube, and FitBit to communicate health information has the potential to 
result in improved health outcomes. For example, in 2011 the Canadian agency 
ReThink created a digital multi-platform, cutting-edge breast cancer campaign 
that focused on encouraging women to do self-checks with a twist (Rethink-
breastcancer.com, n.d.). Because digital media interpersonal communication 
channels ultimately lead to mass communications channels as part of the shared 
social network, digital tools (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, Snapchat) seem particularly 
appropriate for the social ecological model, which is grounded in individual, envi-
ronmental, and social levels.
Through use of analytics and targeting software, the digital environment allows 
for effective dissemination of public health messages (e.g., Cohen et al., 2010; 
Park, Rodgers & Stemmle, 2013). By being able to tailor and target health mes-
sages to consumers based on their demographic, psychographic, and behavioral 
data, it offers the ability for today’s public health professionals to get persuasive 

Improve Public Health Communication  193
messages out to their intended market. Public health professionals can also gain 
specific knowledge of their audiences, ranging from demographics, behavioral 
data, and psychographic information in the form of product and brand likes and 
dislikes, activities and interests, as well as the use of social media and other digital 
tools.
With the growth of the internet and social media networks, users are able 
to find more information and connect with individuals to discuss issues more 
than ever before. For example, the internet provides resources for chronic disease 
self-management through provision of specialized health information, social sup-
port, and psychosocial benefits (e.g., Dobransky & Hargittai, 2012; Househ, Bory-
cki, & Kushniruk, 2014) via online communities. Fox (2010) reports that about 
one in four consumers engage regularly with an online health community. These 
communities provide emotional support and shared knowledge to consumers by 
engaging with similar individuals online (Frost & Massagli, 2008). This is con-
sistent with Seo and Matsaganis (2013), who find that interpersonal channels 
are more successful in changing both attitudes and behaviors. Moreover, existing 
work shows the power of mass media in reaching and informing large audi-
ences (Wakefield, Loken, & Hornik, 2010). That is, online health communities 
are essentially an intersection of mass media and interpersonal communication 
(Walther et al., 2010), offering a digital alternative for activating health behavior 
change (Webb, Joseph, Yardley, & Michie, 2010) through online interaction.
Along with online communities, it is important for healthcare providers to 
use online tools to provide consumers with updated information and enhance 
services. For instance, a healthcare provider (e.g., physician’s office, pharmacy) 
could use various outlets, such as patient portals, text messages, or social media to 
communicate information about flu immunization and/or tips on how to reduce 
illness risk. These outlets could also be used to introduce new doctors, update the 
community on relevant health issues, and provide wellness tips to patients.
When it comes to social media, Facebook leads the way with more than 
1.65 billion monthly active users across the globe (Facebook, 2016), a total popu-
lation larger than most countries. Other popular social media include Twitter, 
known for people sharing 140-character text messages as well as photos and vid-
eos, which provides opportunities for sharing short bursts of information; Insta-
gram, which launched in 2010, is a social media resource where pictures and short 
video clips can be shared by users; and YouTube, a popular digital tool used to 
post videos (for a review of social media use for health, refer to Koteyko, Hunt, & 
Gunter, 2015; Lefebvre & Bornkessel, 2016). 
Underlying the use of all of these social media is the ability for health infor-
mation to “go viral.” Virality may be explained by comparing it to emotional 
contagion, where the emotions of one individual are transferred to another via 
some type of communication. This emotion may be positive or negative, and 
the concept has been tested in a number of social sciences including psychology, 
sociology, and marketing (Hatfield, Cacioppo, & Rapson, 1994). Although the 

194  Royne, Pounders, Levy, and Jones
emotional contagion research has been examined primarily within the context 
of personal interactions, it has been suggested that the transfer of emotions does 
not necessarily demand physical contact (Hasford, Hardesty, & Kidwell, 2015), and 
as such these emotional effects may be experienced via online communications.
Although typically associated with brand placement, advergames represent 
another contemporary approach to digital media (also see more perspectives on 
advertising in games, Chapters 18 and 25). Advergames are specifically designed 
interactive online games that contain embedded brand messages to promote a 
product, brand, or service (Bellman, Kemp, Haddad,  & varan, 2014) via gam-
ing and entertainment (Vashisht  & Sreejesh, 2015). Advergames are believed 
to be more effective advertising tools as compared to traditional media (Wade, 
2004) because advergames can engage consumer attention for longer time spans 
(Edwards, 2003), generate more involvement compared to traditional television 
programming (Nicovich, 2005), have potentially more viral marketing ability, and 
are more cost effective (Ipe, 2008). Additionally, consumers are less susceptible to 
the effects of suspicion and persuasion knowledge of advergames as compared to 
traditional advertising formats (Friestad & Wright, 1994; Obermiller, Spangen-
berg, & MacLachlan, 2005). Finally, as compared to traditional advertising, adver-
games may become hypnotic or enthralling in nature as the game becomes more 
important to the player (Nicovich, 2005).
Digital devices such as smartphones, smartwatches, and tablets, also link con-
sumers to a variety of health-related apps designed for tasks such as monitoring 
calorie intake, calories burned, steps per day, blood glucose, pulse rate, and sleep 
patterns. These apps, often free or available for a minimal charge, have a poten-
tially huge impact on consumers and their physical health (see Garcia-Gomez et 
al., 2014).
In addition to self-monitoring, many apps allow consumers the opportunity 
to share information with their social network and/or others who are using the 
same app. Interacting with others may serve as a source of motivation for some 
consumers. Social comparison theory (Festinger, 1954) states that self-evaluation, 
self-improvement, and self-enhancement are primary motivations for social com-
parisons. Making an upward comparison to a referent that is perceived to be better 
than oneself on a specific attribute may motivate a person to improve on the attrib-
ute. For example, if a consumer has the Nike App and realizes that most people in 
the network are more active than they are, they may be inspired to increase their 
level of physical activity. Social comparisons can be particularly motivating when 
consumers compare themselves to peers or friends (Lockwood & Kunda, 1997).
Message Strategies for Digital Media
Effective communications will result if an effective message strategy is in place. 
At its most basic level, advertising messages fall within a broad two-level catego-
rization model: rational and emotional messages. Rational messages focus more 

Improve Public Health Communication  195
on functional benefits, facts, and statistics to communicate the information. This 
approach appeals to the consumer’s logic. In contrast, emotional messages appeal 
to a person’s feelings with the goal of eliciting an emotional response such as 
humor, happiness, fear, or guilt. The belief is that emotional appeals provide a con-
nection at a visceral level. Both rational and emotional appeals can be effective. 
Considerable research has focused on the situations that might prove one appeal 
to be more effective than the other. While a review of this body of literature is 
outside the scope of this chapter, we do provide an overview of rational and emo-
tional appeals in health messages that may prove effective in digital media. This 
distinction is important for two reasons.
First, in digital media, and social media in particular, engagement is extremely 
important, and the message content directly affects consumer engagement. Sec-
ond, consumers respond to emotional appeals and rational appeals differently, and 
the various types of appeals within these two broad categories will generate dif-
ferent responses. Moreover, reactions to digital media will be digital in nature by 
virtue of their characteristics. For example, people will share information online 
more quickly and more readily than sharing a printed newspaper story because 
of the ease of communication. Further, people share content online for many dif-
ferent reasons, but generally, more emotional content leads to more arousal (Heil-
man, 1997), and high arousal emotions (Berger, 2011) such as anxiety (Gross & 
Levenson, 1995) lead to more sharing than low arousal emotions such as sadness.
Recognizing the different emotional reactions among consumers, earlier this 
year Facebook expanded their traditional “Like” button to include an additional 
five animated emoji reactions: Love, Haha, Wow, Sad, and Angry. This allows indi-
viduals to specifically express their emotional response to the posted message 
when a simple thumbs up is just not enough.
Finally, different types of digital media may be more relevant for emotional 
versus rational messages. For instance, certain rational messages might be best 
communicated via Twitter, because it is a verbally based platform. However, effec-
tive emotional messages may require visual elements and hence, may be more 
suited to Facebook and YouTube than Twitter.
Rational Appeals
Health messages typically utilize common message elements. For example, most 
health communication advertisements convey risk, advocate a healthy action or 
unhealthy inaction, and appeal to the self or one’s family. It is important to under-
stand how combining these elements influence the efficacy of health commu-
nication. Accordingly, this section will focus on these various message elements 
and identifying when they are most efficacious. Provided that health messages 
typically illustrate the undesired outcome of contracting an illness or disease and 
advocate an action (or inaction) to obtain a healthy outcome, a large body of 
work has examined regulatory focus.

196  Royne, Pounders, Levy, and Jones
Regulatory Focus Theory suggests people are motivated to minimize the dis-
crepancy between actual and desired end states (Higgins, 1997, 1998). Specifically, 
people seek pleasure and avoid pain (Higgins, 1997, 1998). To achieve this goal, 
Regulatory Focus Theory suggests two types of self-regulation systems: promotion- 
focused and prevention-focused. A promotion-focused regulation system is asso-
ciated with emphasizing aspirations and achievements and focuses on the presence 
and absence of positive outcomes. Additionally, a promotion-focused regulation 
system uses an approach strategy of goal attainment. A prevention-focused regula-
tion system is associated with emphasizing safety and protection and focuses on 
the presence of negative outcomes. A  prevention-focused regulation system is 
associated with an avoidance strategy of goal attainment.
A large stream of research in persuasion has focused on regulatory fit, which 
refers to the notion that although a goal may be pursued with either a pro-
motion or prevention focus, some goals are more compatible with a specific 
self-regulatory strategy, resulting in a higher level of “fit” (Higgins, 2002b). For 
example, approach goals that strive toward a desirable end state tend to be more 
compatible with a promotion focus, whereas avoidance goals that seek to deter an 
undesirable end state tend to be more compatible with a prevention focus (Hig-
gins, 2002a; Cesario, Grant, & Higgins, 2004). The fit occurs because striving for 
a gain involves more eagerness than guarding against a non-gain, and guarding 
against a loss involves more vigilance than striving for a non-loss (Idson, Liber-
man, & Higgins, 2000).
Although regulatory focus was initially conceptualized as a relatively stable 
chronic trait (Higgins, 1997, 1998, 2002a), it can be situationally induced (Hig-
gins, 1997, 1998; Lee & Aaker, 2004). For example, messages can emphasize the 
positive outcomes of targeted behaviors (e.g., “regular exercise can promote a 
healthy heart!”) and encourage audiences to pursue gains. In contrast, messages 
can focus on negative outcomes resulting from noncompliance of targeted behav-
iors and focus on the prevention of those outcomes (e.g., “regular exercise can 
prevent heart disease!”). Thus, much work on regulatory focus has concentrated 
on understanding the effectiveness of promotion-focused and prevention-focused 
messages.
A large stream of prior research has focused on the effects of regulatory fit 
in persuasion. That is, when the regulatory focus of a message is consistent with 
individuals’ dispositional tendency or primed goal direction, the persuasive effects 
are increased. Promotion-focused messages are more persuasive among those with 
promotion goals, while the opposite holds true for those with prevention goals 
(e.g., Cesario, Grant, & Higgins, 2004). Such regulatory fit has been shown to 
result in positive persuasion outcomes. Kim (2006) examined how message fram-
ing influenced the effectiveness of antismoking messages. Results showed that 
when regulatory goals were congruent with the antismoking message frame par-
ticipants perceived lower benefits related to smoking and indicated they were less 
likely to smoke in the future.

Improve Public Health Communication  197
Lee and Aaker (2004) found that regulatory focus moderates message fram-
ing on persuasion. Their work demonstrated gain frames are more persuasive 
when the message is promotion-focused, whereas loss frames are more persuasive 
when the message is prevention-focused. Additionally, this work showed increased 
eagerness toward positive outcomes and increased vigilance against negative out-
comes when there was a match between the message frame and the regulatory 
focus of the message. This was attributed to fluency and “feeling” right when 
processing the message. This has implications for health communications in terms 
of pairing message frame with the appropriate type of message.
Self-efficacy and response-efficacy have long been central components of 
health communication strategy. Generally speaking, self-efficacy refers to the ease 
of the advocated behavior and response-efficacy refers to the effectiveness of the 
advocated behavior. Keller (2006) identified a match effect between regulatory 
focus and the type of efficacy (self-efficacy or response-efficacy) conveyed in 
communication about health behaviors. Findings from two studies demonstrate 
greater regulatory-efficacy fit and higher intention to perform the advocated 
healthy behaviors when self-efficacy features are paired with a promotion focus 
and when response-efficacy features are paired with a prevention focus.
A substantial number of health messages convey risk of a health hazard. Prior 
work has examined the effectiveness of various temporal frames in regard to 
conveying risk. Much of the work is rooted in Construal Level Theory, which 
proposes that people use higher-level construals to represent information about 
future distant events and lower-level construals to represent near future events 
(Liberman & Trope, 1998; Trope & Liberman, 2003). Higher-level construals are 
conceptualized as abstract and schematic, whereas lower-level construals are con-
ceptualized as concrete and contextualized (Trope & Liberman, 2003). Chandran 
and Menon (2004) found that conveying risk in a proximal frame (i.e., every day) 
is more effective than conveying risk in a distal frame (i.e., every year) because the 
risk is construed as more proximal. This results in increased self-risk perceptions, 
intentions to exercise cautionary behaviors, concern about the health hazard, and 
overall effectiveness of the risk communication.
However, recent work has identified that self-construal influences the impact 
of temporal frame. Self-construal is described as an assembly of thoughts, feel-
ings, and behaviors concerning the self as distinct from others (Singelis, 1994). 
Research in self-construal focuses on the distinction between an independent 
and interdependent construal of the self (Markus & Kitayama, 1991). People with 
an accessible independent self tend to place high value on independence and are 
associated with promotion goals. On the other hand, people with an accessible 
interdependent self-view tend to place importance on relationships with others 
and belonging. They tend to think and behave under the consideration of “we” 
rather than “I,” and group interests often override individual concerns (Kitayama, 
Markus, & Matsumoto, 1995). While self-view has been considered a chronic trait 
dependent on culture, several studies have revealed that one’s accessible self-view 

198  Royne, Pounders, Levy, and Jones
can be situationally manipulated (e.g., Aaker & Lee, 2001). Thus, self-construal 
can be a form of message framing utilized in health communication advertising. 
Oftentimes, self-construal is primed using both copy and imagery in the ad. For 
example, a PSA about depression may focus on how depression can influence the 
self versus one’s family. In addition, a PSA promoting mammograms may focus on 
consequences for the self versus one’s family.
Pounders, Lee, and Mackert (2015) found temporal frame interacts with self-
construal in the contexts of heart disease and skin cancer prevention. Specifically, a 
proximal frame is more effective when paired with an interdependent self, whereas 
a distal frame is more effective when paired with an independent self. They suggest 
this is the result of consistent cognitive processing. People with an interdepend-
ent self-view construe information concretely and specifically, while people with 
an independent self-view construe information more schematically and abstractly 
(Spassova & Lee, 2013). Further, they find that the mediating process differs for 
those with an interdependent versus independent self-view. For those with an 
interdependent self-view, message concreteness mediates the relationship between 
temporal frame and message persuasiveness, and message persuasiveness then 
mediates the impact of message concreteness on intention to engage in healthy 
behaviors. However, for those with an independent self-view, only message per-
suasiveness plays a mediating role in understanding the impact of temporal frame 
on intention to engage in healthy behaviors. This finding is consistent with the dif-
ferent ways that interdependent versus independent people construe information.
A substantial body of work has focused on the relationship between self-
construal and regulatory focus. For example, Aaker and Lee (2001) found that 
people with an accessible interdependent self-view are more persuaded by pre-
vention-focused information consistent with an avoidance goal, whereas people 
with an accessible independent self-view are more persuaded by promotion-
focused information consistent with an approach goal. When there is a match 
between self-view and regulatory focus of the message, people demonstrated 
greater message recall. Lee, Keller, and Sternthal (2010) extended this work by 
establishing promotion-focused people are more likely to construe information 
at abstract, high levels, whereas prevention-focused people are more likely to 
construe information at concrete, low levels. A fit between one’s regulatory focus 
and the construal level of the information resulted in enhanced attitude due 
to processing fluency. Specifically, a PSA that features what one has to gain by 
engaging in a healthy behavior should also focus on the self, whereas a PSA that 
features what one has to lose by not engaging in a healthy behavior should focus 
on one’s family. This serves as yet another example of match effects between mes-
sage elements in persuasion.
Emotional Appeals
The use of emotional appeals in health messages is not a new concept. Health 
communication research has long investigated discrete emotions such as fear 

Improve Public Health Communication  199
and humor. Multiple theoretical frameworks exist in the area of health and fear 
appeals. These include the health belief model, theory of reasoned action, protec-
tion motivation theory, and extended parallel process model. In the advertising 
arena, protection motivation theory has been widely used to understand con-
sumer response to fear appeals in the context of conveying risk of health hazards. 
Fear is defined as a negative emotional response to a perceived threat (Rogers, 
1983). The general premise of protection motivation theory is that a threat mes-
sage includes four components: probability of the threat, magnitude of the threat, 
effectiveness of the recommended response (response efficacy), and one’s ability 
to perform a recommended response (self-efficacy) (Rogers, 1983). The first two 
components refer to the threat appraisal, whereas the latter two components refer 
to the coping appraisal. High levels of all four components result in the greatest 
amount of change in behavior (Rogers, 1983). However, work on fear appeals has 
demonstrated divergent findings. Generally, research has found that fear appeals 
can work until a certain point, beyond which it creates anxiety and is ineffective 
(Keller & Block, 1996; Keller, 1999).
Berger and Milkman’s (2012) work shows that negative emotions can also 
generate arousal and virality, and the authors point to the success of an anxiety 
building campaign. Powerful fear appeals also have the potential to generate the 
needed arousal to activate engagement and create online activity. Hence, advertis-
ers must develop the appropriate ad campaign, and to generate the desired emo-
tions they seek to effectively communicate health information with the intended 
target audience.
Recently, researchers have shifted focus to guilt and shame appeals. Guilt and 
shame are negative self-conscious emotions because the internal attribution is 
the self (Tangney & Dearing, 2002). Although much of the existing literature 
refers to guilt and shame interchangeably, guilt and shame are two different 
emotions with unique cognitive appraisals and coping mechanisms (Tangney & 
Dearing, 2002; Tracy, Robins, & Tangney, 2007). Guilt is a negative emotion that 
occurs when individuals appraise information about their behavior that violates 
some social or moral standard (Izard, 1997; Tangney & Dearing, 2002). Shame is 
a negative emotion that arises when an individual appraises negative informa-
tion about the global self. Therefore guilt is associated with the notion “I did 
something bad,” while shame is associated with the notion “I am a bad person” 
(Tangney & Dearing, 2002; Tracy, Robins, & Tangney, 2007). Guilt and shame 
also differ in coping mechanisms. Guilt is associated with adaptive or approach 
coping, whereas shame is associated with maladaptive or avoidance coping (Tracy, 
Robins, & Tangney, 2007).
Recent work in the arena of consumer behavior and marketing has exam-
ined the impact of guilt and shame in the context of motivating healthy behav-
iors (Agrawal & Duhachek, 2010; Duhachek, Agrawal, & Han, 2012; Boudewyns, 
Turner, & Paquin, 2013). Agrawal and Duhachek (2010) investigated how the two 
emotional states influence the effectiveness of messages that highlight the socially 
undesirable consequences of binge drinking. They find that compatible appeals, 

200  Royne, Pounders, Levy, and Jones
or appeals which are the same elicited by the manipulated message frame, are less 
effective. This is due to defensive processing; specifically, consumers discount the 
negative consequences because they are motivated to reduce the negative emo-
tion (Agrawal & Duhachek, 2010).
Additionally, Duhachek, Agrawal, and Han (2012) found that guilt appeals are 
more effective when paired with gain frames, and shame appeals are more effec-
tive when paired with loss frames. This finding is attributed to coping mecha-
nisms. Specifically, gain frames elicit the use of problem-solving coping strategies, 
which are accompanied with feelings of guilt. In addition, loss frames elicit the 
use of emotion-focused coping strategies, which are accompanied with feelings 
of shame (Duhachek, Agrawal, & Han, 2012).
Health communication research has also examined positive emotions, such as 
humor. The use of humor in advertising has a long history, yet there is still not a 
universal agreement about the definition. Speck (1987) offered a broad perspec-
tive of humor arguing that humor is multi-dimensional, a concept consistent 
with the idea that humor has many types. Specifically, Speck notes that humor 
is “a family of related phenomena made up a several distinct humor species”  
(p. 61). There are also questions about the underlying mechanism that drives 
humor and its success in the advertising arena, with a number of different theories 
proposed to explain how it works. However, the success of humor in the com-
mercial marketplace has led to a call for health communications that offers more 
than basic information and education. Rather, edutainment, or the integration of 
educational messages with entertaining approaches including humor, have been 
advanced (e.g., Lister et al., 2014). Lister et al. (2014) propose the Laugh Model 
as one method to reach the public with an entertaining and somewhat humorous 
approach. Specifically, they found that implementation of their model in the Utah 
Partnership for Healthy Weight campaign produced successful results, and as such, 
argue for moving toward this model to improve health communications in society.
Interestingly, recent research has examined the interplay between shame and 
humor. Yoon (2015) found that the individual factor, fear of negative evaluation, mod-
erates the interplay between shame and humor. Those with low fear of negative eval-
uation favored humor ads when the level of shame was low and preferred no-humor 
ads when shame induction was high. However, for those with high fear of evaluation, 
the results demonstrate humor is important when shame induction is high.
When utilizing digital media, emotional appeals are often more effective when 
portrayed in platforms that utilize pictures and/or videos such as Instagram and 
YouTube. This may be particularly true for positive emotions, such as humor, as 
suggested by Lister et al. (2014), who also indicate that emotional content may be 
more likely to be shared on social media.
Conclusion
With the considerable influence of advertising, it is imperative that the best prac-
tices of research and technology be considered to confront adverse influences on 

Improve Public Health Communication  201
health by effectively communicating important health information to consumers. 
With continuing advances in technology, digital advertising represents an opportu-
nity to promote healthy lifestyles by augmenting current actions of public health.
There are numerous digital tools that offer enormous resources to health prac-
titioners. Social media, apps, and wearables all offer vast information about con-
sumers to healthcare providers and also serve as tools for healthcare providers 
to communicate with consumers. In addition, big data and other information 
provided on social media offer a unique lens by which healthcare providers can 
better understand and target consumers. As important as it is to use digital tools 
in the arena of health communication, it is also necessary to use sound message 
strategy when creating health messages for those tools.
A final consideration is the need to tailor digital tools and messaging to the 
target audience. Considering the lifestyle factors that contribute to pervasive 
chronic diseases, messages related to food intake, physical activity, and tobacco 
will likely make the most impact on improving health outcomes and containing 
healthcare costs. Moreover, further specialized content should be developed to 
support positive health behaviors in vulnerable populations: underserved minori-
ties, limited English speaking, low-income, children, and the elderly, all of whom 
are at increased health risk. Perhaps most important is the need for collaboration 
between marketing and public health professionals. Marketing experts are needed 
to help shape the format and develop the content of digital advertising to realize 
the true potential of digital advertising to improve public health.
References
Aaker, J. L., & Lee, A. Y. (2001). “I” seek pleasures and “We” avoid pains: The role of self- 
regulatory goals in information processing and persuasion. Journal of Consumer Research, 
28(1), 33–49.
Agrawal, N., & Duhachek, A. (2010). Emotional compatibility and the effectiveness of 
antidrinking messages: A defensive processing perspective on shame and guilt. Journal of 
Marketing Research, 47(2), 263–273.
Arbeit, M. L., Johnson, C. C., & Mott, D. S. (1992). The heart smart cardiovascular school 
health promotion: Behavior correlates of risk factor change. Preventive Medicine, 21, 
18–32.
Bellman, S., Kemp, A., Haddad, H., & Varan, D. (2014). The effectiveness of advergames 
compared to television commercials and interactive commercials featuring advergames. 
Computer in Human Behavior, 32, 276–283.
Berger, J. (2011). Arousal increases social transmission of information. Psychological Science, 
22, 891–893.
Berger, J., & Milkman, K. L. (2012). What makes online content viral? Journal of Marketing 
Research, 49(2), 192–205.
Boudewyns, V., Turner, M. M., & Paquin, R. S. (2013). Shame-free guilt appeals: Testing the 
emotional and cognitive effects of shame and guilt appeals. Psychology and Marketing, 
30(9), 811–825.
Cawley, J., & Meyerhoefer, C. (2012). The medical care costs of obesity: An instrumental 
variables approach. Journal of Health Economics, 31(1), 219–230.

202  Royne, Pounders, Levy, and Jones
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2011). National diabetes fact sheet: National 
estimates and general information on diabetes and prediabetes in the United States. 
Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pubs/pdf/ndfs_2011.pdf.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013). Death and mortality. NCHS FastStats 
web site. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/deaths.htm.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014). National diabetes statistics report, 
2014. CDC.com. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pubs/statsreport14/
national-diabetes-report-web.pdf.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2016). What is health communications. Gate-
way to health communication  & social marketing practice. Retrieved from http://
www.cdc.gov/healthcommunication/healthbasics/whatishc.html.
Cesario, J., Grant, H., & Higgins, E. T. (2004). Regulatory fit and persuasion: Transfer from 
“feeling right.” Journal of Personality and Psychology, 86(3), 388–404.
Chandran, S., & Menon, G. (2004). When a day means more than a year: Effects of temporal 
framing on judgments of health risk. Journal of Consumer Research, 31(2), 375–389.
Cohen, E. L., Caburnay, C. A., Len-Ríos, M. E., Cameron, G. T., Luke, D. A., Poor, T., Powe, 
B., Stemmle, J., & Kreuter, M. W. (2010). Engaging ethnic media to expand the reach 
and effectiveness of communication strategies to reduce health disparities. Health Com-
munication, 25(6), 569–571.
Culp, J., Bell, R. A., & Cassady, D. (2010). Characteristics of food industry websites and 
advergames targeting children. Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior, 42(3), 197–201.
DeVol, R.,  & Bedroussian, A. (2007). An unhealthy America: The economic burden of 
chronic disease—Charting a new course to save lives and increase productivity and eco-
nomic growth. Retrieved from http://www.milkeninstitute.org/publications/view/321.
Dietz, W. H., & Gortmaker, S. L. (1985). Do we fatten our children at the television set? 
Obesity and television viewing in children and adolescents. Pediatrics, 75(5), 807–812.
Dobransky, K., & Hargittai, E. (2012). Inquiring minds acquiring wellness: Uses of online 
and offline sources of health information. Health Communication, 27(4), 331–343.
Duhachek, A., Agrawal, N., & Han, D. (2012). Guilt versus shame: Coping, fluency, and 
framing in the effectiveness of responsible drinking message. Journal of Marketing 
Research, 49(60), 928–941.
Edwards, E. (2003, January  26). Plug (the product) and play. Washington Post. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/2003/01/26/
plug-the-product-and-play/4d6dc386-d032–4854–8b16–524ca455b5d6/
Facebook News Room. (2016). Company info-stats. Retrieved from http://newsroom.
fb.com/company-info/
Federal Trade Commission. (2012). Review of food marketing to children and adoles-
cents—Follow-up report.
Festinger, L. (1954). A  theory of social comparison processes. Human Relations, 7(2), 
117–140.
Fox, S. (2010) Patients and online communities. Pew Research Center. Retrieved from http:// 
www.pewinternet.org /2010/04/06/patients-and-online-communities/?beta=true&utm_
expid=53098246-2.Lly4CFSVQG21phsg=KopIg.1&utm_referrer=http%3A%F%2Fwww.
pewinernet.org% 2Fsearch%2Bcommunity%2F.
Freedman, D. S., Mei, Z., Srinivasan, S. R., Berenson, G. S., & Dietz, W. H. (2007). Cardio-
vascular risk factors and excess adiposity among overweight children and adolescents: 
The Bogalusa heart study. Journal of Pediatrics, 150(1), 12–17.
Friestad, M., & Wright, P. (1994). The persuasion knowledge model: How people cope 
with persuasion attempts. Journal of Consumer Research, 21(1), 1–31.

Improve Public Health Communication  203
Frost, J. H., & Massagli, M. P. (2008). Social uses of personal health information within 
PatientsLikeMe, an online patient community: What can happen when patients have 
access to one another’s data. Journal of Medical Research, 10, e15.
Garcia-Gomez, J. M., de la Torre-Diez, I., Vicente, J., Robles, M., Lopez-Coronado, M., & 
Rodrigues, J. J. (2014). Analysis of mobile health applications for a broad spectrum of 
consumers: A user experience approach. Health Informatics Journal, 20(1), 74–84.
Grier, S. A., & Kumanyika, S. K. (2008). The context for choice: Health implications of 
targeted food and beverage marketing to African Americans. American Journal of Public 
Health, 98(9), 1616–1629.
Gross, J., & Levenson, R. (1995). Emotion elicitation using films. Cognition & Emotion, 9, 
87–108.
Han, J. C., Lawlor, D. D., & Kimm, S. Y. (2010). Childhood obesity. Lancet, 375(9), 1737–1748.
Hasford, J., Hardesty, D. M., & Kidwell, B. (2015). More than a feeling: Emotional conta-
gion effects in persuasive communication. Persuasive Communication, 52, 836–847.
Hatfield, E., Cacioppo, J. T., & Rapson, R. L. (1994). Emotional contagion. New York, NY: 
Cambridge University Press.
Heilman, K. (1997). The neurobiology of emotional experience. In S. Salloway, P. Malloy, & 
J. L. Cummings (Eds.) The neuropsychiatry of limbic and subcortical disorders, (pp. 133–142). 
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Higgins, T. E. (1997). Beyond pleasure and pain. American Psychologist, 52(December), 
1280–1300.
Higgins, T. E. (1998). Promotion and prevention: Regulatory focus as motivational princi-
ple. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 30, 1–46.
Higgins, T. E. (2002a). How self-regulation creates distinct values: The case of promotion 
and prevention decision making. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 12(3), 177–191.
Higgins, T. E. (2002b). Making a good decision: Value from fit. American Psychology, 55(11), 
1217–1230.
Hingle, M. D., Castonguay, J. S., Ambuel, D. A., Smith, R. M., & Kunkel, D. (2015). Align-
ment of children’s food advertising with proposed federal guidelines. American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine, 48(6), 707–713.
Househ, M., Borycki, E., & Kushniruk, A. (2014). Empowering patients through social 
media: The benefits and challenges. Healthier Informatics Journal, 20(1), 50–58.
Idson, L. C., Liberman, N., & Higgins, T. E. (2000). Distinguishing gains from nonlosses 
and losses from nongains: A regulatory focus perspective on hedonic intensity. Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology, 36(3), 252–274.
Institute of Medicine. (2013). Challenges and opportunities for change in food marketing 
to children and youth: Workshop summary. Retrieved from http://www.nationalacad 
emies.org/hmd/Reports/2013/Challenges-and-Opportunities-for-Change-in-Food-
Marketing-to-Children-and-Youth.aspx.
Ipe, M. (2008). An introduction. In M. Ipe (Eds.), Advergaming and ingame advertising (pp. 
3–16). Hyderabad: Icfai University Press.
Izard, C. E. (1997). Emotions and facial expressions: A perspective from differential emo-
tions theory. The Psychology of Facial Expression, 2, 57–77.
Keller, P. A. (1999). Converting the unconverted: The effect of inclination and opportunity 
to discount health-related fear appeals. Journal of Applied Psychology, 84(3), 403.
Keller, P. A. (2006). Regulatory focus and efficacy of health messages. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 33(1), 109–114. doi: 10.1086/504141.
Keller, P. A., & Block, L. B. (1996). Increasing the persuasiveness of fear appeals: The effect 
of arousal and elaboration. Journal of Consumer Research, 22(4), 448–459.

204  Royne, Pounders, Levy, and Jones
Kim, Y. J. (2006). The role of regulatory focus in message framing in antismoking advertise-
ments for adolescents. Journal of Advertising, 35(1), 143–151.
Kitayama, S., Markus, H. R., & Matsumoto, H. (1995). Culture, self, and emotion: A cul-
tural perspective on “self-conscious” emotions. In J. P. Tangney & K. W. Fischer (Eds.) 
Self-conscious emotions: The psychology of shame, guilt, embarrassment, and pride (pp. 439–
464). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Koteyko, N., Hunt, D., & Gunter, B. (2015). Expectations in the field of the internet and 
health: An analysis of claims about social networking sites in clinical literature. Sociology 
of Health & Illness, 37(3), 468–484.
Krebs-Smith, S. M., Guenther, P. M., Subar, A. F., Kirkpatrick, S. I., & Dodd, K. W. (2010). 
Americans do not meet federal dietary recommendations. Journal of Nutrition, 140(10), 
1832–1838.
Larson, N., Story, M., Eisenberg, M. E., & Neumark-Sztainer, D. (2016). Secular trends in 
meal and snack patterns among adolescents from 1999 to 2010. Journal of the Academy of 
Nutrition and Dietetics, 116(2), 240–250.
Lee, A. Y., & Aaker, J. L. (2004). Bringing the frame into focus: The influence of regulatory 
fit on processing fluency and persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86(2), 
205–218.
Lee, A. Y., Keller, P. A., & Sternthal, B. (2010). Value from regulatory construal fit: The 
persuasive impact of fit between consumer goals and message concreteness. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 36(5), 735–747.
Lefebvre, R. C., & Bornkessel, A. S. (2016). Digital social networks and health. Circulation, 
127(17), 1829–1836.
Liberman, N., & Trope, Y. (1998). The role of feasibility and desirability consideration in 
near and distant future decisions: A test of temporal construal theory. Journal of Personal-
ity and Social Psychology, 75(1), 5–18.
Lister, C., Royne, M. B., Payne, H., Cannon, B., Hanson, C., & Barnes, M. (2014). The laugh 
model: Reframing and rebranding public health through social media. American Journal 
of Public Health, 105(11), 2245–2251.
Lockwood, P., & Kunda, Z. (1997). Superstars and me: Predicting the impact of role models 
on the self. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73(1), 91.
Malik, V. S., Schulze, M. B., & Hu, F. B. (2006). Intake of sugar-sweetened beverages 
and weight gain: A  systematic review. American Society for Clinical Nutrition, 84(2), 
274–288.
Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and self: Implications for cognition, emo-
tion, and motivation. Psychological Review, 98(April), 224–253.
McLeroy, K. R., Bibeau, D., Steckler, A., & Glantz, K. (1988). An ecological perspective on 
health promotion programs. Health Education & Behavior, 5(4), 351–377.
Mink, M., Evans, A., Moore, C. G., Calderon, K. S., & Deger, S. (2010). Nutritional imbal-
ance endorsed by televised food advertisements. Journal of the American Dietetic Associa-
tion, 110(6), 904–910.
Moore, D. J., Williams, J. D., & Qualls, W. J. (1996). Target marketing of tobacco and alcohol- 
related products to ethnic minority groups in the United States. Ethnicity and Disease, 
6, 83–98.
Nicovich, S. G. (2005). The effect of involvement on ad judgment in video game environ-
ment: The mediating role of presence. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 6(1), 29–39.
Obermiller, C., Spangenberg, E., & MacLachlan, D. L. (2005). Ad skepticism the conse-
quences of disbelief. Journal of Advertising, 34(3), 7–17.

Improve Public Health Communication  205
Ogden, C. L., Carroll, M. D., Kit, B. K., & Flegal, K. M. (2012). Prevalence of obesity and 
trends in body mass index among US children and adolescents, 1999–2010. JAMA, 
307(5), 483–490.
Ogden, C. L., Carroll, M. D., Kit, B. K., & Flegal, K. M. (2014). Prevalence of childhood and 
adult obesity in the United States, 2011–2012. JAMA, 311(8), 806–814.
Park, H., Rodgers, S., & Stemmle, J. (2013). Analyzing health organizations’ use of Twitter 
for promoting health literacy. Journal of Health Communication: International Perspectives, 
18(4), 410–425. doi: 10.1080/10810730.2012.727956.
Pew Internet. (2015). Digital divides. Retrieved from http://www.pewinternet.org/ 
2015/09/22/digital-divides-2015.
Piernas, C., & Popkin, B. M. (2010). Trends in snacking among US children. Health Affairs, 
29(3), 398–404.
Pounders, K. R., & Mackert, M. S. (2015). Matching temporal frame, self-view, and message 
frame valence: Improving persuasiveness in health communications. Journal of Advertis-
ing, 44(4), 388–402.
Puhl, R. M., & Latner, J. D. (2007). Stigma, obesity, and the health of the nation’s children. 
Psychology Bulletin, 133(4), 557–580.
Reisch, L. A., Gwozdz, W., Barba, G., De Henauw, S., Lascorz, N., & Pigeot, I. (2013). Exper-
imental evidence on the impact of food advertising on children’s knowledge about and 
preferences for healthful food. Journal of Obesity, 2013, 13. doi: 10.1155/2013/40852.
Rethinkbreastcancer.com (n.d.). http://rethinkbreastcancer.com/understanding-breast-health/ 
your-man-reminder/
Rogers, R. W. (1983). Cognitive and physiological processes in fear appeals and attitude 
change: A revised theory of protection motivation. In J. T. Cacciopo & R. Petty (Eds.), 
Social psychophysiology: A sourcebook (pp. 153–176). New York, NY: Guildord Press.
Rosenheck, R. (2008). Fast food consumption and increased caloric intake: A systematic 
review of a trajectory towards weight gain and obesity risk. Obesity Reviews, 9(6), 535–547.
Royne, M. B., & Levy, M. (2011). Marketing for public health: We need an app for that. 
Journal of Consumer Affairs, 45(1), 1–6.
Seo, M., & Matsaganis, M. D. (2013). How interpersonal communication mediates the rela-
tionship of multichannel communication connections to health-enhancing and health- 
threatening behaviors. Journal of Health Communication, 18, 1002–1020.
Singelis, T. M. (1994). The measurement of independent and interdependent self-construals. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 20(October), 580–591.
Spassova, G., & Lee, A. Y. (2013). Looking into the future: A match between self-view and 
temporal distance. Journal of Consumer Research, 40(1), 159–171.
Speck, P. S. (1987). On humor in advertising. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation. Texas Tech 
University.
Stokols, D. (1996). Translating social ecological theory into guidelines for community 
health promotion. American Journal of Health Promotion, 10, 282–298.
Story, M., & French, S. (2004). Food advertising and marketing directed at children and ado-
lescents in the US. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 1(3), 3–20.
Sutherland, E. R. (2008). Obesity and asthma. Immunology Allergy Clinic of North America, 
28(3), 589–602.
Tangney, J. P., & Dearing, R. L. (2002). Shame and guilt. New York, NY: Guildford Press.
Tracy, J. L., Robins, R. W., & Tangney, J. P. (2007). The self-conscious emotions: Theory and 
research. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2003). Temporal construal. Psychological Review, 110(3), 403–421.

206  Royne, Pounders, Levy, and Jones
Vashisht, D., & Sreejesh, S. (2015). Effects of brand placement strength, prior game playing 
experience and game involvement on brand recall in advergames. Journal of Indian Busi-
ness Research, 7(3), 292–312.
Wade, W. (2004, February 26). Care and feeding of cyber-pets rivets tag-along marketers. 
New York Times, 87–100.
Wakefield, M. A., Loken, B., & Hornik, R. C. (2010). Use of mass media campaigns to 
change health behavior. The Lancet, 376, 1261–1271.
Walther, J. B., Carr, C. T., Choi, S. S. W., DeAndrea, D. C., Kim, J., Tong, S. T., & Van Der 
Heide, B. (2010). Interaction of interpersonal, peer, and media influence sources online. 
A Networked Self: Identity, Community, and Culture on Social Network Sites, 17, 17–38.
Ward, B. W., Schiller, J. S, & Goodman, R. A. (2014). Multiple chronic conditions among 
US adults: A 2012 update. Preventing Chronic Disease, 11. Retrieved from http://www.
medscape.com/viewarticle/825839
Webb, T., Joseph, J., Yardley, L., & Michie, S. (2010). Using the internet to promote health 
behavior change: A systematic review and meta-analysis of the impact of theoretical 
basis, use of behavior change techniques, and mode of delivery on efficacy. Journal of 
Medical Internet Research, 12(1), e4.
World Health Organization. (2009). The extent, nature, and effects of food promotion to 
children: A review of the evidence to December 2008. Retrieved from http://www.
who.int/dietphysicalactivity/Evidence_Update_2009.pdf.
Yoon, H. J. (2015). Humor effects in shame-inducing health issue advertising: The moder-
ating effects of fear of negative evaluation. Journal of Advertising, 44(2), 126–139.

Introduction
Companies and brands increasingly interact with their audiences, especially via 
online communication and participation formats. One of these formats is the 
brand community. Online brand communities allow companies and brands to 
inform and interact with their customers. By creating brand communities in social 
networking sites (SNS brand communities), such as Facebook brand pages, com-
panies deliver unique and interesting content to (potential) consumers and stimu-
late them to interact with each other, their fellow network contacts, and the brand 
(Jahn & Kunz, 2012). These (potential) customers have never been more enabled 
to engage online with brands and share their brand evaluations with others.
Motivations for participating in more “traditional” (i.e., non-SNS) virtual 
brand communities, online platforms where brands can interact with their current 
and potential customers, are fairly well documented (e.g., Nonnecke & Preece, 
2001; Ridings & Gefen, 2004). However, these insights might not fully apply to 
SNS brand communities, as these are embedded in a larger network of social ties 
between people who usually do not share a common interest in and enthusiasm, 
or even love, for a brand (Boyd & Ellison, 2007). This might be advantageous for 
brands, as consumers’ interactions are potentially visible for their entire social 
network and thus have much larger reach than interactions in traditional virtual 
brand communities. Consequently, SNS brand communities may contribute to 
the spreading of brand-related content and in this way increase the brand’s vis-
ibility, brand awareness, and brand involvement (Jahn & Kunz, 2012). Moreover, 
consumers’ interactions may guide the brand evaluations of their friends. This 
word-of-mouth is highly desirable as it appears to be more effective than tradi-
tional advertising tactics due to higher credibility of and lower resistance to peers 
in a SNS than company-originated sources (de Vries, Gensler, & Leeflang, 2012).
12
CONSUMERS’ MOTIVATIONS 
FOR LURKING AND POSTING IN 
BRAND COMMUNITIES ON SOCIAL 
NETWORKING SITES
Marijke De Veirman, Verolien Cauberghe, Liselot 
Hudders, and Patrick De Pelsmacker

208  Veirman, Cauberghe, Hudders, Pelsmacker
The purpose of this chapter is to explore the characteristics and marketing 
potential of SNS brand communities, how SNS users interact with these com-
munities, and what motivates them to engage in different types of interaction. 
This will be done by providing an overview of research on these topics and by 
reporting the results of an empirical study in which the relationship between 
motivations to engage in brand related activities and performing different types 
of activities is investigated. First, we discuss how SNS brand communities differ 
from traditional online brand communities and in what ways they are valuable 
for brand communications. Next, we give an overview of research on how users 
engage in brand-related activities on SNSs and what motivates them to do so. We 
elaborate on the relationship between these motivations and brand-related activi-
ties and we report the results of the empirical study. We conclude with a discus-
sion on managerial implications.
SNS Brand Communities
The first brand communities were developed offline. Members, usually devoted 
brand advocates, interacted with other members via social activities and events 
organized by the brand. The development of the internet facilitated the creation 
of virtual brand communities. A virtual brand community is a “specialized, non-
geographically bound community, based on a structured set of social relations 
among admirers of a brand” (Muñiz & O’Guinn, 2001, p. 412). A virtual brand 
community, initiated by organizations as part of brand management strategies or 
by individual consumers, is as a group of individuals with common interests in a 
brand, who communicate with each other electronically about a specific brand, 
product, or service, unrestrained by time and space (Rothaermel & Sugiyama, 
2001; Sicilia & Palazón, 2008).
Currently, the popularity of social networking sites (SNSs) provides virtual 
brand communities with new platforms (Kaplan & Haenlein, 2010), such as brand 
pages on Facebook or accounts on Twitter or Instagram. Social networking sites 
are defined as:
Web-based services that allow individuals to construct a public or semi-
public profile within a bounded system, articulate a list of other users with 
whom they share a connection, and view and traverse their list of connec-
tions and those made by others within the system.
(Boyd & Ellison, 2007, p. 2)
Brand pages can be considered a new form of virtual brand community (Sung, 
Kim, Kwon, & Moon, 2010). A brand community has three core components: 
1) consciousness of kind, the intrinsic connection that members feel toward one 
another, and the collective sense of difference from others not in the community, 
2) shared rituals and traditions, and 3) a sense of duty to the community and its 

Motivations for Lurking and Posting  209
members (Muñiz & O’Guinn, 2001). These brand community characteristics can 
also be present in SNS brand communities. Members share a common interest, 
namely the brand, and SNS communities allow member-initiated interaction, as 
consumers can participate in the community through reading, liking, sharing, and 
posting content (Muñiz & O’Guinn, 2001). However, brand pages are immersed 
in SNSs, and the social context that surrounds brand pages may create important 
differences (Jahn & Kunz, 2012; Zaglia, 2013; Habibi, Laroche, & Richard, 2014a; 
2014b). SNS brand communities are “open,” since consumers can easily join and 
leave the community (Gruner, Homburg, & Lukas, 2014).
Individuals join a brand page by a simple click on the button “Like” on Face-
book or “Follow” on Twitter or Instagram. This process requires a low effort 
and does not necessarily require high brand involvement. Individuals may easily 
engage in multiple memberships to different brand pages (Habibi et al., 2014b). 
Brand pages can reach a mass audience, while traditional virtual brand com-
munities do not usually go beyond thousands of brand admirers. Importantly, 
SNSs allow easy information diffusion. By clicking “Like,” “Share,” “Retweet,” 
or “Comment” on a post on Facebook, Twitter, or Instagram, the informa-
tion may be distributed to the user’s entire network. Traditional virtual brand 
communities are specifically established as a platform to facilitate brand-related 
conversations among owners and brand admirers. However, SNS brand com-
munities are embedded in a network of social ties between people who are 
not necessarily all like-minded “fans” of the brand (Muñiz & O’Guinn, 2001; 
Boyd & Ellison, 2007).
Consequently, brand-related content posted to SNS brand communities has 
much larger reach, as consumers’ interactions are potentially visible to their entire 
social network, most of which are not members of the brand page (Lipsman, 
Mudd, Rich, & Bruich, 2012). Members of the brand page may perform a bridg-
ing function with other individuals interested in the brand (Liao & Chou, 2012) 
and facilitate the interaction between the brand and the members’ friends (Ellison, 
Vitak, Gray, & Lampe, 2014). SNSs partly transferred branding power from market-
ers to consumers (Muntinga, Moorman, & Smit, 2011; Chauhan & Pillai, 2013).
SNS brand communities are easily accessible as posted messages are automati-
cally displayed on fans’ personal “walls” and people may interact with the com-
munity without having to create a separate login for the community ( Jahn & 
Kunz, 2012). In social networks, members often use their real identities to create 
a profile. This transparency in brand supporters’ identities may positively impact 
on credibility, brand evaluation, and purchase intentions by members of their 
network (Habibi et al., 2014a).
On the other hand, as a consumer can become a fan of several brands at the 
same time and, thus, to become a member of several brand communities on one 
SNS, members might be less committed compared to members of traditional virtual 
brand communities, who have actively searched and signed up for a website that is 
especially established to discuss the brand (Pöyry, Parvinen, & Malmivaara, 2013).

210  Veirman, Cauberghe, Hudders, Pelsmacker
The main motivation of SNS users is to be connected with friends and meet 
new friends (Raacke & Bonds-Raacke, 2008; Brandtzæg & Heim, 2009); for enter-
tainment (Brandtzæg & Heim, 2009); or for self-presentation, self-expression, or 
self-esteem (Wilcox & Stephen, 2013). Therefore, information that is not oriented 
to these consumer motivations, such as commercially-oriented brand information, 
can be perceived as highly irritating (Taylor, Lewin, & Strutton, 2011). This irrita-
tion can lead SNS users to develop a negative attitude toward the company or the 
brand (Logan, Bright, & Gangadharbatla, 2012). Moreover, since brand posts may 
blend with other messages on consumers’ walls, this implies that brand-related 
content has to compete with other updates in the consumer’s social network, 
which may negatively affect levels of attention and consequently levels of interac-
tion (Pöyry et al., 2013).
In general, SNS brand communities provide a number of opportunities for 
companies and brands. Members of SNS brand communities may post brand 
information that can then be seen by their contacts in the SNS. In that way, 
positive brand information is spread through the social network of the brand 
community members, and this may increase many people’s commitment to the 
brand (Mattila & Wirtz, 2002; Ha & Perks, 2005). In SNSs, consumers build their 
own profile with their personal information. When they join a SNS brand com-
munity, companies can have access to their information and that of their social 
network (e.g., profiles, pictures, location, gender, and family status) (Ridings, 
Gefen, & Arinze, 2006; Habibi et al., 2014b). Companies can use this information 
to enhance communication effectiveness. The brand can plan posts to be seen by 
specific groups of fans or followers (Mata & Quesada, 2014; Tsimonis & Dimitri-
adis, 2014). Additionally, they can use this information to improve the messages 
they create, by analyzing the likes and dislikes of their members on other posts 
and on their own posts. Virtual brand communities often lead to better market 
performance (Rothaermel & Sugiyama, 2001; Bagozzi & Dholakia, 2006).
SNSs offer metrics that enable companies to measure the success of brand 
communities. For instance, brand awareness through SNSs can be measured as the 
numbers of fans the brand page has or the number of individuals who have seen 
their posts. Additionally, brand interactions can be measured by the number of 
times consumers liked, commented, or shared on Facebook or Instagram, or have 
retweeted or favored on Twitter, or by the posts consumers write on the brand 
page (Hoffman & Fodor, 2010; Yu, 2014). Finally, the sentiment of the comments 
about the brand can be measured. Sentiment refers to the tone of the conversa-
tion, the amount of positive and negative brand mentions.
Engaging in Brand-Related Activities on  
Social Networking Sites
Members of a brand community engage in brand-related activities in much the 
same way as they interact with other SNS content. On the one hand, there is the 

Motivations for Lurking and Posting  211
passive use of SNS information or “quiet membership” of a brand community. 
This refers to non-interactive behavior, i.e., people who rarely contribute to the 
community themselves, but mainly read posts from the brand and of other mem-
bers of the community as they browse the brand page. This type of passive, less 
publicly visible engagement is called consuming behavior or “lurking.” On the 
other hand, members may interactively engage in the community, by publicly 
liking and sharing posts, add content themselves, or react to comments of others. 
This “communicative membership” is called “posting” (Burnett, 2000; Hammond, 
2000; Schlosser, 2005). Muntinga et al. (2011) distinguish two types of posting 
behavior: contributing behavior (e.g., sharing posts) and creating behavior (e.g., 
adding posts). Previous research on virtual brand communities found that only a 
small fraction of members publicly post comments (Nonnecke & Preece, 2001). 
The majority prefers to passively enjoy the benefits offered by the comments of 
the brand or others, without making any substantial contribution (Preece, Non-
necke, & Andrews, 2004).
Consumer Motivations for SNS Brand  
Community Participation
As motivations are consumers’ needs or drives, which lead them to participate in 
the community, it is important for brands to gain understanding of these moti-
vations. For brand communities to be successful, first of all they need to attract 
members. SNS users may be motivated to become members for different reasons: 
social interaction and integration, entertainment, informational, status enhance-
ment, and economic benefits (e.g., promotional deals) (Bagozzi & Dholakia, 2006; 
Pentina, Prybutok, & Zhang, 2008; Park & Kim, 2014; Habibi et al., 2014a). These 
motivations fall into two classical categories that also apply to SNS use in gen-
eral: utilitarian needs for knowledge and benefits, and intrinsic hedonic needs for 
enjoyment and self-enhancement (Huang, 2008; Pöyry et al., 2013; Yu, 2014). 
Similarly, Toubia and Stephen (2013) differentiate between what they call intrin-
sic and image-related motivations. Sukoco and Wu (2010) distinguish two main 
motives for consumers to join a virtual brand community: a self-related and a 
social-related motivation. The former refers to consumers’ need for enjoyment, 
information, and maintenance of their self-esteem, while the latter is related to 
consumers’ need for affiliation and social status. Nadkarni and Hofmann (2012) 
propose a similar distinction of motivations to engage in SNSs: the need to belong 
and the need for self-presentation.
Hennig-Thurau, Gwinner, Walsh, and Gremler (2004) find that consum-
ers mainly participate in virtual brand communities to vent negative feelings, 
care for others, enhance their self-worth, seek advice, obtain social or economic 
benefits, obtain platform assistance, or help the company. Wiertz and de Ruyter 
(2007) point out that the most contributing members mainly engage out of feel-
ings of commitment to the brand. Moreover, members take into account the 

212  Veirman, Cauberghe, Hudders, Pelsmacker
perceived informational value of interacting with the community (Brodie, Hol-
lebeek, Juric´, & Ilic´, 2011). According to Zaglia (2013), people mainly participate 
in brand communities out of interest and passion for the brand, willingness to 
learn and improve skills, to build social relationships with others and enhance 
their social position, and to receive information that is tailored to their needs. 
Kwon, Kim, Sung, and Yoo (2014) distinguish four primary motivations for con-
sumers to follow brands on Twitter: incentive seeking, social-interaction seeking, 
brand usage/likeability, and information seeking. Enginkaya and Yilmaz (2014) 
suggest five motivations to interact with and/or about the brand over social 
media: brand affiliation, conversation, opportunity seeking, entertainment, and 
investigation. Bernritter, Verlegh, and Smit (2016) make a distinction between 
consumer identity-related drivers, such as identity signaling (Hollenbeck & Kai-
kati, 2012) and self-expression (Wallace, Buil, de Chernatony, & Hogan, 2014); 
brand-related drivers, such as brand love (Bergkvist & Bech-Larsen, 2010; Batra, 
Ahuvia & Bagozzi, 2012); and consumer-brand identification (Stokburger-Sauer, 
Ratneshwar, & Sen, 2012), and, finally, community-related drivers such as group 
membership (Morandin, Bagozzi, & Bergami, 2013), or social identification with 
the community (Muñiz & O’Guinn, 2001; Bagozzi & Dholakia, 2006; Muntinga 
et al., 2011).
Muntinga et al. (2011) propose a framework of six motivations to engage in 
SNS brand communities: information, entertainment, remuneration, personal 
identity, integration and social interaction, and empowerment. In the next section, 
we will elaborate on the relationship between these six motivations and brand-
related activities of SNS users.
Motivations as Antecedents of Engagement
The need for information is about seeking advice and opinions. Consumers derive 
information from what others think and share in the virtual brand community 
(Dholakia, Bagozzi, & Pearo, 2004). Muntinga et al. (2011) found that, as opposed 
to contributing to brand communities and creating content, consuming brand-
related content is driven by the need for information. Nonnecke & Preece (2001) 
suggest that lurkers do not feel the need to participate (post) as their informational 
needs are satisfied without actively having to contribute.
The entertainment motivation is associated with pleasure-seeking, passing 
time, enjoyment, and relaxation. Previous research indicated entertainment to be 
an important motivation for both lurking and posting behavior (Goldsmith & 
Horowitz, 2006). Muntinga et al. (2011) indeed found that the need for entertain-
ment is associated with all types of brand engagement activities.
The social interaction motivation covers various needs, such as the need to a 
sense of belonging, the need for social contact, etc. Daugherty, Eastin, and Bright 
(2008) found social interaction to be a motivation for creating user-generated con-
tent in general, and Muntinga et al. (2011) found it to be an important motivation 

Motivations for Lurking and Posting  213
for contributing to and creating brand-related content on social media, while this 
was not the case for merely consuming content.
Consumers who are driven by a remuneration motivation undertake a certain 
action because they expect to be rewarded for it (Ryan & Deci, 2000). Hennig-
Thurau et al. (2004) found that online community members are more willing to 
participate when economic incentives are offered. Muntinga et al. (2011) found 
remuneration to be a motivation for consuming brand-related content and not 
for contributing to or creating brand-related content. However, it is a current 
practice of marketers to offer incentives to encourage their fans to engage and 
actively participate in brand-related activities rather than rewarding people for 
merely liking their brand page without any additional efforts. Therefore, it could 
be expected that primarily posting, and not lurking, behavior is motivated by the 
idea of a possible remuneration.
Self-presentation refers to the way people present their personal identity to 
others. Social media users present themselves through personalizing their profile 
and their activities on social media (Tüfekçi, 2007). Peluchette and Karl (2009) 
found that Facebook users purposely post content to present themselves in a cer-
tain way to others. Several studies (e.g., Jahn & Kunz, 2012; Wallace et al., 2014) 
showed that consumers participate in brand-related activities to fulfill the need 
to profile themselves to their personal network, manage their self-identities, rein-
force their self-esteem and identify with and gain recognition from peers ( Jahn & 
Kunz, 2012; Hollenbeck & Kaikati, 2012). It is an important motivation for con-
tributing to and creating brand-related content, but not for merely consuming it 
(Muntinga et al., 2011).
Consumers may also use social media based on an empowerment motivation, 
i.e., to influence other consumers or the brand itself (Fournier & Avery, 2011). 
This idea of empowerment was found to be an important motivation for creating 
brand-related content in Muntinga et al.’s (2011) study.
Empirical Illustration
In the empirical illustration provided, we quantitatively explore the relationships 
between motivations to engage with brands on SNSs and the type of brand-
related activities people engage in. We use Muntinga’s et al. (2011) conceptual 
model of six motivations and predict which motivations can be linked to lurking 
and posting behavior on Facebook brand pages.
Method, Subjects, and Procedure
The study employed an online survey that was posted on Facebook. Participants 
were asked to share the survey link in their own social network. First, participants 
were asked if they liked any brand pages. Participants who indicated not to be 
a fan of any Facebook brand page were excluded from the study. Next, the 187 

214  Veirman, Cauberghe, Hudders, Pelsmacker
TABLE 12.1  Measures (7-point scale)
Variable and items
Source
Alpha
Information motivation
I am looking for information about the brand.
I want to know what other people think about or do 
with the brand.
I want to know how to use the brand and how I can 
solve a problem with the brand.
Muntinga et al. (2011)
.82
Entertainment motivation
Relax.
Get entertained.
Kill time when bored.
Gummerus et al. (2012)
.80
Social interaction motivation
I can meet people like me on this fan page.
I can meet new people like me on this fan page.
I can find out about people like me on this fan page.
I can interact with people like me on this fan page.
Jahn and Kunz (2012)
.88
Remuneration motivation
Get a discount.
Take part in a competition.
Wallace et al. (2014)
.92
Self-presentation motivation
I can make a good impression on others.
I can improve the way I am perceived.
I can present to others who I am.
I can present to others who I want to be.
Jahn and Kunz (2012)
.93
remaining participants (32.6% male; Mage = between 18 and 25 years; education: 
33.2% secondary education, 66.8% higher education) were asked to write down 
one of the brand pages they “Like” on Facebook. After this, they were asked to 
indicate how they interacted with this brand page. Next, participants were asked 
about their motivations to perform brand-related activities. The last part of the 
survey collected demographic information of the participants.
Measures
First, participants had to indicate how often they performed a number of brand-
related activities on the Facebook brand page, using a 7-point scale (1 = never, 
7 = always). Five brand-related activities were included: 1) reading and viewing 
messages, photos, and videos of the brand, 2) liking messages, photos, and videos 
of the brand, 3) sharing messages, photos, and videos of the brand, 4) comment-
ing on brand posts and others’ contributions to the brand page, 5) posting mes-
sages, photos, and videos to the brand page (Muntinga et al., 2011; Gummerus, 
Liljander, Weman, & Pihlström, 2012). Next, participants were asked about their 
motivations to perform each of the above-mentioned activities, namely infor-
mation, social interaction, entertainment, self-presentation, remuneration, and 
empowerment. The measurement scales are shown in Table 12.1.

Motivations for Lurking and Posting  215
Variable and items
Source
Alpha
Empowerment motivation
I want to give suggestions on new or existing products.
I want to influence other people.
I want to influence the brand.
Muntinga et al. (2011)
.87
Measurement Model
Exploratory factor analysis confirmed two types of participation in Facebook 
brand pages: rather passive, less-publicly visible behavior or lurking, and more 
active, publicly visible behavior or posting. The two factors explained 78.27 per-
cent of the total variance. Lurking included activities that are not or only merely 
visible for consumers’ social network or other fans, namely reading and viewing 
brand posts and liking them. Sharing brand posts; reacting on brand posts or oth-
ers’ comments; and posting messages, photos, or videos on the brand page were 
considered more visible to one’s social network or other fans and were therefore 
labeled posting. The mean scores of the items loading on each factor were used 
as dependent variables in further analysis. A paired sample t-test revealed that, as 
previously found, participants engaged far more in lurking behavior (M = 3.63, 
SD = 1.31) than in posting behavior (M = 1.54, SD = .78, p < .001).
Next, a structural equation model analysis was conducted to test the relation-
ship between motivations and posting and lurking behavior. First, confirmatory 
factor analysis (CFA) using AMOS 22 was applied for testing the measurement 
model. Based on modification index and standardized residuals analysis, it was 
decided to allow co-variation between the motivation variables, a number of 
items were removed, and so was the “information” variable. After all these mod-
ifications, the model fit was acceptable: χ2/df = 1.61, GFI = .90, NFI = .91, 
CFI = .96, and RMSEA = .06. Based on the criteria put forward by Fornell and 
Larcker (1981), the measurement model also showed satisfactory reliability, con-
vergent validity, and discriminant validity.
Results
A structural equation model was tested, relating all the independent variables 
(motivations: social interaction, entertainment, empowerment, self-presentation, 
remuneration) to the two dependent variables (lurking, posting). The results are 
shown in Table 12.2.
There is a significant positive effect of the entertainment motivation (b = .17, 
p = .04) and the social interaction motivation (b = .20, p = .04) on lurking. The 
social interaction motivation has greater explanatory value than the entertain-
ment motivation. The remuneration, self-presentation and empowerment motiva-
tions do not explain lurking behavior. There is a significant positive effect of the 

216  Veirman, Cauberghe, Hudders, Pelsmacker
TABLE 12.2  Structural Model Results
Path
Unstandardized effects
SE
p value
Lurking  Social interaction
.20
.10
.04
Lurking  Entertainment
.17
.08
.04
Lurking  Empowerment
.08
.09
.38
Lurking  Self-presentation
.03
.05
.47
Lurking  Remuneration
.05
.04
.25
Posting  Social interaction
.18
.08
.03
Posting  Entertainment
–.07
.07
.28
Posting  Empowerment
.21
.08
.01
Posting  Self-presentation
.00
.04
.90
Posting  Remuneration
.07
.04
.06
empowerment motivation (b = .21, p = .00) and the social interaction motivation 
(b = .18, p = .03) on posting. The empowerment motivation has a slightly greater 
explanatory value than the social interaction motivation. The self-presentation, 
entertainment, and remuneration motivation do not explain posting behavior.
Conclusion and Implications
SNS users engage with brands in much the same way they interact with other 
SNS content. In most cases they “lurk,” meaning that they engage in rather pas-
sive, not publicly visible brand page viewing. In some cases they “post,” i.e., they 
share brand posts with their own social network; react on brand posts or other 
fans’ comments; and post messages, photos, or videos to the brand page. These are 
interactive and publicly visible brand engagements.
The motivations to engage with brands are partly similar to the reasons why 
SNS users engage with other content on social networks. They want to have fun, 
express their self-identity, get socially connected, be in control, get rewarded, and 
look for information. According to our empirical test, lurking and posting are partly 
driven by different motivations. Both lurking and posting are driven by the need 
for social interaction. Lurking is also (but to a lesser extent) motivated by the need 
for entertainment. Although we could not test it, it may be assumed that collect-
ing information is also a prime motivator for lurking. Similar to Muntinga et al.’s 
(2011) findings, our study confirms that empowerment is an important motivation 
for posting. Consumers actively and publicly engage in brand-related activities in 
Facebook brand pages to exert influence on other consumers or the brand itself. 
Unexpectedly, in our study, the self-presentation motivation did not explain why 
consumers engage in posting behavior on brand pages. In other studies, however, 
this motivation has been found to be very relevant for active and public SNS use.
Based on previous research and our own—be it limited—empirical study, there 
are a number of managerial implications. First of all, SNS brand communities are 
interesting advertising tools. They provide brands with a lot of information about 

Motivations for Lurking and Posting  217
the characteristics, interests, and behaviors of community members and their 
social network. Positive brand-related messages from peers may enhance consum-
ers’ commitment to the brand. Companies can use this information to improve 
communication effectiveness because it allows more fine-grained targeting and 
the development of more relevant messages. On top of that, SNSs offer metrics 
that enable companies to measure the effects of brand community activities.
Members of SNS brand communities can engage with the community in a 
passive or an active way. In both cases, their motivation to do so is the need for 
social interaction. Consequently, it is important that marketers do not put too 
many restrictions on consumers’ possibilities to interact and let anyone have the 
possibility to post (not harming) content to the brand page’s timeline. For pas-
sive engagements, such as reading and liking brand-related posts, also providing 
relevant information in an entertaining way is important. Brand pages should be 
interesting and fun. The most important activity that brand communities should 
aim for is active engagement: members sharing posts, commenting on other posts, 
and adding content. Much like with any other SNS-related activity, brand page 
members express their self-identity through these active engagements.
Perhaps the most common motivation for SNS brand community members 
is self-empowerment. Community members actively engage with brand-related 
content to have an impact on brands and on other people. So, companies have to 
make sure they listen to their fans and respond to their questions and suggestions, 
thank them for their replies and sharing their opinions, since this may give them 
a sense of empowerment, encouraging them to further participate actively. Brand 
pages may even be used as a source for crowdsourcing. By asking fans’ opinions, 
fans will feel valued and appreciated, and they may even provide strategic input. 
As previous research has shown that brand-specific factors can affect consumer 
engagement (Van Doorn et al., 2010), future research could delve into brand-specific  
participation behavior and take into account different product categories, for 
instance, hedonic versus utilitarian products, durables versus fast moving products, 
goods versus services, high versus low involvement products, etc.
References
Bagozzi, R. P., & Dholakia, U. M. (2006). Antecedents and purchase consequences of cus-
tomer participation in small group brand communities. International Journal of Research 
in Marketing, 23(1), 45–61. doi: 10.1016/j.ijresmar.2006.01.005.
Batra, R., Ahuvia, A., & Bagozzi, R. P. (2012). Brand love. Journal of Marketing, 76(2), 1–16. 
doi: 10.1509/jm.09.0339.
Bergkvist, L., & Bech-Larsen, T. (2010). Two studies of consequences and actionable ante-
cedents of brand love. Journal of Brand Management, 17(7), 504–518. doi: 10.1057/
bm.2010.6.
Bernritter, S., Verlegh, P. W. J., & Smit, E. G. (2016). Consumers’ online brand endorsements. 
In P. De Pelsmacker (Ed.), Advertising in new formats and media: Current research and impli-
cations for marketers (pp. 189–209). London, UK: Emerald Group Publishing Limited.

218  Veirman, Cauberghe, Hudders, Pelsmacker
Boyd, D. M., & Ellison, N. B. (2007). Social network sites: Definition, history, and schol-
arship. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13(1), 210–230. doi: 10.1111/ 
j.1083–6101.2007.00393.x.
Brandtzæg, P. B.,  & Heim, J. (2009). Why people use social networking sites. In A. A. 
Ozok & P. Zaphiris (Eds.), Online communities and social computing (pp. 143–152). Berlin 
Heidelberg: Springer.
Brodie, R. J., Hollebeek, L. D., Juric´, B., & Ilic´, A. (2011). Customer engagement. Journal of 
Service Research, 14(3), 252–271. doi: 10.1016/j.jbusres.2011.07.029.
Burnett, G. (2000). Information exchange in virtual communities: A typology. Information 
Research: An Electronic Journal, 5(4), n.p. Retrieved August 24, 2015 from http://www.
shef.ac.uk/~is/publications/infres/ircont.html.
Chauhan, K., & Pillai, A. (2013). Role of content strategy in social media brand communi-
ties: A case of higher education institutes in India. Journal of Product & Brand Management, 
22(1), 40–51. doi: 10.1108/10610421311298687.
Daugherty, T., Eastin, M. S.,  & Bright, L. (2008). Exploring consumer motivations for 
creating user-generated content. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 8(2), 1–24. doi: 
10.1080/15252019.2008.10788139.
De Vries, L., Gensler, S., & Leeflang, P. S. H. (2012). Popularity of brand posts on brand 
fan pages: An investigation of the effects of social media marketing. Journal of Interactive 
Marketing, 26(2), 83–91. doi: 10.1016/j.intmar.2012.01.003.
Dholakia, U. M., Bagozzi, R. P., & Pearo, L. K. (2004). A social influence model of con-
sumer participation in network- and small-group-based virtual communities. Journal of 
Research in Marketing, 21, 241–263. doi: 10.1016/j.ijresmar.2003.12.004.
Ellison, N., Vitak, J., Gray, R., & Lampe, C. (2014). Cultivating social resources on social 
network sites: Facebook relationship maintenance behaviors and their role in social 
capital processes. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 19(4), 855–870. doi: 
10.1111/jcc4.12078.
Enginkaya, E., & Yılmaz, H. (2014). What drives consumers to interact with brands through 
social media? A motivation scale development study. Procedia—Social and Behavioral Sci-
ences, 148, 219–226. doi: 10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.07.037.
Fornell, C., & Larcker, D. F. (1981). Evaluating structural equation models with unobserv-
able variables and measurements error. Journal of Marketing Research, 18, 39–50. doi: 
10.2307/3151312.
Fournier, S., & Avery, J. (2011). The uninvited brand. Business Horizons, 54(3), 193–207. doi: 
10.1016/j.bushor.2011.01/001.
Goldsmith, R. E., & Horowitz, D. (2006). Measuring motivations for online opinion seek-
ing. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 6(2), 3–14. doi: 10.1080/1525019.2006.10722114.
Gruner, R. L., Homburg, C., & Lukas, B. A. (2014). Firm-hosted online brand communities 
and new product success. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 42(1), 29–48. doi: 
10.1007/s11747–013–0334–9.
Gummerus, J., Liljander, V., Weman, E., & Pihlström, M. (2012). Customer engagement 
in a Facebook brand community. Management Research Review, 35(9), 857–877. doi: 
10.1108/01409171211256578.
Ha, H., & Perks, H. (2005). Effects of consumer perceptions of brand experience on the 
web: Brand familiarity, satisfaction and brand trust. Journal of Consumer Behavior, 4(6), 
438–452. doi: 10.1002/cb.29.
Habibi, M. R., Laroche, M.-O., & Richard, M. O. (2014a). Brand communities based in 
social media: How unique are they? Evidence from two exemplary brand commu-
nities. International Journal of Information Management, 34(2), 123–132. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijrinfomgt.2013.11.010.

Motivations for Lurking and Posting  219
Habibi, M. R., Laroche, M.-O., & Richard, M. O. (2014b). The roles of brand community 
and community engagement in building brand trust on social media. Computers in 
Human Behavior, 37, 152–161. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2014.04.016.
Hammond, M. (2000). Communication within on-line forums: The opportunities, the 
constraints and the value of a communicative approach. Computers & Education, 35(4), 
251–262. doi: 10.1016/S0360–1315(00)00037–3.
Hennig-Thurau, T., Gwinner, K. P., Walsh, G., & Gremler, D. D. (2004). Electronic word- 
of-mouth via consumer-opinion platforms: What motivates consumers to articulate them-
selves on the internet? Journal of Interactive Marketing, 18(1), 38–52. doi: 10.1002/dir.10073.
Hoffman, D. L., & Fodor, M. (2010). Can you measure the ROI of your social media mar-
keting? Sloan Management Review, 52(1), 41–49.
Hollenbeck, C. R., & Kaikati, A. M. (2012). Consumers’ use of brands to reflect their 
actual and ideal selves on Facebook. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 29(4), 
395–405. doi: 10.1016/j.ijresmar.2012.06.002.
Huang, E. (2008). Use and gratifications in e-consumers. Internet Research, 18(4), 405–426. 
doi: 10.1108/10662240810897817.
Jahn, B., & Kunz, W. (2012). How to transform consumers into fans of your brand. Journal 
of Service Management, 23(3), 344–361. doi: 10.1108/09564231211248444.
Kaplan, A. M.,  & Haenlein, M. (2010). Users of the world, unite! The challenges and 
opportunities of social media. Business Horizons, 53(1), 59–68. doi: 10.1016/j.
bushor.2009.09.003.
Kwon, E. S., Kim, E. Y., Sung, Y., & Yoo, C. Y. (2014). Brand followers: Consumer moti-
vation and attitude towards brand communications on Twitter. International Journal 
of Advertising: The Quarterly Review of Marketing Communication, 33(4), 657–680. doi: 
10.2501/IJA-33–4–657–680.
Liao, S., & Chou, E. Y. (2012). Intention to adopt knowledge through virtual communi- 
ties: Posters vs lurkers. Online Information Review, 36(3), 442–461. doi: 10.1108/ 
1468452­1211241440.
Lipsman, A., Mudd, G., Rich, M., & Bruich, S. (2012). The power of “like”: How brands 
reach (and influence) fans through social-media marketing. Journal of Advertising Research, 
52(1), 40–52. doi: 10.2501/JAR-52–1–040–052.
Logan, K., Bright, L. F., & Gangadharbatla, H. (2012). Facebook versus television: Adver-
tising value perceptions among females. Journal of Research in Interactive Marketing, 6, 
164–179. doi: 10.1108/17505931211274651.
Mata, F. J., & Quesada, A. (2014). Web 2.0, social networks and e-commerce as market-
ing tools. Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research, 9(1), 56–69. doi: 
10.4067/S0718–18762014000100006.
Mattila, A. S., & Wirtz, J. (2002). The impact of knowledge types on the consumer search 
process: An investigation in the context of credence services. International Journal of Ser-
vice Industry Management, 13(3), 214–230. doi: 10.1108/09564230210431947.
Morandin, G., Bagozzi, R. P., & Bergami, M. (2013). Brand community membership and 
the construction of meaning. Scandinavian Journal of Management, 29(2), 173–183. doi: 
10.1016/j.scaman.2013.03.003.
Muñiz, Jr., A. M., & O’Guinn, T. C. (2001). Brand community. Journal of Consumer Research, 
27(4), 412–432. doi: 10.1086/319618.
Muntinga, D. G., Moorman, M., & Smit, E. G. (2011). Introducing COBRAs: Exploring 
motivations for brand-related social media use. International Journal of Advertising, 30(1), 
13–46. doi: 10.2501/IJA-30–1–013–046.
Nadkarni, A., & Hofmann, S. G. (2012). Why do people use Facebook? Personality and Indi-
vidual Differences, 52(3), 243–249. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2011.11.007.

220  Veirman, Cauberghe, Hudders, Pelsmacker
Nonnecke, B., & Preece, J. (2001). Why lurkers lurk. Paper presented at the Americas Con-
ference on Information Systems, Boston.
Park, H., & Kim, Y. K. (2014). The role of social network websites in the consumer–brand 
relationship. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 21(4), 460–467. doi: 10.1016/j.
jretconser.2014.03.011.
Peluchette, J.,  & Karl, K. (2009). Examining students’ intended image on Facebook: 
“What were they thinking?!” Journal of Education for Business, 85(1), 30–37. doi: 
10.1080/08832320903217606.
Pentina, I., Prybutok, V. R., & Zhang, X. (2008). The role of virtual communities as shop-
ping reference groups. Journal of Electronic Commerce Research, 9(2), 114–136. www.csulb.
edu/journals/jecr/issues/20082/paper3.pdf.
Pöyry, E., Parvinen, P., & Malmivaara, T. (2013). Can we get from liking to buying? Behav-
ioral differences in hedonic and utilitarian Facebook usage. Electronic Commerce Research 
and Applications, 12(4), 224–235. doi: 10.1016:j.elerap.2013.01.003.
Preece, J., Nonnecke, B., & Andrews, D. (2004). The top five reasons for lurking: Improving 
community experiences for everyone. Computers in Human Behavior, 20(2), 201–223. 
doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2003.10.015.
Raacke, J., & Bonds-Raacke, J. (2008). MySpace and Facebook: Applying the uses and 
gratifications theory to exploring friend-networking sites. Cyberpsychology & Behavior, 
11(2), 169–174. doi: 10.1089/cpb.2007.0056.
Ridings, C. M., & Gefen, D. (2004). Virtual community attraction: Why people hang out 
online. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 10(1), n.p. doi: 10.1111/j.1083–
6101.2004.tb00229.x.
Ridings, C. M., Gefen, D., & Arinze, B. (2006). Psychological barrier: Lurker and poster 
motivation and behaviour in online communities. Communication of Association for Infor-
mation Systems, 18, 329–354.
Rothaermel, F. T., & Sugiyama, S. (2001). Virtual internet communities and commercial suc-
cess: Individual and community-level theory grounded in the atypical case of TimeZone.
com. Journal of Management, 27(3), 297–312. doi: 10.1016/S0149–2063(01)00093–9.
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: Classic definitions 
and new directions. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 25(1), 54–67. doi: 10.1006/
ceps.1999.1020.
Schlosser, A. E. (2005). Posting versus lurking: Communicating in a multiple audience 
context. Journal of Consumer Research, 32(September), 260–265. doi: 10.1086/432235.
Sicilia, M., & Palazón, M. (2008). Brand communities on the internet: A case study of 
Coca-Cola’s Spanish virtual community. Corporate Communications: An International Jour-
nal, 13(3), 255–270. doi: 10.1108/13563280810893643.
Stokburger-Sauer, N., Ratneshwar, S., & Sen, S. (2012). Drivers of consumer–brand identi-
fication. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 29(4), 406–418.
Sukoco, B. M., & Wu, W. (2010). The personal and social motivation of customers’ partici-
pation in brand community. Journal of Business, 4(5), 614–622.
Sung, Y., Kim, Y., Kwon, O., & Moon, J. (2010). An explorative study of Korean consumer 
participation in virtual brand communities in social network sites. Journal of Global 
Marketing, 23(5), 430–445. doi: 10.1080/08911762.2010.521115.
Taylor, D. G., Lewin, J. E.,  & Strutton, D. (2011). Friends, fans, and followers: Do ads 
work on social networks? Journal of Advertising Research, 51(1), 258–275. doi: 10.2501/
JAR-51–1–258–275.
Toubia, O.,  & Stephen, A. T. (2013). Intrinsic vs. image-related utility in social media: 
Why do people contribute content to Twitter? Marketing Science, 32(3), 368–392. doi: 
10.1287/mksc.2013.0773.

Motivations for Lurking and Posting  221
Tsimonis, G., & Dimitriadis, S. (2014). Brand strategies in social media. Marketing Intel-
ligence & Planning, 32(3), 328–344. doi: 10.1108/MIP-04–2013–0056.
Tüfekçi, Z. (2007). Can you see me now? Audience and disclosure regulation in 
online social network sites. Bulletin of Science, Technology & Society, 28(1), 20–36. doi: 
10.1177/0270467607311484.
Van Doorn, J., Lemon, K. N., Mittal, V., Nass, S., Pick, D., Pirner, P., & Verhoef, P. C. (2010). 
Customer engagement behavior: Theoretical foundations and research directions. Jour-
nal of Service Research, 13(3), 253–266. doi: 10.1177/1094670510375599.
Wallace, E., Buil, I., de Chernatony, L.,  & Hogan, M. (2014). Who ‘likes’ you.  .  . and 
why? A typology of Facebook fans. From ‘fan’-atics and self-expressives to utilitar-
ians and authentics. Journal of Advertising Research, 54(1), 92–109. doi: 10.2501/
JAR-54–1–092–109.
Wiertz, C., & de Ruyter, K. (2007). Beyond the call of duty: Why customers contribute to 
firm-hosted commercial online communities. Organization Studies, 28(3), 347–376. doi: 
10.1177/0170840607076003.
Wilcox, K.,  & Stephen, A. T. (2013). Are close friends the enemy? Online social net-
works, self-esteem, and self-control. Journal of Consumer Research, 40(1), 90–103. doi: 
10.1086/668794.
Yu, J. (2014). We look for social, not promotion: Brand post strategy, consumer emotions, 
and engagement. A case study of the Facebook brand pages. Journal on Media & Com-
munications, 1(2), 28–36. doi: 10.5176/2335–6618_1.2.17.
Zaglia, M. E. (2013). Brand communities embedded in social networks. Journal of Business 
Research, 66(2), 216–223. doi: 10.1016/j.jbusres.2012.07.015PMID23564989.

Introduction
Advertising practitioners are undergoing pressure to be more accountable for 
advertising and to communicate its added value to top management as well as to 
shareholders (Marketing Science Institute, 2004). Determining the value created 
by digital advertising has become a growing focus, which demands that both 
practitioners and scholars translate advertising resource allocations into measura-
ble effects. Practitioners and scholars, however, have not adequately demonstrated 
digital advertising’s impact on performance metrics that really matter to top man-
agement and shareholders, partly due to the lack of established effectiveness of 
measures (Marvin, 2013). Consequently, the perceived lack of accountability has 
threatened digital advertising’s credibility or even standing in the media mix (Ha, 
2008). Nonetheless, digital advertising continues to play an important role in 
many firms’ advertising strategies.
Advertising practices that include digital advertising can help build long-term 
assets (e.g., brand equity, customer equity) and can be leveraged to deliver finan-
cial and firm value effects (Rust, Ambler, Carpenter, Kumar, & Srivastava, 2004). 
Although financial methods alone have proved inadequate for justifying advertis-
ing investments (Rust et al., 2004), the event study method, which assesses the 
financial impact of changes in any marketing strategy including digital advertising, 
seems particularly relevant in today’s advertising environment where account-
ability is imperative. Therefore, the purpose of this chapter is: 1) to introduce the 
event study framework and procedure for assessing digital advertising account-
ability, especially, the effects of digital advertising on financial or economic value 
(i.e., shareholder returns), and 2) to present preliminary research examining the 
relationship between Fortune 500 firms’ launching a digital advertising channel 
13
ASSESSING THE FINANCIAL VALUE 
OF DIGITAL ADVERTISING
An Event Study Approach
Chan Yun Yoo and Tae Hyun Baek

Financial Value of Digital Advertising  223
(i.e., Twitter) and shareholder values. This research finds that digital advertising 
investments may be linked to shareholder values.
Underlying Assumptions of an Event Study
Brown and Warner (1980) note the underlying assumptions of an event study:
Event studies provide a direct test of market efficiency. Systematically 
nonzero abnormal security returns, which persist after a particular type of 
event are inconsistent with the hypothesis that security prices adjust quickly 
to fully reflect new information. In addition, to the extent that the event 
is unanticipated, the magnitude of abnormal performance at the time the 
event actually occurs is a measure of the impact of that type of event on the 
wealth of the firms’ claimholders. Any such abnormal performance is con-
sistent with market efficiency, however, since the abnormal returns would 
only have been attainable by an investor if the occurrence of the event 
could have been predicted with certainty.
(pp. 205–206)
As such, the event study is based on three key theoretical and methodologi-
cal assumptions (McWilliams & Siegel, 1997; Srinivasan & Bharadwaj, 2004): 1) 
Financial markets are efficient, and thus, the market’s reaction to an event can 
be measured by stock returns over the event window; that is, the period during 
which the stock prices of the firm involved in the event will be studied, 2) the 
event is unexpected, and thus, abnormal (or excess) stock returns—the difference 
between an asset’s actual return and its predicted return—indicate the market’s 
reaction to the unexpected event, and 3) there are no confounding effects during 
the event window, and thus the effect of the event is isolated from the effects of 
other events.
In regard to the first assumption, a significant body of work in economics and 
finance has addressed the efficient market hypothesis (Fama, Fisher, Jensen, & Roll, 
1969), suggesting that stock prices incorporate all relevant information available 
to investors and thus provide unbiased estimates of a firm’s discounted future cash 
flow (Rappaport, 1997). Such an assumption provides a basis for using the event 
study method. Thus, any financially relevant information that is newly revealed 
to investors will be quickly reflected in stock prices, and an event is anything that 
results in new relevant information.
As for the second assumption, only an unexpected event can change stock 
prices. Because the market previously did not have information on the event, 
investors would gain information from the event or announcement. Abnormal 
stock returns can then be assumed to be the results of the stock market’s response 
to new information. Thus, information that may result in a positive or negative 
change in expected future cash flows also will have a positive or negative effect on 

224  Yoo and Baek
the stock price. An event, however, could have been expected, or information may 
have leaked out to the market prior to a formal event or announcement. Such 
information leakages may make the event study method challenging because 
determining when investors become aware of new information may be difficult.
The third assumption is based on researchers isolating the effect of an event 
from other confounding effects. McWilliams and Siegel (1997) have considered 
this assumption as the most critical for the event study method. Confounding 
events can include announcements of cash dividends, new products, unexpected 
earnings, mergers and acquisitions, stock buybacks, changes in key executives, lay-
offs, restructurings, and local and federal regulations (McWilliams & Siegel, 1997; 
Wiles & Danielova, 2009). Any of these events might impact stock prices during 
the event window. Therefore, the length of the event window is very critical, 
because it is more difficult to control for confounding effects when long windows 
are used [e.g., ±90 days in Davidson, Worrell, and Dutia’s CEO succession study 
(1993)]. Thus, an event window should be short enough to exclude confounding 
effects, and long enough to capture the significant effect of an event. Foster (1980) 
discussed methods that allow researchers to control for confounding events in an 
event study: 1) eliminating firms that have confounding events, 2) partitioning a  
sample by grouping firms that have experienced the same confounding events,  
3) eliminating a firm from the sample on the day that it experiences a confound-
ing event, and 4) subtracting the financial impact of the confounding effect when 
calculating the abnormal returns.
Research Design and Methods for the Event Study
Srinivasan and Bharadwaj (2004) suggested that an event study should follow 
these necessary steps: defining the event and specifying criteria for inclusion, cal-
culating abnormal returns based on the normal performance model, testing statis-
tical significance, and explaining significant abnormal returns.
Defining the Event as Well as Specifying Criteria for Inclusion
Events are typically found through extensive searches of databases such as Lexis-
Nexis or Factiva to ensure the times and dates of the events are clearly identified. 
The event day is the date that the event actually occurred. In practice, the event 
window often includes up to one or more days after the event day to capture the 
price effects of the event and one or more days before the actual event to capture 
information leakages.
Then, it is necessary to specify the criteria for the inclusion of a firm’s event in 
a study and to identify those firms that experienced confounding events during 
the event window. Researchers may elect to exclude certain cases from the study 
because of prior theoretical and methodological considerations. For example, in a 
study examining the effects of launching a Twitter channel on shareholder value, 

Financial Value of Digital Advertising  225
the launch date and time for a firm’s Twitter account can be acquired on its offi-
cial Twitter page by putting a cursor on the “joined” date. Firms with no stock 
information on the event day—because they are not publicly traded or because 
they have an initial public offering (IPO) after launching its Twitter accounts (e.g., 
Facebook)—would not be included in the study.
Calculating Abnormal Stock Returns
The next step is to assess an event’s impact on a firm’s shareholder value. It requires 
a measure of abnormal stock returns that was pioneered by Fama et al. (1969). The 
percentage change in the stock price is the stock return:
(1)  R
P
P
P
it
it
it
it
=
−
−
−
1
1
Where Pit is the stock price of asset i at time t. This stock return reflects market 
expectations of the financial impact of information arriving between t-1 and t. 
When this information deals with an event, such as launching a Twitter chan-
nel, an “important and relatively objective indication” (Kalyanaram, Robinson, & 
Urban, 1995, p. 14) of an event’s anticipated financial consequences is obtained.
The link between an event and a firm’s stock return would be examined by 
comparing the stock return Rit at the event day with E(Rit ), that is, the return  
that would be expected if the event had not taken place. According to the mar-
ket model (i.e., normal performance model), the expected return E(Rit ) to asset  
i at time t can be expressed as a linear function of the returns from a benchmark 
portfolio of marketable assets Rmt:
(2)  E(Rit) = αi + βi Rmt
Where αi and βi are the ordinary least squares (OLS) parameter estimates 
obtained from the regression of Rit on Rmt over an estimation period preceding 
the event, for example, 255 trading days, ending 46 days prior to the event. Typi-
cally, event studies using daily stock prices have used a 45-day window to separate 
the estimation period from the event window (Srinivasan & Bharadwaj, 2004).
A benchmark portfolio includes several broad-based stock indices, such as 
the Center for Research in Securities Price (CRSP) value-weighted index, 
the CRSP equal-weighted index, and the S&P 500 index. Removing the 
portion of the stock’s return that is related to variations in the general mar-
ket’s return increases the possibility of detecting the event’s effect on the 
stock’s return. The difference between the actual return and the estimated 
expected return provides a measure of the “abnormal” return eit for the shares 
of firm i and time t:
(3)  eit = Rit–E(Rit) = Rit–(αi + βi Rmt )

226  Yoo and Baek
This abnormal return, or prediction error, is the unexpected change in the 
stock price, which is then attributed to the event that took place at time t.
Testing Statistical Significance
Generally, significance tests for an event study can be grouped in parametric and 
nonparametric tests (Corrado, 1989; McWilliams & Siegel, 1997; Srinivasan & 
Bharadwaj, 2004; Kolari & Pynnonen, 2011). In a large-sample event study, abnor-
mal returns (ARs) for the event generally are aggregated over time to produce 
cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) and then averaged over several firms to 
generate inferences about the event (i.e., Cumulative Average Abnormal Returns: 
CAARs).
A parametric test is based on the assumption of normal distribution of abnor-
mal returns and depends on a classic t-test, which performs to specify if the 
abnormal effects in relation to the event are significantly different from zero and, 
thus, not the result of pure chance. In other words, the null hypothesis is that the 
event has no impact on firm value, whereas the alternative hypothesis is that the 
event increases or decreases the firm value. Parametric test statistics, however, tend 
to be very sensitive to outliers (McWilliams & Siegel, 1997). A useful and impor-
tant control for outliers is for researchers to report nonparametric test statistics 
(Corrado, 1989).
Typically two nonparametric tests—a sign test and a rank test—are frequently 
employed in conjunction with a parametric test. The sign test (Cowan, 1992), 
such as the binomial Z statistic, tests whether the proportion of positive to nega-
tive returns exceeds the number from expected returns from the market model. 
However, a sign test is not robust in specifying whether the distribution of abnor-
mal stock returns is skewed. To overcome this weakness, a nonparametric rank test, 
suggested by Corrado and colleagues (Corrado, 1989; Corrado & Zivney, 1992), 
transforms abnormal returns into ranks (i.e., ranking is done for all abnormal 
returns of both the event and the estimation period). It tests the null hypothesis 
that no abnormal return exists on the event day or during the event window.
Explaining Abnormal Returns
The final step of an event study is explaining abnormal returns. After determining 
the significance of the CAARs, researchers should explain abnormal returns by 
showing that the cross-sectional variation in abnormal returns is consistent with 
theoretical models. In order to examine any theoretically presumed association 
between the magnitude of abnormal returns and characteristics specific to the 
event, researchers have created a cross-sectional regression model of abnormal 
returns. Matrix of characteristics of an event and a firm become independent 
variables, while cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) become dependent vari-
ables in Ordinary Least Square (OLS) regression models. The t-statistics in OLS 

Financial Value of Digital Advertising  227
regression models will be used to assess whether or not independent variables are 
statistically significant.
Use of Event Studies in Assessing the Effects of Digital 
Advertising
Given that the total revenue of digital advertising is expected to reach about 
$60 billion in the United States by the end of 2015 (eMarketer, 2015), the effect 
of digital advertising on a firm’s financial value has generated considerable inter-
est. Searches through EBSCO Business Source Complete, using the keyword 
terms “advertising” and “event study,” between 1997 and 2015, returned about 
120 academic articles, but no such study has been conducted in the context of 
digital advertising.
Prior studies demonstrated that advertising decisions, such as changing an 
advertising slogan (Mathur  & Mathur, 1995), changing ad spending before a 
recall announcement (Gao, Xie, Wang, & Wilbur, 2015), introducing celebrities as 
spokespersons (Agrawal & Kamakura, 1995), winning one or more Clio Awards 
(Tippins & Kunkel, 2006), and running Super Bowl commercials (Fehle, Tsypla-
kov, & Zdorovtsov, 2005), had significant impacts on the shareholder wealth of 
firms. These studies offer valuable insights into the financial effects of traditional 
advertising initiatives, but the financial or economic values of digital advertising 
practices, due to the lack of academic research, remains unclear.
When a firm launches a new digital advertising channel or initiates a new 
digital advertising campaign, investors could be expected to buy or sell stocks 
on the basis of their expectations of how the new channel or the campaign will 
affect the value of future cash flows. For example, investors may expect the firm 
to maintain its usual level of digital advertising, and thus, they could consider add-
ing a new channel or launching a new digital advertising campaign as either an 
opportunity or threat.
Digital advertising developments that positively affect future cash flows should 
be expected to increase stock prices, whereas those that negatively affect cash 
flows should be expected to decrease them. Thus, an event in a digital advertising 
environment might have an impact on the financial performance of a firm and 
might produce an abnormal movement in stock prices. These hypotheses could 
be especially ripe for research given the increased emphasis among advertising 
practitioners and scholars on the accountability of digital advertising and the rela-
tionship between digital advertising investments and financial values of firms.
Accordingly, event studies could be designed in different ways to reflect spe-
cific research purposes and questions in the context of digital advertising. The 
event study method could be used in clinical studies as well as large sample stud-
ies. A clinical study could investigate the effect of a digital advertising event on 
stock prices of a single firm, such as an analysis of the market’s reaction to a new 
Instagram sweepstakes campaign. Meanwhile, large sample studies could examine 

228  Yoo and Baek
the impact of an important event (e.g., launching a new social media account as a 
digital advertising channel) on stock prices of different sample firms.
The following sections present how the latter (i.e., large sample event studies) 
could be conducted using steps suggested by Srinivasan and Bharadwaj (2004). 
Specifically, an exploratory event study, examining the relationship between 
launching a firm’s Twitter account as a digital advertising channel and shareholder 
value, illustrates each step of the research procedure. Furthermore, the results of 
the study highlight how digital advertising investments could be linked to the 
expected financial value of a firm.
The Exploratory Event Study: Assessing the Financial 
Value of Launching a Twitter Channel
Information about a firm’s launch of a Twitter channel is typically distributed 
to the market via cross-media campaigns through slogans such as “Follow us on 
Twitter” and other promotions (i.e., events and sweepstakes). This firm-initiated 
communication effort cues investors to the use of Twitter as a digital advertis-
ing channel. Therefore, launching a Twitter channel is considered an unexpected 
event controlled mainly by an advertiser, and it becomes a market signal directed 
at influencing the behavior of one or more investors of the firm. Information 
about a firm’s decision to add a Twitter channel to its advertising portfolio should 
be expected to change investors’ perceptions regarding a firm’s future financial 
performance. Ultimately, information-based trading is expected in response to the 
event of launching a Twitter channel.
Identifying the Event and the Event Window
When research is interested in examining the financial value of launching a Twit-
ter channel, the event is defined as launching an official Twitter account, and the 
event day is defined as the date when the Twitter account first appeared. Putting 
a cursor on the “joined” date on a Twitter account page obtains the accurate tim-
ing of the event. For example, Starbucks launched its official Twitter channel on 
November 29, 2006 at 11:19 a.m. In this study, however, the event windows were 
set, ranging from five days before through five days after the event, because of the 
potential for information leakage (e.g., advertisers’ early press release about their 
launch of a Twitter channel) and the gradual dissemination of information via 
post-launch promotions.
Samples and Data
Fortune 500 companies are deemed to be appropriate as the sampling units 
for the study because they include firms from a variety of industries as well as 
the nations’ largest firms with respect to revenues. Thus, they are more likely to 

Financial Value of Digital Advertising  229
adopt Twitter to interact with shareholders and customers (Culnan, McHugh, & 
Zubillaga, 2010), and their use of Twitter has been examined in the prior studies 
(Rybalko & Seltzer, 2010; Lee, Oh, & Kim, 2013). All Fortune 500 companies 
were searched through Twitter via typing each company name into the search 
box. A total of 96 firms (e.g., Energy Transfer Equity, World Fuel Service Cor-
poration) were identified as not having official Twitter accounts at the time of 
searching, and they were dropped from the dataset.
Launch dates (i.e., event day) for those firms were recorded by checking the 
“joined” date of the official Twitter page. Daily stock-price returns for each firm 
were obtained from the CRSP databases, and 41 cases were dropped from the fur-
ther analyses, because they were either privately held (e.g., State Farm Insurance, 
United Services Automobile Associations, etc.) or their stock-price data around 
the Twitter launching date were not available (e.g., Facebook, Vanguard Health 
Systems, etc.). These deletions reduced the sample to 363 cases.
Finally, a Factiva database was extensively searched to identify any case with 
confounding events during the event window. Firms with confounding events 
were removed, including those with announcements of cash dividend, new prod-
ucts, unexpected earnings, mergers and acquisitions, stock buybacks, changes in 
key executives, layoffs, restructurings, local and federal regulations, and lawsuits 
(McWilliams & Siegel, 1997) five days before and after the event day. This process 
retained 217 firms in the sample (see Appendix).
Results of the Event Study
The parameters of the market model for each firm were estimated during a win-
dow of 255 trading days, ending 46 days prior to the event, using the CRSP’s 
equal-weighted index to model the market portfolio. All statistical calculations 
were performed using the EVENTUS program developed by Cowan Research, 
LLC. The sample firms’ cumulative average abnormal returns (CAARs) and test 
statistics, five days before and after the event day, appear in Table 13.1.
Empirically determining the event window is standard practice in an event 
study to allow for any uncertainty regarding when the information was available 
to investors and to understand the cumulative effect of an event (Agrawal & Kam-
akura, 1995; Wiles & Danielova, 2009). No significant CAARs were found for the 
event windows prior to launching a Twitter channel (e.g., [–5 to –1], [–3 to –1], 
and [–1 to 0]), indicating information regarding the pending addition of a Twit-
ter channel did not leak into the marketplace in a substantial enough manner to 
cause investors to reassess the firms. However, significant CAARs for the [0 to +3]  
event window were found. This event window fits the expectations that the market 
can become gradually aware of a launch of a Twitter channel via advertisers’ post-
promotions. The direction and pattern of the results for the post-event windows  
are similar, but further interpretations should be made for the statistically signifi-
cant [0 to +3] event window.

230  Yoo and Baek
TABLE 13.1  Cumulative Average Abnormal Returns (CAARs) of Launching a Twitter 
Channel for Fortune 500 Firms
Event 
Window
CAAR 
(%)
Sample 
Size (N)
The Number 
of Firms 
with Positive 
Abnormal 
Returns (%)
The 
Number of 
Firms with 
Negative 
Abnormal 
Returns (%)
Brown and 
Warner 
(1985) 
Portfolio 
t-Statistic
Patell 
(1976) 
Z-Statistic
Kolari and 
Pynnonen 
(2011) 
Generalized 
Rank t- 
Statistic
–5 to –1
.11
217
123 (56.7)
94 (43.3)
.25
.63
.29
–3 to 0
–.10
217
116 (53.5)
101 (46.5)
–.30
–.32
–.34
–1 to 0
–.21
217
110 (50.7)
107 (49.3)
–.78a
–.70
–.91
–1 to +1 –.31
217
108 (49.8)
109 (50.2)
–.91
–1.24
–.92
0 to +1
–.15
217
98 (45.2)
119 (54.8)
–.253
–1.11
–.58
0 to +3
–.58
217
94 (43.3)
123 (56.7)
–1.48*
–1.94*
–1.65*
0 to +5
–.25
217
100 (46.1)
117 (53.9)
–0.49
–.52
–.55
ap < .10, *p < .05
Results show that on average, sample Fortune 500 firms experienced -0.58 percent  
abnormal returns on [0 to +3] days after adding Twitter as their digital advertising 
channel. The associated binomial proportionality test statistic (Z) was significant, 
providing additional support for the robustness of the negative abnormal returns 
(123 of 217 abnormal returns are negative; Z = -1.94, p < .05). Furthermore, 
t-statistics for the crude dependence adjustment (CDA) time-series portfolio test 
(t = -1.48, p < .05) (Brown & Warner, 1985) as well as the generalized rank t-test 
(t = -1.65, p < .05) (Kolari & Pynnonen, 2011) were statistically significant, indi-
cating that the results were not due to the outliers in the sample. Combining all 
together, launching a Twitter account as a firm’s digital advertising channel nega-
tively affected the shareholder’s value.
Explaining Negative Abnormal Returns
Given that the use of Twitter is believed to generate positive consequences such 
as the co-creation and the speedy transmission of advertising content, and the 
potential to build relationships with millions of customers, the finding that the 
stock market reacted to the firm’s launching Twitter channel in a negative manner 
was surprising. On average, launching a Twitter channel decreased the value of the 
firm by 0.58 percent.
Explaining the negative abnormal return is the necessary step of the event 
study. It is expected that the type of customers with whom the firm commu-
nicates should be relevant to the negative impact of a firm’s Twitter launch. The 
buying process for consumer goods has been shown to be less rational, and it 
involves the exchange of smaller monetary amounts than the sale and purchase 
of industrial goods (Turley & Kelley, 1997). Furthermore, consumer goods firms 

Financial Value of Digital Advertising  231
tend to have a larger group of stakeholders ( Jeong & Yoo, 2011), and they may 
need to send more market signals than industrial goods firms. Thus, if launching a 
Twitter channel has a positive effect on stakeholders’ perception of the firm, then 
it is more likely with consumer goods, where brand images and brand relation-
ships play important roles. Oppositely, the benefits of launching a Twitter channel 
should not be as great for industrial goods firms. Industrial goods are more likely 
to be tested and assessed in an objective manner, which makes industrial goods 
firms more prone to develop a sales orientation rather than a marketing orienta-
tion, leading to less appreciation of marketing intelligence and marketing com-
munications (Avlonitis & Gounaris, 1997).
To examine the above scenario, a cross-sectional regression model was tested 
with the independent variable of industrial goods firms (i.e., dichotomously 
coded: 1 or 0) and two control variables (the firms’ total assets and market value 
in millions of dollars). Note that the significant multicollinearity between con-
sumer- and industrial-goods firms did not allow the entering of both as inde-
pendent variables into the model. The model (F3, 179 = 3.69, p < .01, adjusted 
R-square = .11) found that industrial goods firms yielded significantly negative 
abnormal stock returns to the firms’ Twitter launch (β = -.18, t = -3.03, p < .01), 
suggesting that the overall negative abnormal returns on the [0 to +3] event win-
dow were attributable to industrial goods firms in the Fortune 500 list.
Conclusion
The exponential growth of digital advertising is intuitively understandable because 
digital media are especially powerful in facilitating real-time engagement with 
shareholders and customers, which has become critical for driving sales. Digi-
tal advertising’s credibility, however, has been questioned and the pressing need 
has been also accentuated for advertisers to link digital advertising investment to 
financial performance. Furthermore, due to a lack of compelling empirical evi-
dence, it remains unclear whether digital advertising investments, such as adding 
a new social media channel, will increase or decrease the financial value of a firm.
This chapter suggests that an event study would be a supplemental, but appro-
priate, method for evaluating the financial value effects of digital advertising 
practices. Event studies have been frequently employed to detect the effects of 
event-induced variance on abnormal returns in the field of finance and econom-
ics as well as in the past advertising studies, but have virtually never been used in 
the context of digital advertising. Acknowledging the gap, this chapter outlines 
the study framework and procedure for an event study and discusses how the 
event study method could be utilized to explain digital advertising’s accountabil-
ity and to examine the effect of digital advertising on the financial value of a firm. 
Furthermore, it demonstrates how the event study can be applied to the context 
of digital advertising, especially for examining the financial value of launching a 
digital advertising channel.

232  Yoo and Baek
The exploratory event study found that launching a Twitter account as a firm’s 
digital advertising channel has a negative impact on shareholder’s value, and fur-
ther analysis revealed that unexpected negative abnormal returns are attributable 
to a large number of industrial goods firms. A  number of speculative reasons 
emerged: investors’ fear in a new social media channel may play a role in gener-
ating negative market reactions, or their concern about increased security risk, 
which seemingly involve information leakage and inadvertent disclosure of inter-
nal corporate data (Waxer, 2011), may outweigh the expected benefits of using a 
Twitter channel.
Future studies, therefore, should examine in more detailed manner why indus-
trial goods firms suffered negative abnormal returns upon launching a Twitter 
channel to provide further theoretical and practical explanations. Furthermore, 
digital advertisers should bear in mind that the results only reflect the short-
term effect of launching a Twitter channel on the firm’s financial performance 
for the [0 to +3] event window. While maintaining a Twitter presence, advertisers 
can harness its power by successfully implementing intended strategies, facilitat-
ing real-time communication and user engagement, and sharing knowledge with 
shareholders and customers. Thus, advertisers should not be discouraged by the 
overall negative abnormal returns found in the study. Further event studies, how-
ever, are recommended to examine whether the financial value effects of Twitter 
or other digital advertising channels could be enhanced or attenuated with con-
tinuous management and care.
References
Agrawal, J., & Kamakura, W. A. (1995). The economic worth of celebrity endorsers: An 
event study analysis. Journal of Marketing, 59(3), 56–62.
Avlonitis, G. J., & Gounaris, S. P. (1997). Marketing orientation and company performance: 
Industrial vs. consumer goods companies. Industrial Marketing Management, 26(5), 
385–402.
Brown, S. J., & Warner, J. B. (1980). Measuring security price performance. Journal of Finan-
cial Economics, 8(3), 205–258.
Brown, S. J., & Warner, J. B. (1985). Using daily stock returns: The case of event studies. 
Journal of Financial Economics, 14(1), 3–31.
Corrado, C. J. (1989). A nonparametric test for abnormal security-price performance in 
event studies. Journal of Financial Economics, 23(2), 385–395.
Corrado, C. J., & Zivney, T. L. (1992). The specification and power of the sign test in event 
study hypothesis tests using daily stock returns. The Journal of Financial and Quantitative 
Analysis, 27(3), 465–478.
Cowan, A. R. (1992). Non-parametric event study tests. Review of Quantitative Finance and 
Accounting, 2(4), 343–358.
Culnan, M. J., McHugh, P. J., & Zubillaga, J. I. (2010). How large US companies can use 
Twitter and other social media to gain business value. MIS Quarterly Executive, 9(4), 
243–259.
Davidson, W. N., Worrell, D. L., & Dutia, D. (1993). The stock market effects of CEO suc-
cession in bankrupt firms. Journal of Management, 19(3), 517–533.

Financial Value of Digital Advertising  233
eMarketer. (2015). US digital ad spending will approach $60 billion this year, with retailers 
leading the way: Retail industry will spend more on mobile, programmatic and video 
ads than any other sector. Retrieved from http://www.emarketer.com/Article/US-
Digital-Ad-Spending-Will-Approach-60-Billion-This-Year-with-Retailers-Leading-
Way/1012497.
Fama, E. F., Fisher, L., Jensen, M. C., & Roll, R. (1969). The adjustment of stock prices to 
new information. International Economic Review, 10(1), 1–21.
Fehle, F., Tsyplakov, S., & Zdorovtsov, V. (2005). Can companies influence investor behav-
iour through advertising? Super bowl commercials and stock returns. European Financial 
Management, 11(5), 625–647.
Foster, G. (1980). Accounting policy decisions and capital market research. Journal of 
Accounting and Economics, 2(1), 29–62.
Gao, H., Xie, J., Wang, Q., & Wilbur, K. C. (2015). Should ad spending increase or decrease 
before a recall announcement? The marketing-finance interface in product-harm crisis 
management. Journal of Marketing, 79(5), 80–99.
Ha, L. (2008). Online advertising research in advertising journals: A review. Journal of Cur-
rent Issues & Research in Advertising, 30(1), 31–48.
Jeong, J., & Yoo, C. Y. (2011). Deceptive advertising and abnormal stock returns: An event 
study analysis. International Journal of Advertising, 30(3), 509–535.
Kalyanaram, G., Robinson, W. T., & Urban, G. L. (1995). Order of market entry: Established 
empirical generalizations, emerging empirical generalizations, and future research. Mar-
keting Science, 14(3), G212-G221.
Kolari, J. W.,  & Pynnonen, S. (2011). Nonparametric rank tests for event stud-
ies. Journal of Empirical Finance, 18(5), 953–971. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jempfin.2011.08.003.
Lee, K., Oh, W.-Y., & Kim, N. (2013). Social media for socially responsible firms: Analysis 
of Fortune 500’s Twitter profiles and their CSR/CSIR ratings. Journal of Business Ethics, 
118(4), 791–806.
Marketing Science Institute. (2004). Linking marketing to financial performance and firm 
value. Journal of Marketing, 68(October), 73–75.
Marvin, G. (2013, November 26). Despite soaring digital video ad spend, advertisers lack 
measurement tools. Marketing Land. Retrieved from http://marketingland.com/despite-
soaring-digital-video-ad-spend-advertisers-lack-measurement-tools-study-66412.
Mathur, L. K., & Mathur, I. (1995). The effect of advertising slogan changes on the market 
values of firms. Journal of Advertising Research, 35(1), 59–65.
McWilliams, A., & Siegel, D. (1997). Event studies in management research: Theoretical and 
empirical issues. Academy of Management Journal, 40(3), 626–657.
Patell, J. M. (1976). Corporate forecasts of earnings per share and stock price behavior: 
Empirical test. Journal of Accounting Research, 14(2), 246–276.
Rappaport, A. (1997). Creating shareholder value: A guide for managers and investors. New York, 
NY: The Free Press.
Rust, R. T., Ambler, T., Carpenter, G. S., Kumar, V., & Srivastava, R. K. (2004). Measuring 
marketing productivity: Current knowledge and future directions. Journal of Marketing, 
68(4), 76–89.
Rybalko, S., & Seltzer, T. (2010). Dialogic communication in 140 characters or less: How Fortune 
500 companies engage stakeholders using Twitter. Public Relations Review, 36(4), 336–341.
Srinivasan, R., & Bharadwaj, S. (2004). Event studies in marketing strategy research. In C. 
Moorman & D. R. Lehmann (Eds.), Assessing marketing strategy performance (pp. 9–28). 
Cambridge, MA: Marketing Science Institute.

234  Yoo and Baek
Tippins, M. J., & Kunkel, R. A. (2006). Winning a clio advertising award and its relationship 
to firm profitability. Journal of Marketing Communications, 12(1), 1–14.
Turley, L., & Kelley, S. W. (1997). A comparison of advertising content: Business to business 
versus consumer services. Journal of Advertising, 26(4), 39–48.
Waxer, C. (2011, February 11). CIOs struggle with social media’s security risks: Facebook 
and other social networking sites help agencies interact with citizens but also pre-
sent security threats. Government Technology. Retrieved from http://www.govtech.com/
pcio/CIOs-Social-Media-Security-Risks-021111.html.
Wiles, M. A., & Danielova, A. (2009). The worth of product placement in successful films: 
An event study analysis. Journal of Marketing, 73(4), 44–63.

Company
Event Day: 
Twitter Launch
SIC Codea
Confounding 
Eventb
Starbucks Corporation
20061129
5810
0
Oracle
20070305
7372
0
Wells Fargo
20070314
6022
0
Intel
20070329
3679
1
Progressive Corporation
20070403
6331
0
JetBlue Airways Corporation
20070530
4512
0
United Technologies
20070611
3724
1
CarMax, Inc.
20070622
5521
1
Southwest Airlines
20070702
4512
0
Yum! Brands, Inc.
20070912
5812
0
Live Nation Entertainment, Inc.
20071023
7922
0
EMC Corporation
20071106
3572
0
Monsanto Company
20071130
2879
0
General Motors
20071204
3711
1
Hormel Foods Corporation
20080122
2011
0
Alaska Air Group
20080207
4512
0
Texas Instruments Incorporated
20080219
3674
0
Marriott International, Inc.
20080313
7011
0
Health Net, Inc.
20080324
6324
0
Allstate
20080401
6331
1
AT&T
20080501
4812
0
Home Depot
20080515
5211
1
Advanced Micro Devices
20080521
3674
0
DIRECTV
20080529
4899
0
Alcoa, Inc.
20080611
3334
1
Caterpillar
20080612
3531
1
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
20080616
5411
0
Nordstrom
20080618
5651
0
URS Corporation
20080702
8711
0
APPENDIX
(Continued )

Company
Event Day: 
Twitter Launch
SIC Codea
Confounding 
Eventb
SanDisk Corporation
20080708
3570
0
Lennar Corporation
20080711
1531
0
Ryder System, Inc.
20080721
7513
1
U S BANCORP DEL
20080723
6021
0
Ford
20080731
3711
1
Big Lots, Inc.
20080731
5331
0
Dow Chemical Company
20080801
2821
1
CSX Corporation
20080804
4011
0
Cisco Systems
20080806
3674
1
Marathon Oil Corporation
20080807
2911
0
Tyson Foods
20080813
2015
0
Northrop Grumman Corporation
20080813
3812
1
Genworth Financial
20080814
6311
0
The Southern Company
20080815
4911
0
NetApp, Inc.
20080818
3572
1
Synnex Corporation
20080822
7373
0
Raytheon CO
20080827
3812
1
PetSmart, Inc.
20080905
5990
0
Discover Financial Services
20080905
6141
0
Aetna
20080908
6324
0
Charter Communications
20081001
4841
1
Western Digital Corporation
20081027
3572
1
Windstream Holdings, Inc.
20081029
4813
0
Wal-Mart
20081103
5311
1
Harley-Davidson, Inc.
20081104
3751
0
Hewlett-Packard
20081105
3571
0
SLM Corporation
20081105
6141
0
Whirlpool
20081110
3633
0
Agilent Technologies, Inc.
20081110
3825
1
J. C. Penney Company
20081117
5311
1
Best Buy
20081118
5731
0
Symantec Corporation
20081118
7370
0
Henry Schein, Inc.
20081124
5047
0
Xerox Corporation
20081125
3577
0
Union Pacific Corp
20081125
4011
0
Waste Management, Inc.
20081125
4953
1
Travelers Companies, Inc.
20081125
6331
0
Coca-Cola Enterprises, Inc.
20081201
5651
0
Berkshire Hathaway
20081205
6331
0
Hertz Global Holdings, Inc.
20081209
7514
0
Gap
20081229
5651
0
Office Depot, Inc.
20090102
5943
1
Deere & Company
20090107
3523
0
IBM (International Business 
Machines)
20090114
3571
0
Micron Technology, Inc.
20090115
3674
1
Viacom, Inc.
20090115
4841
0
Baker Hughes, Inc.
20090122
3533
1
Con-way, Inc.
20090122
4213
0
The Williams Companies, Inc.
20090122
4922
0
(Continued)

Company
Event Day: 
Twitter Launch
SIC Codea
Confounding 
Eventb
Lowe’s
20090122
5211
0
AECOM Technology Corporation
20090123
8711
0
Sears Holdings
20090126
5331
1
Unum Group
20090127
6321
0
Hartford Financial Services Group
20090127
6331
0
eBay
20090129
7389
0
Northeast Utilities
20090202
4911
0
Automatic Data Processing, Inc.
20090203
7374
1
Consolidated Edison, Inc.
20090206
4931
0
J&J (Johnson & Johnson)
20090209
2834
1
Google
20090210
7375
0
Sempra Energy
20090211
4932
0
The Priceline Group, Inc.
20090211
7389
0
Tech Data Corporation
20090213
5040
0
Amazon.com
20090213
7370
1
Chevron
20090217
2911
0
Pepsico
20090219
2086
1
Avon Products, Inc.
20090223
2844
1
Discovery Communications, Inc.
20090226
4841
1
Foot Locker, Inc.
20090226
5661
0
American Airlines
20090302
4512
0
Owens Corning
20090304
2951
0
Starwood Hotels & Resorts
20090304
6798
0
Ball Corporation
20090305
3411
0
Dr Pepper Snapple Group
20090309
2086
1
ConocoPhillips
20090309
2911
1
Chubb Corporation
20090309
6331
0
BlackRock, Inc.
20090311
6211
0
DuPont
20090312
2821
0
Centene Corporation
20090312
6324
0
Humana
20090313
6324
1
Boeing
20090318
3721
0
Northwestern Mutual Life 
Insurance
20090320
4931
0
Anixter International, Inc.
20090320
5063
0
NCR Corporation
20090323
3578
0
Navistar International Corporation
20090323
3711
1
Coca-Cola
20090326
2086
0
CBS Corporation
20090326
4841
1
P&G (Procter & Gamble)
20090327
2841
1
Insight Enterprises, Inc.
20090327
5045
1
The Mosaic Company
20090330
2874
0
INTL FCStone
20090330
6211
0
Ingram Micro
20090401
5045
0
Amgen, Inc.
20090402
2830
1
DaVita HealthCare Partners, Inc.
20090403
8092
0
AGCO Corporation
20090406
3523
0
Safeway
20090406
5411
0
Mohawk Industries, Inc.
20090409
2273
1
PPG Industries, Inc.
20090409
2851
0
(Continued )

Company
Event Day: 
Twitter Launch
SIC Codea
Confounding 
Eventb
First American Financial 
Corporation
20090409
7374
0
Western Union Company
20090413
6099
0
Wynn Resorts, Limited
20090414
7990
1
PG&E Corporation
20090415
4911
0
O’Reily Automotive, Inc.
20090415
5531
0
Freddie Mac
20090415
6111
1
Barnes & Noble, Inc.
20090416
5942
0
Bristo-Myers Squibb Company
20090421
2834
1
Ralph Lauren Corporation
20090422
2329
0
Entergy Corporation
20090422
4911
0
The Hershey Company
20090423
2066
1
CBRE Group, Inc.
20090423
6726
0
Merck & Co.
20090427
2834
1
J.B Hunt Transport Services, Inc.
20090427
4213
0
Kohl’s
20090427
5311
1
Kelly Services, Inc.
20090428
7361
1
Kroger
20090429
5411
0
Exxon Mobil
20090430
2911
1
Campbell Soup Company
20090501
2032
1
Cigna
20090504
6324
1
Kindred Healthcare, Inc.
20090504
8062
1
AutoNation
20090512
5511
0
Dick’s Sporting Goods, Inc.
20090519
5941
1
American Electric Power Company
20090520
4911
0
United Rentals, Inc.
20090522
7359
0
Occidental Petroleum Corporation
20090526
1311
0
American Express
20090526
6141
1
Lockheed Martin
20090527
3721
1
Express Scripts
20090527
8093
1
TJX Companies
20090528
5651
1
CenturyLink
20090602
4813
1
Rockwell Automation, Inc.
20090604
3829
1
Hess
20090605
2911
1
Walgreen
20090610
5912
1
Baxter International, Inc.
20090611
3841
1
WESCO International, Inc.
20090617
5063
0
Lincoln National Corporation
20090618
6311
1
Macy’s
20090625
5311
0
The Pantry, Inc.
20090626
5411
0
Goodyear Tire & Rubber 
Company
20090701
3011
0
Medtronic
20090701
3845
1
Ameren Corporation
20090710
4931
0
Pfizer
20090713
2834
1
CONSOL Energy
20090714
1221
0
DTE Energy Company
20090714
4911
0
Apache Corporation
20090715
1311
0
Smithfield Foods
20090715
2013
0
United Natural Foods, Inc.
20090715
5140
0
(Continued)

Company
Event Day: 
Twitter Launch
SIC Codea
Confounding 
Eventb
Laboratory Corporation
20090715
8071
1
Verizon Communications
20090723
4812
1
Sealed Air Corporation
20090724
2671
1
FirstEnergy Corp.
20090724
4911
1
Johnson Controls
20090730
1796
0
Emerson Electric
20090803
3629
1
Exelon Corporation
20090803
4931
1
Dillard’s, Inc.
20090805
5311
0
Applied Material, Inc..
20090811
3550
1
ONEOK, Inc.
20090811
4923
0
Fidelity National Financial, Inc.
20090812
6361
0
Corning, Inc.
20090813
3357
0
Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.
20090814
3829
0
Norfolk Southern
20090817
4011
0
Walt Disney
20090820
7996
1
SunTrust Banks
20090824
6021
0
Cognizant Technology Solutions
20090828
7370
0
Mondelez International
20090831
2000
0
McDonald’s
20090902
5812
0
Chesapeake Energy Corporation
20090903
1311
0
Apple
20090908
3571
1
Coach, Inc.
20090910
3911
0
Microsoft
20090914
7370
1
MasterCard, Inc.
20090917
7389
0
Quest Diagnostics, Inc.
20090922
8071
0
Advance Auto Parts
20090923
5531
0
Cliffs Natural Resources, Inc.
20090924
1011
0
Eastman Chemical Company
20090924
2821
0
Staples
20090930
5940
0
Metlife
20090930
6311
0
Citigroup
20091002
6021
1
Integrys Energy Group, Inc.
20091005
4931
0
UGI Corporation
20091005
4932
0
Fidelity National Information 
Services
20091007
7389
1
Duke Energy Corporation
20091009
4911
0
Dominion Resources, Inc.
20091019
4922
0
Qualcomm, Inc.
20091023
3663
0
Cummins, Inc.
20091103
3519
1
Harris Corporation
20091103
3663
0
NextEra Energy
20091103
4911
1
Target
20091110
5331
1
Comcast
20091112
4841
1
Casey’s General Stores, Inc.
20091112
5331
0
Tenet Healthcare Corporation
20091119
8062
0
ConAgra Foods, Inc.
20091124
2096
0
Dollar Tree, Inc.
20091204
5331
0
Terex Corporation
20091209
3537
0
PNC Financial Services Group
20091211
6021
0
Mattel, Inc.
20091221
3942
1
(Continued )

Company
Event Day: 
Twitter Launch
SIC Codea
Confounding 
Eventb
L Brands, Inc.
20091230
5651
0
Level 3 Communications, Inc.
20100106
4813
1
Kinder Morgan Energy Partners
20100108
4922
0
Xcel Energy, Inc.
20100121
4931
0
The Andersons, Inc.
20100126
5150
0
Air Products & Chemicals
20100129
2813
1
McGraw Hill Financial, Inc.
20100201
2731
1
CVS
20100202
5912
1
ADM (Archer Daniels Midland)
20100203
2046
1
The Sherwin-Williams Company
20100204
5231
1
Parker-Hannifin Corporation
20100208
3492
1
D. R. Horton, Inc.
20100210
1531
0
Heinz H J CO
20100216
2030
1
Fannie Mae
20100218
6112
0
V.F. Corporation
20100224
2325
0
Stanley Black & Decker
20100226
3423
0
CenterPoint Energy, Inc.
20100308
4931
0
Newell Rubbermaid, Inc.
20100309
3089
0
AIG (American International 
Group)
20100324
6331
1
Time Warner Cable, Inc.
20100330
4841
0
Colgate-Palmolive Company
20100401
2844
1
FMC Technologies, Inc.
20100405
3533
0
The Charles Schwab Corporation
20100413
6211
1
Rite Aid
20100416
5912
1
FedEx
20100419
4513
0
Spectra Energy Corp
20100507
4923
1
Family Dollar Stores, Inc.
20100517
5331
1
McKesson
20100527
5122
1
GameStop Corp.
20100527
5734
0
3M Company
20100601
3841
1
Kimberly-Clark Corporation
20100602
2676
1
Assurant, Inc.
20100604
6331
0
Biogen Idec, Inc.
20100614
2830
1
W.W. Grainger, Inc.
20100614
5063
1
UPS (United Parcel Service, Inc.)
20100621
4215
1
Ameriprise Financial, Inc.
20100707
6282
0
Principal Financial Group
20100708
6321
0
Allergan, Inc.
20100709
2834
0
LKQ Corporation
20100712
5015
0
Avery Dennison Corporation
20100713
2754
0
Bank of New York Mellon 
Corporation
20100716
6022
1
Fluor Corporation
20100824
1623
1
St. Jude Medical, Inc.
20100826
3845
0
TravelCenters of America LLC
20100826
5541
0
MeadWestvaco Corporation
20100910
2621
0
WellCare Health Plans, Inc.
20100913
6324
0
Sysco
20100914
5141
0
Motorola Solutions
20100927
3663
1
(Continued)

Company
Event Day: 
Twitter Launch
SIC Codea
Confounding 
Eventb
Omnicare, Inc.
20101012
5912
1
Bank of America
20101025
6021
1
Boston Scientific Corporation
20101110
3841
0
Marsh & McLennan Companies, 
Inc.
20101119
6411
1
Masco Corporation
20101209
5211
0
Fifth Third Bancorp
20101227
6711
1
Public Service Enterprise Group 
Incorporated
20110106
4931
0
Republic Services, Inc.
20110110
4953
0
Community Health systems
20110110
8062
0
The Blackstone Group L.P.
20110118
6282
1
Gannett Co., Inc.
20110131
2711
1
Penske Automotive Group, Inc.
20110131
5511
0
Dean Foods company
20110203
2026
1
Ecolab, Inc.
20110211
2841
1
Goldman Sachs Group
20110216
6211
0
Cardinal Health
20110222
5122
0
Honeywell International, Inc.
20110225
3724
1
C. H. Robinson Worldwide, Inc.
20110301
4731
1
United Continental Holdings, Inc.
20110304
4512
0
Celanese Corporation
20110310
2869
0
Universal Health Services, Inc.
20110310
8062
0
General Electric
20110316
4813
1
Altria Group
20110317
2111
0
Erie Insurance Group
20110323
6410
0
J.P. Morgan Chase
20110330
6021
1
AutoZone, Inc.
20110406
5531
0
Las Vegas Sands Corp.
20110407
7011
0
General Mills
20110411
2043
0
Supervalu
20110414
5141
1
Halliburton Company
20110426
1389
1
AmerisourceBergen
20110427
5122
1
The Estee Launder Companies, Inc.
20110429
2844
0
Mylan, Inc.
20110505
2834
1
Ashland, Inc.
20110506
2819
0
Simon Property Group
20110519
6798
0
Edison International
20110524
4911
0
Gilead Sciences, Inc.
20110602
2830
0
The J.M. Smucker Company
20110610
2033
1
Celgene Corporation
20110628
2890
0
State Street Corporation
20110708
6022
0
Franklin Resources, Inc.
20110718
6282
0
Broadcom Corporation
20110719
3670
0
Core-Mark Holding Company, Inc.
20110720
5149
0
Dana Holding Corporation
20110727
3714
1
W.R. Berkley Corporation
20110802
6331
0
Ross Stores, Inc.
20110808
5650
1
Abbott Laboratories
20110822
2834
1
Nucor Corporation
20110824
3312
0
(Continued )

Company
Event Day: 
Twitter Launch
SIC Codea
Confounding 
Eventb
Capital One Financial Corporation
20110829
6712
1
Bed Bath & Beyond
20110913
5700
0
Darden Restaurants
20110913
5812
0
Lear Corporation
20110915
3714
0
Weyerhaeuser Company
20110915
6798
0
BorgWarner, Inc.
20110919
3714
1
The Interpublic Group of 
Companies, Inc.
20110922
7311
1
Paccar
20111013
3711
0
UnitedHealth Group
20111024
6324
0
Morgan Stanley
20111101
6798
1
Dish Network
20111104
4841
1
ManpowerGroup, Inc.
20111107
7363
1
BB&T Corporation
20111108
6021
1
Nike
20111118
3021
1
PPL Corporation
20111129
4911
0
Domtar Corporation
20111206
2621
0
Airgas, Inc.
20111208
5084
1
WellPoint (Anthem, Inc.)
20111212
6324
0
Vanguard Health Systems, Inc.
20111212
8069
1
Newmont Mining corporation
20111215
1041
0
Loews Corporation
20111215
6331
0
Kellogg Company
20120103
2043
0
Prudential Financial, Inc
20120123
6311
1
Reynolds American, Inc.
20120207
2111
1
Jabil Circuit, Inc.
20120207
3672
1
The Clorox Company
20120301
2842
0
Ingredion, Inc.
20120305
2046
0
Visa
20120411
7389
0
Praxair, Inc.
20120418
2813
0
Sanmina
20120504
3672
0
Avis Budget Group
20120515
6531
1
Computer Sciences Corporation
20120604
7373
1
Arrow Electronics
20120725
5065
1
Expeditors International of 
Washington, Inc.
20120726
4730
0
Tractor Supply Company
20120806
5999
1
KKR & Co. L. P.
20120820
6282
1
Peabody Energy Corporation
20120828
1221
0
General Dynamics Corporation
20120906
3731
1
Philip Morris International
20121101
2111
0
Avnet
20121108
5065
1
Reliance Steel & Aluminum Co.
20121217
5051
0
Global Partners LP
20140624
5171
0
a 0-: Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing, 1-: Mining and Construction, 2- or 3: Manufacturing, 4-: 
Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas, and Sanitary Services, 5-: Wholesale and Retail Trade, 
6-: Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate, 7- or 8-: Services, 9-: Public Administration
b 1 = Yes, 0 = No
(Continued)

You have done it and I have done it. We gravitate toward things that give us pleas-
ure and avoid those which cause us pain. This basic human instinct is core to one 
of the oldest concepts in psychology, that of Approach-Avoidance. Our avoidance 
motivation is a “spring to action” that allows us to avoid negative stimuli in our 
environment, such as hot cooktops, boring lectures, or even advertising.
Avoidance behavior—or behavior withdrawal—is something well docu-
mented by neuroscience as lateralized in the right anterior cortical regions of 
our brains. At the core of this spring to action is emotion, and there is substantive 
empirical evidence of an association between negative affective evaluation and 
avoidance behavior (Chen & Bargh, 1999; Elliot & Thrash, 2002). That is, the 
pop-up ad annoys us, and we ignore it. Some researchers like Elliot and Thrash 
(2010) even suggest that approach and avoidance temperaments are basic dimen-
sions of our personality. Perhaps you know someone who controls the remote in 
your household.
It might seem, therefore, that advertising avoidance is a part of human nature. 
But what do we know about it? And what triggers this avoidance? What chal-
lenges do advertisers face as they cope with empowered consumers, who control 
where and how they receive and share branded messages and increasingly choose 
not to receive any advertising at all? Perhaps, most importantly, how could this 
basic human instinct threaten free content online and potentially reshape digital 
advertising? Does this leave us between an ad block and a hard place? This chapter 
sets out to investigate these issues by defining advertising avoidance and exploring 
the ways in which it has been transformed in the digital world. To do this, it builds 
on the theoretical premise of promotional radiation to look at types of advertising 
avoidance, antecedents of advertising avoidance, and new research and industry 
trends shaping advertising avoidance in the digital world.
14
BETWEEN AN AD BLOCK AND  
A HARD PLACE
Advertising Avoidance and the Digital World
Louise Kelly, Gayle Kerr, and Judy Drennan

244  Kelly, Kerr, and Drennan
Advertising Avoidance Defined
Advertising avoidance is an important area of research, spanning traditional media 
(Speck & Elliott, 1997), online media (Edwards, Li, & Lee, 2002; Cho & Cheon, 
2004), and more recently social media (Kelly, Kerr, & Drennan, 2010; Hadija, 
Barnes, & Hair, 2012; Barreto, 2013). Speck and Elliott (1997) created the most 
widely adopted definition of advertising avoidance, describing it as: “all actions 
that media users employ to reduce exposure to advertising content” (p. 61). This 
type of avoidance may be conceptualized as a spectrum, ranging from consumers 
not even noticing the advertisement (banner blindness) (Dreze & Hussherr, 2003; 
Hervet, Guerard, Tremblay, & Saber Chtourou, 2011) to users downloading ad 
blocking software to ensure that they do not receive any advertising (Kelly et al., 
2010). This suggests that advertising can be both intentionally and unintentionally 
avoided (Duff & Faber, 2011).
Speck and Elliott (1997) investigated advertising avoidance across four media 
types (television, radio, magazines, and newspapers), concluding that avoidance is 
influenced by consumer characteristics, variables specific to the medium, as well 
as consumer perceptions toward the advertising. While they were first to include 
communication problems related to advertising, such as search hindrance, distrac-
tion, and disruption, as antecedents of avoidance, they found that attitude toward 
advertising in a medium explained the greatest variation in avoidance across all 
media types.
Advertising Avoidance and the Digital World
Researchers have explored advertising avoidance in the online environment since 
the turn of the 21st century, investigating why avoidance occurs on the various 
online platforms, and the role of technology in facilitating avoidance (Johnson & 
Kaye, 1998; Kiousis, 2001; Cho  & Cheon, 2004; Obermiller, Spangenberg,  & 
MacLachlan, 2005; Jin & Villegas, 2007; Kelly et al., 2010; Duff & Faber, 2011; 
Lorenzo-Romero, Constantinides, & Alarcon-del-Amo, 2011; Taylor, Lewin, & 
Strutton, 2011). Where once you had to leave the room to avoid advertising on 
television, now you can change channels with the remote, record or download or 
stream programs without advertising content, or even use software to mechani-
cally block all advertising online.
As a result of these advances, advertising avoidance has become a $21.8 bil-
lion business globally. More than 198 million ad blockers globally, an increase of 
41 percent in the past year, help people automatically avoid advertising (WARC, 
2015). This ad block leaves the industry in a hard place with up to 27 percent of 
lost advertising inventory, posing a threat to free content online. It is predicted that 
without the revenue from online advertising, many of the marginally profitable 
websites offering free content will cease to exist (Naughton, 2015).
There are a number of reasons offered to explain ad blocking, which primarily 
relate to consumer empowerment and privacy. The most common reason cited in 

Advertising Avoidance  245
the literature for using ad blockers was related to privacy concerns about the mis-
use of personal information (WARC, 2015). On social network sites, for example, 
the increasing personalization of content sees advertising more specifically tar-
geted to consumers based on their reported activities and their online behavior. 
For example, while Kelly et al. (2013) reported young consumer confidence in 
their own experience and ability to control privacy information, they still identi-
fied the “creepy line” that marketers and digital platforms sometimes cross.
Another reason for advertising avoidance in the digital world relates to con-
sumer empowerment. As new technology has given consumers more power to 
actively seek out information online, they are no longer dependent upon advertis-
ing to provide product information (Dinev & Hart, 2004; Schultz, 2008; Hadija 
et al., 2012). This new empowerment has altered the way they perceive online 
advertising, and as such has made advertising avoidance much easier. In fact 
Schultz (2006) sees advertising avoidance as a consumer decision to participate or 
not in a brand conversation.
Types of Advertising Avoidance
Advertising avoidance has been described as being cognitive, affective, mechani-
cal, or behavioral in nature (Speck & Elliott, 1997; Cho & Cheon, 2004; Kelly 
et al., 2010). Speck and Elliott (1997), for example, suggest that there are three 
types of advertising avoidance: cognitive (ignoring ads), behavioral (flip or skip), 
or mechanical (eliminating or blocking the ad). Cho and Cheon (2004), on the 
other hand, model avoidance on the three types of basic consumer responses 
(Vakratsas & Ambler, 1999), proposing affective (negative feelings or disliking the 
ad), cognitive (thought suppression or ignoring the ad), and behavioral (an action 
such as scrolling down to avoid advertising) responses.
One important difference between these two typologies reflects the division in 
the psychology literature as to whether affect and cognition are separate or inter-
related systems (see Folkman, 1984; Zajonc, 1984). Some researchers suggest that 
cognition is a prerequisite for emotion, while others view affect and cognition as 
separate and partially independent systems. However, in the context of advertising 
avoidance, it would seem likely that the described affective avoidance (negative 
feelings or emotional beliefs about the advertising) still requires either cognitive 
avoidance (ignoring the ads) or behavioral avoidance (clicking away from the 
page) to enact it and to actually avoid the ad. Hence we suggest that affective 
avoidance is actually an affective response and often the catalyst for subsequent 
cognitive or behavioral avoidance.
The other difference in these two typologies is mechanical avoidance. Unlike 
Speck and Elliott (1997), Cho and Cheon (2004), who studied avoidance on the 
internet, do not propose mechanical avoidance as a type of advertising avoidance. 
This is interesting as mechanical avoidance is so easily achieved online through 
technology such as ad blocking software. It is conceivable though that mechanical 

246  Kelly, Kerr, and Drennan
avoidance could be seen as the ultimate behavioral avoidance. Indeed, Cho and 
Cheon’s definition of behavioral avoidance, “consumer avoidance actions other 
than lack of attention” (2004, p. 91), could also describe mechanical avoidance. 
Notably, despite building these different typologies of advertising avoidance, 
Speck and Elliott (1997) and Cho and Cheon (2004) all still measured advertising 
avoidance as a single, higher-order construct.
Antecedents of Advertising Avoidance
In keeping with the idea of approach-avoid, it is likely that threats, punishment, 
and adverse stimuli will encourage avoidance in order to prevent harm or loss. 
Therefore, consumers will approach advertising that offers rewards or helps them 
fulfill their goals, and avoid advertising that disrupts or threatens them in some 
way, even if it is only a loss of time.
A number of different antecedents of advertising avoidance have been identi-
fied in the literature. These include negative stimuli: the absence of reward, such 
as lack of an incentive or irrelevance of the message; disruption, such as task 
interruption; clutter and threats, such as expectation of a negative experience; 
skepticism of the advertising; attitude toward the advertising medium; and privacy 
concerns and control (Cho & Cheon, 2004, Kelly et al., 2010).
Where there is no reward, there is little incentive to approach advertising. In 
the context of SNS, Kelly et al.’s (2010) exploratory study found that consumers 
avoided advertising on these sites when they felt that the advertising message was 
not relevant to them. Similarly, if consumers saw little value in the advertising, if 
there was no incentive for them to pay attention, then they were also likely to 
avoid it (Ducoffe & Curlo, 2000; Edwards et al., 2002).
Jin and Villegas (2007) also researched online advertising avoidance, consider-
ing the role of consumer ambivalence and consumer interactivity. Their study 
found that when consumers had low levels of interactivity and high levels of 
ambivalence toward the advertising, they were more likely to avoid or ignore the 
advertising. Hadija et al. (2012) propose that consumers on social networking sites 
(SNS) simply do not notice the advertising on their SNS.
Disruption to the online task also triggers advertising avoidance (Cho  & 
Cheon, 2004). This could be caused by advertising clutter (or the belief that 
there is too much advertising), which is considered to disrupt media viewing and 
impact advertising avoidance in traditional (Speck & Elliott, 1997) and online 
media (Cho & Cheon, 2004). Research has shown that a low-clutter environment 
produces more desirable outcomes for advertisers (Nelson-Field, Riebe, & Sharp, 
2012). Consumers are less likely to recall the advertising—especially if it is a 
lesser-known brand—if they feel that there are too many messages being directed 
at them (Nelson-Field et al., 2012).
In terms of threats, expectation of negative experience is likely to encour-
age advertising avoidance online (Cho & Cheon, 2004) and in SNS (Kelly et al., 

Advertising Avoidance  247
2010). When consumers perceive that advertising is deceptive, exaggerated, incor-
rectly targeted, or leads users to inappropriate sites (Cho & Cheon, 2004), they are 
likely to avoid the advertising. Similarly, as Kelly et al. (2010) suggest, if consumers 
have had a previous negative experience when they have clicked on advertising, 
they may be reluctant to click on advertising a second time.
In one of the earliest studies into advertising avoidance in the online envi-
ronment, Edwards et al. (2002) examined negative responses and the avoidance 
of pop-up ads. They found that advertising intrusiveness infringed on consumer 
freedom online, encouraging consumers to avoid the advertising.
This perception of a negative experience may also be influenced by the believ-
ability or trustworthiness of an advertising medium. Moore and Rodgers (2005) 
found that trust in the advertising medium influences consumer perception of 
the advertising message and determines whether they ignore the message or 
not. Indeed, Speck and Elliott (1997) found that attitude toward advertising in 
a medium explained the greatest variation in avoidance across four traditional 
media types. Similarly, if consumers have a skeptical attitude toward the medium 
(e.g., Facebook) or are cynical about the advertising message, they are also more 
likely to avoid the advertising (Johnson & Kaye, 1998; Kelly et al., 2010).
A final threat is to one’s privacy. Examining personalized advertising avoid-
ance, Baek and Morimoto (2012) identified privacy concerns as having an impact 
on advertising avoidance. Building on this, Sheehan and Hoy (1999) found that 
consumers, if concerned, took control of their online information by participat-
ing in avoidance behaviors, such as providing incorrect information and removing 
themselves from mailing lists. More recently, behavioral targeting offers a visible 
manifestation of privacy concerns, and as a result many consumers turn to ad 
blocking software to protect themselves online (Johnson, 2013).
Models of Advertising Avoidance
Two studies have taken the research into antecedents of advertising avoidance 
and related these to the types of advertising avoidance online. These are discussed 
below.
Advertising Avoidance in the Online Environment: Cho and 
Cheon 2004
Cho and Cheon (2004) were first to develop a model of advertising avoidance 
for the online environment. As shown in Figure 14.1, it was built upon the three 
antecedents of advertising avoidance, identified earlier in this chapter: interrup-
tion of task, perceived clutter, and negative past experiences with internet adver-
tising. When the speed of data retrieval and processing is reduced or interrupted 
by advertising, consumers may react in a negative way toward the advertisement 
or product (Cho  & Cheon, 2004). Likewise, if perceived clutter is excessive, 

248  Kelly, Kerr, and Drennan
FIGURE 14.1  Advertising Avoidance in the Online Environment
Source: Cho and Cheon, 2004
consumers are likely to have difficulty in discriminating between messages, lead-
ing them to disregard all messages in this space (Cho & Cheon, 2004). Finally, 
past experience with online advertising that is deceptive, exaggerated, incorrectly 
targeted, or leads users to inappropriate sites, encourages advertising avoidance 
online (Cho & Cheon, 2004).
Advertising Avoidance on SNS: Kelly, Kerr, and Drennan 2010
In 2010, Kelly, Kerr and Drennan proposed a new model of advertising avoidance, 
by applying Cho and Cheon’s (2004) research in the online environment to the 
more specific context of online SNS. In addition to the three antecedents that 
Cho and Cheon (2004) identified, Kelly et al. (2010) revealed other factors of 
influence and incorporated these into a model (see Figure 14.2).
Kelly et al. (2010) suggest that SNS users avoid advertising if they feel threat-
ened when clicking on an advertisement. This could be a result of previous nega-
tive experiences with advertising on SNS or a warning from people in authority. 
Relevance of the advertising message was also found to be an antecedent of 
advertising avoidance. If the advertising message is not of interest to the receiver, 
then the information is likely to be ignored. This also supports Greenwald and 
Leavitt’s (1984) early study on relevance, which found that consumer involve-
ment with a message is dependent upon relevance. Skepticism of the advertising 
message and even skepticism of the advertising medium were also reasons for 
consumers to avoid advertising on SNS.
Toward a New Model of Advertising Avoidance
Previous models of advertising avoidance identified the antecedents of avoidance, 
yet measured advertising avoidance as a single construct. Kelly’s (2014) quan-
titative study extended this knowledge of avoidance by testing whether some 

Advertising Avoidance  249
FIGURE 14.2  Model of Advertising Avoidance in Online Social Networking Sites
Source: Kelly et al., 2010
antecedents influenced some types of avoidance (such as cognitive or behavioral) 
but not others.
Their study found that attitude toward SNSs as an advertising medium, expec-
tation of negative experiences with advertising owing to word-of-mouth and 
negative past experiences, and perceived goal impediments influence all types 
of advertising avoidance. When consumers had concerns about their privacy or 
control of their information on Facebook, they were likely to exhibit an affec-
tive response and cognitive avoidance, but not behavioral avoidance. If consumers 
saw no value or incentive in advertising, they were likely to exhibit cognitive and 
behavioral avoidance, with no affective response. Relevance of advertising mes-
sage influenced how they felt and thought about advertising, but did not influ-
ence their action or behavior to avoid the advertising. Clutter influenced how 
consumers felt toward advertising, but not enough to trigger cognitive or behav-
ioral avoidance. Skepticism toward the advertising message did not influence any 
type of advertising avoidance.
As shown in Figure 14.3, the results of this study suggest that SNS consumers 
have a strong emotional connection with their Facebook site, with eight of the 
ten tested antecedents creating an affective response. Only skepticism of advertis-
ing message and lack of incentive have no influence on how they feel toward the 
advertising. Likewise, cognitive advertising avoidance is also influenced by eight 
of the antecedents. Skepticism of advertising message again and advertising clut-
ter had no impact. Finally, the study suggests that consumers will take action to 
behaviorally avoid advertising if they have a negative attitude toward it, if they 

250  Kelly, Kerr, and Drennan
FIGURE 14.3  Antecedents of Cognitive Avoidance on Facebook
Source: Kelly, 2014
do not see value or incentive in the advertising, or if it distracts them from doing 
what they intended on Facebook.
The take-out for brands wanting to share this emotional space with their con-
sumers is that understanding their expectations and being sensitive to the emo-
tional nature of the medium may result in more engaging and more influential 
campaigns.
Advertising Avoidance Across Time
Maybe you are one of social network generation. Perhaps you grew up on MyS-
pace, before migrating to Facebook, before going mobile. If so, you might find the 
longitudinal study by Kelly, Kerr, and Drennan (2013) a bit of déjà vu. In 2007, 

Advertising Avoidance  251
the cohort of teens aged 13 to 17 years were interviewed about their views on 
advertising on SNS. The majority of participants ignored the advertising (cogni-
tive avoidance) and felt that the advertising on SNS (in this case mostly MySpace) 
was not targeted to them at all. Their parents had terrified them about the dangers 
of clicking on ads for fear of viruses and ending up in inappropriate websites, so 
even if they noticed an ad, they were hesitant to click. Thus, if the product was 
relevant to them it was a pure coincidence rather than receiving targeted advertis-
ing. They also thought if their site was set to private mode (which most of them 
were) then the SNS platform did not have access to their information for targeted 
advertising. Clutter was not an issue. They distrusted advertising and were reluc-
tant to give out any personal details.
Four years later this same group was interviewed as mature 17–21 year olds 
who had abandoned MySpace in favor of Facebook. They had come to understand 
that advertisers used their information to target messages to them, but privacy 
concerns were flagged if this information became too personal. They understood 
the risks of being online and were strategic about the information they shared. 
Clutter of news feeds had become an issue, with brands vying for attention with 
their friend’s messages, and this annoyed them. Their distrust of advertising on 
SNS had increased with maturity. And although they did not trust the advertising, 
they had faith that Facebook would protect their information.
The longitudinal study confirmed what many parents have long suspected: 
young people have mastered the art of avoidance. From ignoring things that do 
not attract them to an enviable proficiency with privacy settings, young people 
are well informed and well prepared to avoid advertising. Perhaps this is why they 
like advertising on Facebook, which is “just there,” yet complain about more inno-
vative engagement strategies such as “liking,” which has become the new clutter. 
Increasingly, they rely on mechanical avoidance, which is easier and more automatic 
than cognitive avoidance, which at least requires some thought. Participants were 
confident in their own experience and their own ability to control their personal 
data. They are wary of unethical marketers and concerned about the “creepy line” 
that platforms such as Facebook continue to push. However, the delivery of more 
relevant advertising that consumers want to read could outweigh these concerns. 
Likewise, the need to socialize online might be greater than any privacy concern.
New Trends in Advertising Avoidance
What’s next for this social network generation? Or even for the rest of the popu-
lation who are now largely digitally enabled.
Mechanical Ad Blocking Threatens Free Content
The use of ad blocking software has rattled the advertising industry and threatens 
free content online. The Wall Street Journal reported that Randall Rothenberg, 

252  Kelly, Kerr, and Drennan
president of the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB) had blasted ad-blocking 
companies, calling them “profiteers” and charged them as standing in the way of 
free speech (Shields, 2016). Rather than blame the software that enables advertis-
ing avoidance, we need to better understand why it is happening in the first place.
This chapter has presented the antecedents as triggers of advertising avoidance. 
In addition, it has provided two overarching reasons why people avoid advertising: 
first for privacy reasons, and second, because they are empowered by technology 
to do so. They have the power to block advertising using all kinds of devices and 
software. They also have the power to find information when they require it, 
replacing the need for advertising, or perhaps changing the need for advertising 
from information to entertainment.
However, no research to date has looked at mechanical avoidance from a con-
sumer perspective. Do consumers realize that, once blocked by mechanical means, 
all advertising, even that which is relevant or entertainment, is banished forever? 
And have consumers forgotten that advertising is the price you pay for free con-
tent? Future research is urgently needed to investigate the thinking behind the 
ad blocking.
Reckless Use of Content
Even if consumers block advertising, they still have a lot of clutter to contend 
with. Apart from advertising clutter, there’s vendor clutter and consumer clutter. 
Jeff Charney, CMO, Progressive in Ad Age (January 11, 2016) suggests that this 
reckless use of content is one of marketing’s biggest challenges. He says:
Everyone’s so concerned about ad blocking and time shifting, but we see a 
very different threat. Everybody is flooding the web with their own con-
tent, hour-by-hour, minute-by-minute. That’s great, the web is democra-
tized and the best stuff will usually rise up, but the clutter also makes it noisy. 
We’re not just competing with our top competitors, or even other brands 
outside of our category, we’re competing with people’s friends, mothers 
and self-made celebrities on YouTube, Facebook, Twitter, etc. And it’s just 
getting started.
(n.p.)
So if we could control some of this other clutter, would consumers be less con-
cerned with blocking ads? Certainly, research from the early days of social net-
work sites suggested that clutter was not a problem (Kelly et al., 2010). However, 
research conducted shortly after noted that advertising on SNSs has the addi-
tional challenge of competing with user-generated content (Hadija et al., 2012). 
Undoubtedly, the popularity of the platforms and the reckless creation of content 
escalates the clutter.

Advertising Avoidance  253
Ad Blocking and Self-Regulation
Interestingly, it is not only consumers who are blocking ads online. In 2015, the 
number of ads blocked by Google increased by nearly 50 percent to 780 million 
advertisements. Typically, these ads contained malware, misleading messages, or 
somehow impacted the user experience. Amongst the culprits are 12.5 million 
pharmaceutical ads, 10,000 sites selling counterfeit goods, and 30,000 sites pro-
moting weight loss scams (Hickman, 2016). Therefore, when used for the good 
of society, ad blocking can also be a form of advertising self-regulation, helping 
eliminate misleading, deceptive, or potentially dangerous advertising.
Conclusion
This chapter provided an explanation of the triggers for advertising avoidance and 
presented the challenges that advertisers face in order to cope with a new breed 
of empowered consumers who wield their power to control how, when, or even 
whether they receive online advertising.
Advertising avoidance has become so easy and, in many cases, automatic. We don’t 
even have to make a cup of coffee or ignore the branded message in order to avoid 
advertising. However, the ease of using ad-blocking software is leaving the advertising 
industry, and publishers, between an ad block and a hard place. If left unchecked, it is 
likely to threaten the very premise of advertising to fund free media content.
References
Baek, T. H., & Morimoto, M. (2012). Stay away from me: Examining the determinants 
of consumer avoidance of personalized advertising. Journal of Advertising, 41(1), 59–76.
Barreto, A. M. (2013). Do users look at banner ads on Facebook? Journal of Research in 
Interactive Marketing, 7, 119–139.
Chen, M., & Bargh, J. A. (1999). Consequences of automatic evaluation: Immediate behav-
ioral predispositions to approach or avoid the stimulus. Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 25(2), 215–224.
Cho, C.-H., & Cheon, H. J. (2004). Why do people avoid advertising on the internet? 
Journal of Advertising, 33(4), 89–97.
Dinev, T., & Hart, P. (2004). Internet privacy concerns and their antecedents—Measurement  
validity and a regression model. Behaviour and Information Technology, 23(6), 413–422.
Dreze, X., & Hussherr, X. F. (2003). Internet advertising: Is anybody watching? Journal of 
Interactive Marketing, 17, 8–23.
Ducoffe, R. H., & Curlo, E. (2000). Advertising value and advertising processing. Journal of 
Marketing Communications, 6(4), 247–262.
Duff, B. R. L., & Faber, R. J. (2011). Missing the mark: Advertising avoidance and distractor 
devaluation. Journal of Advertising, 40(2), 51–62.
Edwards, S. M., Li, H., & Lee, J.-H. (2002). Forced exposure and psychological reactance: 
Antecedents and consequences of the perceived intrusiveness of pop-up ads. Journal of 
Advertising, 31(3), 83–95.

254  Kelly, Kerr, and Drennan
Elliot, A. J.,  & Thrash, T. M. (2002). Approach-avoidance motivation in personality: 
Approach and avoidance temperaments and goals. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 82(5), 804–818.
Elliot, A. J., & Thrash, T. M. (2010). Approach and avoidance temperament as basic dimen-
sions of personality. Journal of Personality, 78(3), 865–906.
Folkman, S. (1984). Personal control and stress and coping processes: A theoretical analysis. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 46(4), 839–852.
Greenwald, A. G., & Leavitt, C. (1984). Audience involvement in advertising: Four levels. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 11(June), 581–592.
Hadija, Z., Barnes, S. B., & Hair, N. (2012). Why we ignore social networking advertising. 
Qualitative Market Research, 15(1), 19–32.
Hervet, G., Guerard, K., Tremblay, S.,  & Saber Chtourou, M. (2011). Is banner blind-
ness genuine? Eye tracking internet text advertising. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 25, 
708–716.
Hickman, A., (2016). Google blocked ads up by 50% in 2015. AdNews. Retrieved from 
http://www.adnews.com.au/news/google-blocked-ads-up-by-50-in-2015.
Jin, C. H., & Villegas, J. (2007). Consumer responses to advertising on the internet: The 
effect of individual difference on ambivalance and avoidance. CyberPsycology and Behav-
iour, 10(2), 258–266.
Johnson, J. P. (2013). Targeted advertising and advertising avoidance. The RAND Journal of 
Economics, 44(1), 128–144.
Johnson, T., & Kaye, B. K. (1998). Cruising is believing? Comparing internet and traditional 
sources on media credibility measures. Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly, 
75(2), 325–340.
Kelly, L., Kerr, G., & Drennan, J. (2010). Avoidance of advertising in social networking sites: 
The teenage perspective. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 10(2), 16–27.
Kelly, L., Kerr, G., & Drennan, J. (2013). Advertising avoidance on social networking sites: A lon-
gitudinal study. Presented at the American Academy of Advertising Annual Conference, 
New Mexico.
Kelly, L. M. V. (2014). An exploration of advertising engagement, advertising avoidance and privacy 
concerns on social networking sites. Doctoral Dissertation. Retrieved from http://eprints.
qut.edu.au/79114/
Kiousis, S. (2001). Public trust or mistrust? Perceptions of media credibility in the informa-
tion age. Mass Communication & Society, 4(4), 381–403.
Lorenzo-Romero, C., Constantinides, E.,  & Alarcon-del-Amo, M.-D.-C. (2011). Con-
sumer adoption of social networking sites: Implications for theory and practice. Journal 
of Research into Interactive Marketing, 5(2/3), 170–188.
Moore, J. J., & Rodgers, S. L. (2005). An examination of advertising credibility and skepti-
cism in five different media using the persuasion knowledge model. In American Acad-
emy of Advertising Conference Proceedings (p. 10).
Naughton, J. (2015). The rise of ad-blocking could herald the end of the free inter-
net. Retrieved from http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/27/
ad-blocking-herald-end-of-free-internet-ios9-apple.
Nelson-Field, K., Riebe, E., & Sharp, B. (2012). What’s not to “like?” Can a Facebook fan 
base give a brand the advertising reach it needs? Journal of Advertising Research, 52(2), 
2–14.
Obermiller, C., Spangenberg, E., & MacLachlan, D. (2005). Ad skepticism. Journal of Adver-
tising, 34(3), 7–17.

Advertising Avoidance  255
Schultz, D. E. (2006). IMC is do or die in new pull marketplace. Marketing News, 40(13), 7.
Schultz, D. E. (2008). Actions, not promises. Marketing Management, 17(2), 10–11.
Sheehan, K. B., & Hoy, M. G. (1999). Using e-mail to survey internet users in the United 
States: Methodology and assessment. Journal of Computer Mediated Communication, 4(3). 
Retrieved from http://www.ascusc.org/jcmc/vol4/issue3/sheehan.html.
Shields, M. (2016). IAB CEO continues to hammer ad blockers. The Wall Street Journal. 
Retrieved from http://www.wsj.com/articles/iab-ceo-continues-to-hammer-ad-bloc 
kers-1453849338.
Speck, P. S., & Elliott, M. T. (1997). Predictors of advertising avoidance in print and broad-
cast media. Journal of Advertising, 26(3), 61–76.
Taylor, D. G., Lewin, J. E., & Strutton, D. (2011). Friends, fans, and followers: Do ads work 
on social networks? Journal of Advertising Research, 51(1), 258–275.
Vakratsas, D., & Ambler, T. (1999). How advertising works: What do we really know? Journal 
of Marketing, 63(1), 26–43.
WARC. (2015). Ad blocking a “viral phenomenon.” Retrieved from https://www.warc.
com/LatestNews/News/Ad_blocking_a_viral_phenomenon.news?ID=35212.
Zajonc, R. B. (1984). On the primacy of affect. American Psychologist, 39(2), 117–123.


PART IV
Digital Media—Radiating 
Voices


Introduction
Social media platforms such as weblogs, social networking sites, video sharing 
sites, and online communities facilitate a wide variety of ways for consumers to 
create brand-related content. Such content is central to the social media phe-
nomenon (Smith, Fischer, & Yongjian, 2012). It gives consumers influence and 
credibility (Liu-Thompkins & Rogerson, 2012), and has strong potential to shape 
brand perceptions (Christodoulides, Jevons,  & Blackshaw, 2011) and purchase 
behavior (Dhar & Chang, 2009). Marketers, therefore, seek to strategically inspire 
and cultivate the voluntary creation of brand-related content (Muñiz & Schau, 
2011). To do so effectively, advertisers and marketers must be equipped with an 
understanding of who creates, and why they create brand-related content.
Identifying consumers who create brand-related content and exert influence 
over other consumers’ attitudes and behaviors is critical to a successful social 
media strategy. It permits marketers to more precisely target and design their 
efforts to encourage brand-related content creation and leverage social media to 
the best advantage (Chatterjee, 2011; Godes, 2011; Hinz, Skiera, Barrot, & Becker, 
2011). Because different types of consumers have different functions in the diffu-
sion of information and behavior through online social networks (Watts & Dodds, 
2007; Boster, Kotowski, Andrews, & Serota, 2011), different consumer character-
istics may relate differently to their creation of brand-related content. However, 
researchers have not yet begun to examine the characteristics of consumers that 
create brand-related content, and the field remains largely unaware of who are the 
influential consumers.
In addition to knowing who creates, academics and practitioners need to 
understand why these potentially influential individuals create brand-related con-
tent. Muntinga (2013) shows that consumers’ intrinsic motivations are important 
15
WHO CREATES BRAND-RELATED 
CONTENT, AND WHY? THE 
INTERPLAY OF CONSUMER 
CHARACTERISTICS AND 
MOTIVATIONS
Daniël G. Muntinga, Marjolein Moorman,  
Peeter W. J. Verlegh, and Edith G. Smit

260  Muntinga, Moorman, Verlegh, and Smit
predictors of their creation of brand-related content. Little is known, however, 
about how intrinsic motivations are distributed across consumers. While it has 
repeatedly been suggested that different types of consumers have different moti-
vations to engage with brands on social media (Porter, Donthu, MacElroy,  & 
Wydra, 2011; Taylor, Lewis, & Strutton, 2011), this notion so far remains without 
academic evidence. Despite Godes et al.’s (2005) call for research on the “funda-
mental motives behind the individual’s proclivity for communication as a function 
of the individuals’ characteristics” (p. 418, emphasis added), little to no work in the 
realm of social media marketing has investigated the relationship between con-
sumers’ characteristics and their motivations to create brand-related content.
The objective of this study is, therefore, to examine the relationship between 
consumers’ characteristics and motivations to create brand-related content while 
investigating the interplay of both factors in predicting brand-related content cre-
ation. The remainder of this chapter proceeds as follows. It begins by explaining 
this study’s theoretical lens, the Uses and Gratifications (U&G) approach, followed 
by the introduction of three types of personality characteristics that are relevant 
for understanding the dynamics of social media. Next, prior research on consum-
ers’ motivations for creating brand-related content is discussed, and a research 
question is posed about the interplay of characteristics, motivations, and brand-
related content creation. The chapter then describes the study’s design, presents 
findings, and discusses how the findings can help strategic decision-making about 
how to encourage the creation of brand-related content. The chapter concludes 
with a brief discussion of the study’s limitations and describes opportunities for 
further research.
Background
Uses and Gratifications Approach and  
Brand-Related Content
Brand-related content, when created by consumers (also “consumer-” or “user-
generated content”), is defined as content that “is made available through publicly 
accessible transmission media such as the internet, reflects some degree of crea-
tive effort, and is created for free outside of professional routines and practices” 
(Christodoulides, Jevons, & Bonhomme, 2012, p. 55). The centrality of the con-
sumer in this definition suggests the value of employing a user-centric research 
perspective for examining the drivers of brand-related content creation. The Uses 
and Gratifications (U&G) approach is the predominant user-centric theoretical 
framework for studying how and why individuals use media (McQuail, 2010). 
Commonly applied to traditional media, it is also an appropriate perspective for 
studying social media, as these compel the active participation of its users (Rug-
giero, 2000; Nambisan & Baron, 2009; Taylor, Lewis, & Strutton, 2011; Eisenbeiss, 
Blechschmidt, Backhaus, & Freund, 2012).

Who Creates Brand-Related Content and Why  261
U&G states that media use is the consequence of various factors working in 
concert (Katz, Blumler & Gurevitch, 1974; Rosengren, 1974). For U&G scholars, 
motivation is a central factor, as they assume that people purposely select and 
use media according to goals they actively aim to achieve. Research shows that 
people’s motivations influence their selection, use, and sharing of different media 
and different content (e.g., Levy & Windahl, 1984; Rubin, 2002). But U&G also 
assumes that people’s motivations for using media are shaped by their particular 
characteristics. In line with this, the present study proposes that 1) consumers’ 
characteristics 2) influence their motivations, which 3) influence their creation of 
brand-related content.
Consumer Characteristics
Despite the relevance of an individual’s characteristics for understanding social 
media dynamics (Li & Chignell, 2010), academics have not yet begun to exam-
ine how consumers’ characteristics relate to their brand-related social media use. 
Scholars from other academic disciplines, however, have. Several studies employ 
the Five-Factor Model of human personality (“Big Five”) to examine how 
user characteristics relate to the generic use of social network sites (SNSs). The 
majority of these studies show that the Big Five’s elementary traits (extraver-
sion, neuroticism, conscientiousness, agreeableness, and openness to experiences) 
exhibit limited ability to predict concrete behaviors on SNSs (e.g., Ross et al., 
2009; Correa, Willard Hinsley, & De Zúñiga, 2010; Ong et al., 2011; Zhong, 
Hardin, & Sun, 2011; Hughes, Row, Batey, & Lee, 2012; Pettijohn II, LaPiene, 
Pettijohn, & Horting, 2012). It has been suggested that other, more social media-
specific traits that are not defined by the Big Five may provide a better under-
standing of how characteristics affect social media use (e.g., Paunonen & Ashton, 
2001; Baumgartner, 2002; Ross et al., 2009; Moore  & McElroy, 2012; Skues, 
Williams, & Wise, 2012).
This study, therefore, uses three attributes that have been demonstrated to be 
relevant in social media contexts (Westerman, Spence, & Van der Heide, 2012): 
mavenism, connectivity, and persuasiveness. Taken together, these characteristics make 
up the personality components of being an opinion leader (Katz & Lazarsfeld, 
1955; Chan & Misra, 1990; Gladwell, 2000; Boster et al., 2011). Many authors 
have contended that opinion leadership is an appropriate construct for dealing 
with social media marketing (e.g., Nisbet & Kotcher, 2009; Aral & Walker, 2011; 
Chu & Kim, 2011; Aral &Walker, 2012; Godes, 2011). Online opinion leaders, or 
“e-fluentials,” (Sun, Youn, Wu, & Kuntaraporn, 2006) exercise great and frequent 
influence over other consumers’ attitudes and behaviors (e.g., Hinz et al., 2011; 
Iyengar, Van den Bulte, & Valente, 2011). They have been shown to seek and for-
ward more online information (Sun et al., 2006), make more use of the internet 
(Nisbet, 2006), and engage in more online word-of-mouth (Godes & Mayzlin, 
2009) than less influential consumers.

262  Muntinga, Moorman, Verlegh, and Smit
But true opinion leaders are rare (Smith, Coyle, Lightfoot, & Scott, 2007). 
Few consumers exhibit high levels of all three characteristics of opinion leader-
ship: most consumers who are high on mavenism, connectivity, or persuasive-
ness are low on the other two characteristics (Boster et al., 2011; Westerman 
et al., 2012). As a consequence, companies that wish to stimulate the creation 
of brand-related content may want to look beyond those consumers that are 
extremely influential, yet also extremely few in number (Katz  & Lazarsfeld, 
1955; Gladwell, 2000; Smith et al., 2007; Watts & Dodds, 2007; Fournier & Lee, 
2009). As Boster et al. (2011) states, “influential members of social networks 
need not be viewed unidimensionally; indeed, it may be unprofitable to do so 
because different types of people fill different network functions” (p. 193). Thus, 
consumers high on mavenism, connectivity, and persuasiveness are influential 
in their own right, and accordingly, these three characteristics are interesting 
constructs for investigating how consumer characteristics relate to the creation 
of brand-related content.
Mavenism
The body of literature investigating mavens is extensive. Introduced by Feick 
and Price (1987), the maven predominantly features in marketing and consumer 
behavior research (Goldsmith, Clark,  & Goldsmith, 2006). Mavens are under-
stood as “information brokers” (Gladwell, 2000, p. 69): consumers who are 
well informed about products and brands, and who pass on their knowledge to 
other consumers. They are experts and are often consulted for advice in the real 
world (e.g., Goodey & East, 2008), as well as on social media (e.g., Lester, Tudor, 
Loyd, & Mitchell, 2012). Several studies link mavenism to increased internet usage 
(Barnes & Pressey, 2012), online search behavior (Belch, Krentler, & Willis-Flurry, 
2005), and creating generic content (Laughlin & MacDonald, 2010).
Connectivity
Social media are “hyper-social” (Moran & Gossieaux, 2010), enabling users to 
connect with others online more than they can ever do offline. Some consumers 
are more connected than other consumers. For instance, they have a lot of Face-
book friends, many followers on Twitter, or “500+” LinkedIn connections. Such 
well-connected consumers have a central position in their network and often link 
individual consumers and separate consumer collectives (Granovetter, 1973). As 
such, they allow for brand-related content to flow from one collective to another 
(Chatterjee, 2011). Well-connected consumers have been demonstrated to use 
SNSs more frequently (Lin & Lu, 2011), participate more in virtual marketing 
campaigns (Hinz et al., 2011), and contribute more to online platforms (Smith et 
al., 2007) than less well-connected consumers.

Who Creates Brand-Related Content and Why  263
Persuasiveness
Some consumers are more effective at convincing others and frequently try 
to influence other consumers. They are skilled communicators and presenters, 
enjoy discussing issues, and usually have things their way (Boster et al., 2011). 
While research on the relationship between persuasiveness and content creation 
is largely absent in the literature, studies into what makes individuals, in the eyes 
of others, more or less persuasive (see Petty & Wegener, 1998) provide anecdotal 
evidence of a relationship. The Big Five trait openness to experiences is found 
to relate positively to the extent to which a person is perceived as persuasive: 
individuals low on openness to experiences are less persuasive (Rhodes & Wood, 
1992), while individuals high on this personality trait are more persuasive (Ger-
ber, Huber, Doherty, Dowling, & Panagopoulos, 2012). Additionally, research has 
demonstrated that openness to experiences relates positively to SNS use (Correa 
et al., 2010; Zhong et al., 2011) and online co-creation behaviors (Füller, Mat-
zler, & Hoppe, 2009; Füller, 2010).
Motivations for Creating Brand-Related Content
Apart from knowing who are the consumers who create brand-related content, 
research on why these people create is also warranted (e.g., Moore & McElroy, 
2012). “Why” in this regard refers to consumers’ motivations. Research on motiva-
tions is rich and covers a wide range of academic disciplines. Although the body of 
literature on what motivates consumers to create specific brand-related content on 
social media is relatively small compared to other disciplines, it has been growing 
steadily over the past decade. Research has demonstrated that especially intrin-
sic motivations are an important factor underlying brand-related online word-
of-mouth giving behavior (Hennig-Thurau, Gwinner, Walsh, & Gremler, 2004; 
Brown, Broderick, & Lee, 2007) and the creation of brand parodies (Berthon et 
al., 2008; Campbell, Pitt, & Berthon, 2011). Moreover, research demonstrates that 
consumers’ passive-to-active brand-related activities on social media are, to a large 
extent, explained by the motivation types information, entertainment, personal 
identity, integration and social interaction, and empowerment and remuneration 
(Muntinga, 2013) (See Table 15.1 for a brief description of these motivations).
Muntinga (2013) shows that the activity of creating brand-related content is 
predominantly explained by intrinsic motivations rather than extrinsic motiva-
tions. Intrinsic motivations are driven by a strong interest and involvement in an 
activity itself. In the context of the current study, this indicates that consumers’ 
creation of brand-related content is, to a large extent, dependent on the ability of 
that behavior to satisfy certain needs. Extrinsic motivations, on the other hand, 
stand apart from the performed activity. Behavior that is extrinsically motivated is 
usually driven by the prospect of gaining some kind of extrinsic reward, deadlines, 

264  Muntinga, Moorman, Verlegh, and Smit
TABLE 15.1  Summary of Linear Regression for Consumer Characteristics Predicting 
Motivations, Controlling for Sex, Age, and Education (standardized regression 
coefficients (b*) reported).
Characteristics
Motivations
Information
Entertainment
Integration and 
social interaction
Personal 
identity
Empowerment
Mavenism
.48**
.39**
.53**
.42**
.43**
Connectivity
.37**
.29**
.46**
.50**
.47**
Persuasiveness
.28**
.32**
.34**
.27**
.29**
Note. **p < .01.
time constraints, media availability, or competition (Ryan & Deci, 2000). While 
intrinsic and extrinsic motivations can both drive a consumer to create brand-
related content and combinations of both are common (Kietzmann, Silvestre, & 
McCarthy, 2012), “one is likely to be primary for a given person doing a given 
task” (Amabile, 1997, p. 44). Muntinga (2013) demonstrates that creating brand-
related content is primarily motivated by intrinsic motivations. Extrinsic motiva-
tion (Muntinga, Moorman, and Smit’s (2011) “remuneration” motivation) was 
shown to have little predictive ability. Remuneration, then, is both theoretically 
and empirically unlikely to have much predictive ability in this particular study, so 
it is not taken into further account in this study.
Relating Characteristics and Motivations to Brand-Related 
Content Creation
Although it has been argued that online, different consumers may be driven by dif-
ferent motivations (Porter et al., 2011), previous social media marketing research 
has largely neglected how personality relates to motivations and how both factors 
interact to affect consumers’ creation of brand-related content (Godes et al., 2005; 
Moore & McElroy, 2012).
Several theoretical perspectives concerned with drivers of human behavior, such 
as social cognitive theory (e.g., Dweck & Leggett, 1988) and self-determination  
theory (e.g., Deci & Ryan, 2000), suggest that particular personality features affect 
people’s motivations, which in turn influence their behavior (Ryckman, 2004; 
Fang & Mowen, 2009). This study’s theoretical foundation, U&G, assumes a simi-
lar path of influence, namely that media use is influenced by motivations, which in 
turn depend on personality (Haridakis & Hanson, 2009). This chapter, therefore, 
adopts the view that the influence of consumers’ personality characteristics on 
their creation of brand-related content is mediated by their motivations. After all, 
as Baumgartner (2002) states, motivations are “more ideographic in nature, more 
closely tied to behavior” (p. 287) than personality.

Who Creates Brand-Related Content and Why  265
M/C/P
Brand-related content creation
Information
Entertainment
Personal identity
Integration and 
social interaction 
Empowerment
Control variables
- Age
- Sex
- Level of education
- Product type
FIGURE 15.1  Conceptual Framework
Note. C = connectivity; M = mavenism; P = persuasiveness.
All human behavior is “multimotivated” (Maslow, 1970, p. 29) and so is brand-
related social media use. While the relationship between motivations and brand-
related content creation is increasingly well understood (see Muntinga et al., 
2011), little theoretical guidance exists to predict which personality characteristics 
affect which motivations and how both factors interact to predict the creation of 
brand-related content. Because of the exploratory nature of this study, specific 
hypotheses were not formulated with respect to the exact nature of the proposed 
mediated relationship. Instead, the following research question was posed (see 
Figure 15.1 for a graphical representation):
RQ:  How do consumers’ motivations mediate the influence of consumer per-
sonality characteristics on consumers’ creation of brand-related content on 
social media?
Research method
Social Networking Sites
A survey was developed and disseminated among the members of several brand 
profiles on a large social networking site (SNS). SNSs are the most prominent 
and important social media platforms and marketers’ preferred online promo-
tional tool (Moran & Gossieaux, 2010). Many of the profiles or pages on this 
platform revolve around brands. Initiated by the brand itself (the “official” brand 
page) or by its consumers (groups), these pages form a platform for consumers 

266  Muntinga, Moorman, Verlegh, and Smit
to engage in a wide variety of activities, including the creation of brand-related 
content. This feature makes SNSs interesting platforms for fielding this study’s 
questionnaire.
Sample and Procedure
Respondents were recruited by soliciting the members of several of the SNS’s 
brand pages. From a list of popular brand pages, only those pages were selected 
that centered on actual product brands. From the remaining brand pages, 100 
brands were randomly selected; duplicates were avoided. The first author enrolled 
as a member of these brands’ pages and observed whether they showed recent 
participation activity; those that did not were not selected.
Forty brand pages remained, and the questionnaire was tailored to each of these 
brands. Banner advertisements were created that contained links to the question-
naires, which were specifically targeted to the selected brand pages’ members, 
aged 13 and older. In addition, the brand pages’ administrators were requested 
to distribute the link to the questionnaire to their members; five administrators 
complied with this request. As an incentive to take part in this study, respondents 
were offered the prospect of winning a tablet computer of a popular brand. After 
removing the brands that yielded fewer than ten respondents, 28 product brands 
remained. For these brands, 2,495 respondents completed the survey (respondents 
between 13 and 78 years old, Mage = 24.88, SD = 12.93, 52% female).
Measures
For this study, the following variables were taken into account: the independent 
variable—namely, the three personality characteristics (mavenism, connectivity, 
and persuasiveness); five proposed mediators—namely, motivations (information, 
entertainment, personal identity, integration and social interaction, and empower-
ment); and, the dependent variable—brand-related content creation. All measures 
were provided on 7-point scales presented in a slider format, as slider scales may 
enhance measurement accuracy (Saris & Gallhofer, 2007).
Personality Characteristics
The measures of the personality characteristics mavenism, connectivity, and 
persuasiveness were taken from Boster et al. (2011), who developed a 15-item 
instrument to identify these three types of influential individuals based on self-
reports. Because Boster et al.’s instrument was originally developed as a self-
reported measure for identifying opinion leadership in health contexts, several 
minor modifications were made to the statements for current purposes. This is in 
accordance with Boster et al. (2011) who, in their future research directions sec-
tion, encouraged utilization of their scales in contexts other than health. Principal 

Who Creates Brand-Related Content and Why  267
component analysis with varimax rotation confirmed the three dimensions (each 
of five items), which were all sufficiently reliable. The items were then computed 
for each personality characteristic using their mean scores.
For mavenism, an example of an item is: “When I know something about a 
brand or a product, I feel it is important to share that information with others” 
(anchored by “strongly disagree” (= 1) and “strongly agree” (=7); Mmavenism = 4.38, 
SD = 1.40, Cronbach’s alpha = .82, R2 = 58.78, EV = 2.93, normal distribution). 
For connectivity, an example of an item is: “I’m often the link between friends in 
different groups” (anchored by “strongly disagree” (= 1) and “strongly agree” (= 7);  
Mconnectivity = 3.82, SD = 1.57, Cronbach’s alpha = .89, R2 = 69.71, EV = 3.419, 
normal distribution). For persuasiveness, an example of an item is: “I am able to 
adapt my method of argument to persuade someone” (anchored by “strongly 
disagree” (= 1) and “strongly agree” (= 7); Mpersuasiveness = 4.71, SD = 1.40, Cron-
bach’s alpha = .87, R2 = 66.57, EV = 3.33, normal distribution).
Consumer Motivations
Using the motivation instrument adopted from Muntinga et  al. (2011) and 
Muntinga (2013), the following motivations were taken into account: informa-
tion (three items), entertainment (three items), integration and social inter-
action (four items), personal identity (three items), and empowerment (three 
items). All motivation scales were sufficiently reliable (Cronbach’s alpha > 
.65), except for the entertainment scale (Cronbach’s alpha  =  .23). The item 
“[because] I am bored” was found to decrease reliability of the scale and was 
subsequently removed (Cronbach’s alpha = .65) (see Appendix 5.1 for the items 
for the motivation instrument).
Creating Brand-Related Content
The dependent variable, creating brand-related content, was measured with a 
single-item, adopted from Muntinga (2013): “I create weblogs, reviews, videos, 
music, pictures, and/or articles about [brand]” (anchored by “never” (= 1) and 
“very frequently” (= 7); Mcreating = 3.02, SD = 2.04, normal distribution).
Control Variables
In addition, several factors were measured as possible covariates, namely age, sex, 
level of education (primary education (elementary school) = 1, secondary educa-
tion (high school) = 2, vocational education = 3, higher vocational education = 4, 
university education = 5), and product type. With regard to the latter, the 28 
brands selected in the study were categorized as either a “search” or “experience” 
product according to Nelson’s (1974) description of both product types. Search 
products are products that can be evaluated prior to purchase (N = 1,145; 46.4%). 

268  Muntinga, Moorman, Verlegh, and Smit
Experience products are products that cannot be evaluated until purchase and use 
of the product (N = 1,325; 53.6%). A dummy variable was computed to measure 
product type (search products = 0, experience products = 1).
Results
This study aimed to examine the relationship between consumer characteristics 
and intrinsic motivations to create brand-related content, but also adopted the 
view that the influence of characteristics on brand-related content creation is 
mediated by motivations. It also examined the interplay of characteristics and 
motivations. First, a description is given of those who are high on the three 
characteristics, based on their demographics, behavior, and motivations. Second, 
findings are reported that shed light on the motivational patterns underlying 
mavenism, connectivity, and persuasiveness. Third, the assumption is tested that 
creating brand-related content is influenced by specific motivations, which in 
turn are influenced by consumer characteristics.
Who? Mavens, Connectors, and Persuaders
According to Keller and Berry (2003), 10 percent of the population influences 
the thoughts and behaviors of the other 90 percent of the population. The present 
study focuses on three types of characteristics that may make a consumer, through 
his or her creation of brand-related content, potentially influential: mavenism, 
connectivity, and persuasiveness. Who are the consumers that are high on these 
characteristics? “High” in this regard is defined, in line with Keller and Berry 
(2003), as being within the highest 10 percent of the scale.
Mavenism
Findings revealed that 156 respondents were high on mavenism (scored between 
6.18 and the scale maximum of 7). Analysis of variances showed that consumers 
high on mavenism did not significantly differ from consumers who scored relatively 
low on the scale (that is, within the lowest 90 percent of the scale) when it came 
to age and education. However, mavens tended to be male (F(1,1434) = 16.107, 
p < .01) and created significantly more brand-related content than consumers 
low on mavenism (Mcreate = 4.46, SD = 2.33 versus Mcreate = 2.92, SD = 1.98; 
F(1,2493)  =  86.416, p < .01). Mavens also scored higher on the motivations 
than non-mavens: information (F(1,1481) = 105.913, p < .01), entertainment 
(F(1,1481) = 58.715, p < .01), personal identity (F(1,1384) = 115.697, p < .01), 
integration and social interaction (F(1,1384) = 118.170, p < .01), and empower-
ment (F(1,1289) = 100.826, p < .01). This suggests that mavens were more promi-
nently driven by internal motivations than other consumers.

Who Creates Brand-Related Content and Why  269
Connectivity
For connectivity, a similar pattern was observed. A  total of 156 respondents 
scored high on connectivity (5.84–7), and these respondents did not differ sig-
nificantly from their less well-connected counterparts in terms of age and 
education. Analysis of variance showed that those high on connectivity were pre-
dominantly male (F(1,1434) = 4.368, p < .05) and created more brand-related 
content than respondents that scored relatively low on this scale: Mcreate = 4.56, 
SD = 2.33 versus Mcreate = 2.91, SD = 1.98; F(1,2493) = 99.439, p < .01. In addi-
tion, consumers high on connectivity also scored significantly higher on each of 
the five motivations: information (F(1,1481) = 99.879, p < .01), entertainment 
(F(1,1481) = 66.909, p < .01), personal identity (F(1,1384) = 146.097, p < .01), 
integration and social interaction (F(1,1484) = 117.368, p < .01), and empower-
ment (F(1,1289) = 114.892, p < .01). Again, this suggests that connectors were 
more prominently internally motivated than less well-connected consumers.
Persuasiveness
Of the respondents, 153 were within the highest 10 percent of the persuasive-
ness scale (6.46–7). Again, these respondents did not differ significantly from less 
persuasive respondents in terms of age and education. Analysis of variance showed 
that those high on persuasiveness were predominantly male (F(1,1434) = 5.133, 
p < .05) and created significantly more brand-related content than respond-
ents that score relatively low on this scale: Mcreate  =  3.94, SD  =  2.04 versus 
Mcreate = 2.96, SD = 1.99; F(1,2493) = 33.469, p < .01. Respondents high on 
persuasiveness also scored significantly higher on the motivations information 
(F(1,1481)  =  63.560, p < .01), entertainment (F(1,1481)  =  58.813, p < .01), 
personal identity F(1,1384) = 72.639, p < .01, integration and social interaction 
(F(1, 1384) = 68.526, p < .01), and empowerment F(1,1289) = 64.992, p < .01).
Overall
While respondents who were high on one characteristic tended to also score high 
on the other two characteristics, results demonstrate that few consumers were 
shown to exhibit high levels of all three characteristics. Sixty-three respondents 
scored within the highest 10 percent of the mavenism, connectivity, and persua-
siveness scales. Effectively, then, these respondents were so-called opinion leaders. 
Such individuals were predominantly male (F(1,1434) = 8.340, p < .01), created 
more brand-related content than all other respondents (Mcreate = 5.53, SD = 2.33 
versus Mcreate = 2.95, SD = 2.00; F(1,2493) = 101.837, p < .01), and—similar 
to mavenism, connectivity, and persuasiveness—scored significantly higher on 
intrinsic motivations than respondents that did not exhibit high levels of all three 
characteristics.

270  Muntinga, Moorman, Verlegh, and Smit
Different Consumers, Different Motivations?
While it has repeatedly been suggested that different consumers are motivated 
differently to engage with brands and brand-related content on social media, aca-
demic research on this topic is largely absent. Linear regression analyses were 
conducted to investigate the intrinsic motivations underlying the three consumer 
types in their creation of brand-related content (results are shown in Table 15.2).
Mavenism
Because the demographic variables of sex and age correlated significantly with 
mavenism and several of the five motivations (see Appendix 5.2), these variables 
were included in the analyses as covariates. The demographic variable education 
and the variable product type did not correlate with the motivations and therefore 
were not included. Controlling for the influence of age and sex, then, mavenism 
significantly predicted all motivations. This indicates that all motivations may play 
a role in mavens’ creation of brand-related content. The integration and social 
interaction (b* = .53), information (b* = .48), and empowerment (b* = .43) 
motivations, however, were the most prominent drivers of mavens’ creation of 
brand-related content
Connectivity
Using identical analyses, the five motivations were regressed on connectivity. In 
this analysis, only sex was included as a covariate since age, education, and product 
type correlated significantly with neither connectivity nor motivations. Results 
showed that connectivity significantly and positively predicted all motivations, but 
most prominently the personal identity (b* = .50), empowerment (b* = .47), and 
integration and social interaction (b* = .46) motivations.
Persuasiveness
Controlling only for the influence of sex and education, persuasiveness sig-
nificantly predicted all the motivations. Persuasiveness was most prominently 
associated with the motivations integration and social interaction (b*  =  .34), 
entertainment (b* = .32), and empowerment (b* = .29).
Motivations for Creating Brand-Related Content
Linear regression results showed that creating brand-related content was signifi-
cantly driven by all of the five motivations taken into account: information (b* = 
.10, SE = .03, t = 2.92, p < .01), entertainment (b* = .12, SE = .03, t = 3.75, p < 
.01), integration and social interaction (b* = .13, SE = .04, t = 3.37, p < .01), per-
sonal identity (b* = .11, SE = .03, t = 3.12, p < .01), and empowerment (b* = .10, 
SE = .03, t = 3.13, p < .01).

TABLE 15.2  Direct and Indirect Effects of Characteristics on Brand-Related Content Creation through Motivations, Controlled for Sex
Directeffect
Indirect effect
Information
Entertainment
Integration and social interaction
95% CI
95% CI
95% CI
Characteristics
De
SE
Ie
SE
LL
UP
Ie
SE
LL
UL
Ie
SE
LL
UL
Mavenism
.02
.03
.05
.02
.01
.08
.04
.01
.02
.07
.07
.02
.03
.12
Connectivity
.10**
.03
.03
.01
.01
.07
.04
.01
.02
.06
.05
.02
.01
.09
Persuasiveness
.03
.03
.03
.01
.00
.05
.04
.01
.01
.06
.04
.01
.02
.07
Indirect effect
Personal identity
Empowerment
95% CI
95% CI
Characteristics
Ie
SE
LL
UL
Ie
SE
LL
UL
Mavenism
.05
.02
.01
.08
.05
.02
.02
.08
Connectivity
.04
.02
.00
.09
.04
.02
.00
.08
Persuasiveness
.03
.01
.01
.05
.03
.01
.01
.05
Note: Standardized regression coefficients (b*) reported; De = direct effect; Ie = indirect effect; LL = lower limit; SE = standard error; UL = upper limit; when 95% CI (confidence 
interval) contains zero the indirect effect is significant; **p < .01.

272  Muntinga, Moorman, Verlegh, and Smit
Mediation Analyses
To verify the assumption that creating brand-related content was influenced by 
motivations, which in turn were influenced by characteristics, a bootstrapping 
approach was employed. This approach for assessing specific mediating relation-
ships allows for the examination of multiple mediators (Zhao, Lynch, & Chen, 
2010; Hayes, 2012). The indirect effects of mavenism, connectivity, and persua-
siveness on brand-related content creation were examined through the proposed 
mediators: the intrinsic motivations information, entertainment, integration and 
social interaction, personal identity, and empowerment. Three bootstrapping anal-
yses were conducted, one for each consumer characteristic. Each of these con-
trolled for the influence of sex, which was shown to correlate significantly with 
the three independent variables, three out of five proposed mediators, and the 
dependent variable (see Appendix).
Results showed significant total effects for mavenism (b* = .25, SE = .02, 95% 
CI [.21, .30]), connectivity (b* = .21, SE = .02, 95% CI [.16, .25]), and persuasive-
ness (b* = .16, SE = .02, 95% CI [.12, .20]). This indicates that mavens created 
more brand-related content than connectors and persuaders, and that connectors 
created more brand-related content than persuaders. As depicted in Table 15.2, 
there was also a significant direct effect for connectivity on creating (b* = .10, 
SE = .03), but not for mavenism and persuasiveness. This means that connectivity 
also had an effect on creating independent of motivations. With regard to media-
tion, for all three models, the confidence intervals did not contain zero, which 
indicates that although small, as is common for mediated effects,1 there was a sig-
nificant indirect effect of all three characteristics on the creation of brand-related 
content through motivations.
Conclusion and Discussion
To inspire and cultivate consumers’ creation of brand-related content on social 
media, academics and practitioners need to have an understanding of who are the 
consumers that create brand-related content, and why they create it (e.g., Godes 
et al., 2005). Little to no work in the realm of social media marketing, however, 
has previously investigated the relationship between consumer characteristics and 
consumer motivations, and how both factors interplay to predict consumers’ crea-
tion of brand-related content on social media. The present study fills this gap in 
literature. It shows that different consumers have different motivations to cre-
ate brand-related content and that the relationship between characteristics and 
brand-related content creation is mediated by motivations. Below, this study’s 
results are discussed in light of the existing literature.
Different Consumers Are Differently Motivated to Create
Previous research has suggested that consumer characteristics that are highly rel-
evant for a social media environment may help to better understand the dynamics 

Who Creates Brand-Related Content and Why  273
of brand-related social media use (cf. Paunonen & Ashton, 2001; Baumgartner, 
2002; Ross et al., 2009; Moore & McElroy, 2012; Skues et al., 2012). This study 
therefore employed three characteristics that have been demonstrated as highly 
relevant in a social media context: mavenism, connectivity, and persuasiveness. 
These three characteristics represent three consumer types that fill different net-
work functions, and as such they are potentially very influential through their 
dissemination and creation of brand-related content (Boster et al., 2011). Because 
intrinsic motivations have been shown to have great ability to predict consumers’ 
creation of brand-related content, it is important to understand the intrinsic moti-
vations behind mavens’, connectors’, and persuaders’ creation of brand-related 
content. This study is the first to investigate and demonstrate that different types 
of consumers have different motivations to create brand-related content on social 
media.
Mavenism
The first consumer characteristic, mavenism, has received great academic atten-
tion since the introduction of the market maven-construct by Feick and Price in 
1987. Research on mavens, that is, “information brokers” (Gladwell, 2000, p. 69), 
has demonstrated that this trait is positively linked to a variety of off- and online 
behaviors such as increased use of the internet (Barnes  & Pressey, 2012) and 
increased creation of generic content on social media (Laughlin & MacDonald, 
2010). While the market maven-construct mainly features in marketing literature 
and while the concept has been shown relevant in social media contexts (Lester 
et al., 2012), to date, little was known about how mavenism related to consumers’ 
creation of specifically brand-related content. By showing that mavenism can also 
be linked to consumers’ increased creation of brand-related content, this study 
therefore both corroborates and extends previous research’s findings. Mavens not 
only collect and share the brand-related information that companies and other 
consumer produce, but they also create a substantial amount of brand-related 
content themselves.
Little was hitherto known what drives the maven. There is some research that 
has investigated the psychological profile of mavens (Goldsmith et al., 2006), but 
what inspires a maven to create brand-related content thus far fully remained in 
the dark. This study demonstrated that mavens are primarily motivated by a need 
for integration and social interaction (belonging to a group, engaging in brand-
related conversations), a need for information (for instance about where to buy 
products and brands or about their brand-related social environment), and a need 
for empowerment (influencing brands and/or other consumers).
Connectivity
Findings indicate that the second of the three social-media specific consumer 
characteristics, connectivity, also significantly relates to consumers’ creation of 

274  Muntinga, Moorman, Verlegh, and Smit
brand-related content. Although the total effect of connectivity is less than that 
of mavenism, there is a significant direct effect of connectivity on creating. Con-
nectivity is associated with consumers who have a great many connections and 
bridge different consumer collectives. Word-of-mouth and social media mar-
keting commonly assumes that such highly connected consumers are likely to 
generate a large amount of influence as they occupy central positions in social 
networks (Libai, Muller, & Peres, 2013). Literature confirms this by demonstrating 
that highly connected consumers are particularly active in online environments 
(Rosen, 2009), make more use of social networking sites (Lin & Lu, 2011), and 
contribute more to online platforms than other consumers (Hinz et al., 2011). 
However, the connectivity characteristic was not earlier tied to brand-related 
content creation on social media. By doing so, this study not only adds to the 
field’s understanding of the dynamics of interpersonal influence via social media, 
but also contributes to the ongoing discussion in literature about the efficacy of 
different network targeting strategies that suggest that targeting consumers in the 
presence of social influence can be very effective (e.g., Aral, Muchnik, & Sunda-
rarajan, 2012).
In addition, this study demonstrates that the connectivity characteristic can 
also be directly linked to brand-related content creation, that is, independent of 
motivations. This result attests to the special role of connectors in the context 
of social media and, in particular, social networking sites (SNSs). Social media 
enable people to easily keep in touch with a great many people from different 
countries and different periods of life. Making connections with other people 
is a basic element for individuals making use of SNSs (Boyd & Ellison, 2007). 
“Being connected,” then, is a highly relevant characteristic for the social media 
phenomenon. In that regard, results from studies into the relationship between 
user personality and SNS use suggests that when a personality trait is highly 
relevant for a concrete behavior, it may well have some explanatory power for 
this behavior (Baumgartner, 2002; Ross et al., 2009; Amichai-Hamburger  & 
Vinitzky, 2010; Moore & McElroy, 2012). This is why, in this study, it was cho-
sen to employ three personality characteristics that were shown to be highly 
relevant for social media (Westerman et al., 2012). The direct effect of con-
nectivity shows that indeed, when personality traits are highly relevant for con-
crete behaviors, they may explain additional variance independent of intrinsic 
motivations.
What motivates consumers who are highly connected? In the absence of such 
knowledge in the existing literature, this study set out to investigate connectors’ 
motivations to create brand-related content. Results indicate that connectors are 
primarily motivated by a need for personal identity (portraying oneself in a pre-
ferred manner, self-expression, or gaining self-assurance), followed by a need for 
empowerment (influencing companies or other consumers), and a need for inte-
gration and social interaction (talking and connecting with like-minded others).

Who Creates Brand-Related Content and Why  275
Persuasiveness
The third consumer characteristic that was taken into account, persuasiveness, 
stands for the ability to convincing other consumers effectively and regularly. 
Persuasiveness has been mentioned as a potentially influential personality trait 
with regard to social networks (Gladwell, 2000; Boster et al., 2011), but literature 
on persuasiveness as a specific trait is virtually absent (conversely, the body of 
research into what makes an individual persuasive in the eyes of other consum-
ers is vast). Unsurprisingly, then, research on this characteristic in the context of 
consumers’ creation of brand-related content so far did not exist, although Füller 
et al. (2009) and Füller (2010) showed that the Big Five trait “openness to expe-
riences,” associated with persuasiveness (Boster et al., 2011), relates to increased 
online co-creation activity. While previous research thus only provided anecdotal 
evidence for the influence of persuasiveness in online marketing contexts, this 
study empirically demonstrates that the more persuasive an individual reports to 
be, the more brand-related content he or she creates. Persuaders, however, create 
less brand-related content than mavens and connectors.
Why do persuaders create brand-related content? This study demonstrates that 
persuaders are primarily driven by a need for integration and social interaction 
(belonging to a group of like-minded people and engaging with them in brand-
related conversations), a need for entertainment (enjoyment, relaxation), and a 
need for empowerment (influencing companies or other consumers).
The Interplay of Characteristics and Motivations
This study thus shows that different types of consumers have different motivations 
to create brand-related content. However, in line with the Uses and Gratification 
(U&G) premise that media use is driven by a variety of factors working in concert 
(e.g., Katz et al., 1974), it was also investigated whether the creation of brand-
related content on social media results from the interplay of consumer charac-
teristics and intrinsic motivations. Particularly, since motivations have previously 
been demonstrated to explain a large portion of variance in creating brand-related 
content (see Muntinga, 2013), it was examined whether motivations mediated the 
relationship between consumer characteristics and brand-related content creation.
Results show that, indeed, consumer characteristics affect consumer moti-
vations, which in turn affect consumers’ creation of brand-related content. By 
demonstrating that the effect of consumer characteristics on brand-related con-
tent creation is to a large extent mediated by intrinsic motivations, this study 
makes three important contributions to the literature. First, in demonstrating that 
a mediation model of personality and motivations is well able to predict concrete 
behaviors, it corroborates U&G’s premise that media use is the result of the inter-
play of a host of factors. Second, it additionally validates U&G because it shows 
that the most important of these factors are dispositional, that is, stemming from a 

276  Muntinga, Moorman, Verlegh, and Smit
strong interest and involvement in the activity and needs within the individual— 
namely motivations. All media use, brand-related social media use no less, is 
actively directed toward fulfilling certain needs. Understanding these needs, then, 
is vital toward gaining an understanding of the dynamics of media use. This chap-
ter thereby corroborates previous findings that beyond extrinsic factors, intrinsic 
motivation is a key element of creating brand-related content to be understood 
(cf. Muntinga, 2013). Third, this second contribution confirms Baumgartner’s 
(2002) earlier mentioned statement that motivations are “more ideographic in 
nature, more closely tied to behavior” (p. 287) than personality.
With regard to this third contribution, this study’s results have important 
implications for the growing body of research into the individual differences 
associated with the use of social media and social networking sites (SNSs) in par-
ticular. Arguing that personality is an important determinant of human behavior, 
an increasing number of authors investigate how the Big Five factors of human 
personality relate to the use of SNSs. The majority of these studies however dem-
onstrate that such general personality traits explain little variance in SNS use 
(e.g., Ross et al., 2009). While the debate about the relevance of personality is 
ongoing (e.g., Amichai-Hamburger & Vinitzky, 2010), there is consensus among 
authors that other factors, such as consumer characteristics that are not captured 
by the Big Five, as well as motivations, may explain concrete behaviors in specific 
situations (Moore & McElroy, 2012). This study confirms this idea. It shows that 
motivation is a very important factor to consider when aiming to predict (brand-
related) social media use, but it also shows that highly specific personality traits 
may explain additional variance in concrete behaviors independent of motiva-
tions when they are also highly relevant for those behaviors. Considering the 
growing academic interest in explaining SNS use, then, this study urges authors 
that wish to predict SNS use to employ more social-media specific personality 
traits. Most importantly however, this study aligns with prior research by making 
a strong case for including motivation in such research.
Practical Implications
The present study has implications for practitioners who wish to inspire and 
cultivate the voluntarily creation of brand-related content on social media. They 
can be guided by this study’s results as follows. First, it is shown that targeting con-
sumers who can be identified as mavens may be particularly beneficial. Consum-
ers who often seek for and disseminate brand-related information create more 
brand-related content than other types of consumers, especially persuaders. As a 
result, strategically stimulating mavens to create may make brand-related content 
go viral and become “contagious” more quickly. Mavens can be identified by 
consulting demographic/usage profiles (Lester et al., 2012), psychological mark-
ers (Iyengar et al., 2011), or employing standard self-report methods such as that 
recently developed by Boster et al. (2011).

Who Creates Brand-Related Content and Why  277
Second, yet more importantly, this study shows that the influence of personal-
ity on brand-related content creation is to a large extent mediated by motiva-
tions. For brand managers, this finding denotes an important practical implication, 
because motivations can be more easily addressed than personality factors (Ross et 
al., 2009) and because (as this study also shows) mavens, connectors, and persuad-
ers do not differ very much in terms of demographics. Marketing and advertising 
practitioners currently remain predominantly reliant on sociodemographics, psy-
chological profiles, and usage profiles when seeking to most effectively propagate 
brand-related content and behaviors. Intrinsic motivations, on the other hand, 
are commonly neglected as targeting factors. Based on this study’s findings, it is 
argued that encouraging consumers’ creation of brand-related content may be 
done best by helping consumers fulfill their intrinsic motivations. Practitioners 
that wish to stimulate mavens thus first need to understand why mavens engage in 
the creation of brand-related content. Findings from this chapter can particularly 
help them do so: mavens are shown to be primarily driven by needs for integra-
tion and social interaction, information, and empowerment.
Limitations and Future Research Directions
This research is subject to some limitations, which may provide interesting direc-
tions for future research. First, this study uses a sample of 28 brands and two 
product types: search and experience products. The type of product is not shown 
to affect the creation of brand-related content or the motivations underlying this 
behavior. The fact that the type of product has little explanatory power aligns with 
research demonstrating that brands themselves do not explain much variance in 
brand-related behaviors; as Ahuvia (2015) aptly states, “nothing matters more to 
people than people” (p. 122). Nevertheless, previous research on electronic word-
of-mouth on social media demonstrates that the search/experience dichotomy 
holds value for explaining consumers’ reactions toward brand-related content 
(Willemsen et al., 2011). In that respect, it is to some extent surprising to find 
that that this dichotomy does not hold for the current study. While it may well 
be that the explanatory value of the search/experience scheme only lies at the 
consequences-side of brand-related content, it would be interesting to examine 
why it has no explanatory value for the antecedents-side of brand-related content. 
Future research is therefore warranted to further investigate the conditions and 
situations in which the search/experience scheme does (not) hold value.
As a second and perhaps most potent avenue for future research, this study 
shows that motivations, in general, are a more prominent predictor of brand-
related content creation than consumer characteristics. For those researchers that 
employ personality as the sole determinant of social media use, as there are many, 
this result implies that they should also begin to incorporate intrinsic motivation 
in their work. After all, by leaving out motivations, they neglect the most powerful 
driver of (brand-related) social media use. However, media use is the consequence 

278  Muntinga, Moorman, Verlegh, and Smit
of a host of antecedents, personality, motivations, and a great many others, work-
ing together. Future research on the antecedents of brand-related social media use 
should therefore ideally seek to integrate motivation and personality within one 
overarching framework. In that regard, this study can be considered as the first step 
toward that framework.
Note
	1	 See Preacher and Kelley (2011) for an extended discussion of the practical importance 
of effect size in the context of mediation.
References
Ahuvia, A. C. (2015). Nothing matters more to people than people: Brand meaning and 
social relationships. Review of Marketing Research, 12, 121–149.
Amabile, T. M. (1997). Motivating creativity in organizations: On doing what you love and 
loving what you do. California Management Review, 40(1), 39–58.
Amichai-Hamburger, Y., & Vinitzky, G. (2010). Social network use and personality. Comput-
ers in Human Behavior, 26(6), 1289–1295.
Aral, S., Muchnik, L., & Sundararajan, A. (2012). Engineering social contagions: Opti-
mal network seeding in the presence of homophily. Retrieved from http://papers.ssrn.
com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1770982.
Aral, S., & Walker, D. (2011). Creating social contagion through viral product design: A ran-
domized trial of peer influence in networks. Management Science, 57(9), 1623–1639.
Aral, S., & Walker, D. (2012). Identifying influential and susceptible members of social net-
works. Science, 337(6092), 337–341.
Barnes, S. J., & Pressey, A. D. (2012). In search of the “Meta-Maven”: An examination of 
market maven behavior across real-life, web, and virtual world marketing channels. Psy-
chology & Marketing, 29(3), 167–185.
Baumgartner, H. (2002). Toward a personology of the consumer. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 29(2), 286–292.
Belch, M. A., Krentler, K. A., & Willis-Flurry, L. A. (2005). Teen internet mavens: Influence 
in family decision making. Journal of Business Research, 58(5), 569–575.
Berthon, P. R., Pitt, L. F., & Campbell, C. (2008). AdLib: When consumers create the ad. 
California Management Review, 50(4), 6–30.
Boster, F. J., Kotowski, M. R., Andrews, K. R., & Serota, K. (2011). Identifying influence: 
Development and validation of the connectivity, persuasiveness, and maven scales. Jour-
nal of Communication, 61(1), 178–196.
Boyd, D., & Ellison, B. (2007). Social network sites: Definition, history, and scholarship. 
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13(1), 210–230.
Brown, J., Broderick, A. J., & Lee, N. (2007). Word of mouth communication within online 
communities: Conceptualizing the online social network. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 
21(3), 2–20.
Campbell, C., Pitt, L. F., & Berthon, P. R. (2011). Understanding consumer conversations 
around ads in a web 2.0 world. Journal of Advertising, 40(1), 87–102.
Chan, K. K., & Misra, S. (1990). Characteristics of the opinion leader: A new dimension. 
Journal of Advertising, 19(3), 53–60.

Who Creates Brand-Related Content and Why  279
Chatterjee, P. (2011). Drivers of new product recommendation and referral behavior on 
social network sites. International Journal of Advertising, 30(1), 77–101.
Christodoulides, G., Jevons, C., & Blackshaw, P. (2011). The voice of the consumer speaks 
forcefully in brand identity: User-generated content forces smart marketers to listen. 
Journal of Advertising Research, 51(1), 101–111.
Christodoulides, G., Jevons, C., & Bonhomme, J. (2012). Memo to marketers: Quantita-
tive evidence for change. How user-generated content really affects brands. Journal of 
Advertising Research, 52(1), 53–64.
Chu, S.-C., & Kim, Y. (2011). Determinants of consumer engagement in electronic word-
of-mouth (eWOM) in social networking sites. International Journal of Advertising, 30(1), 
48–75.
Correa, T., Willard Hinsley, A., & De Zúñiga, H. G. (2010). Who interacts on the web? The 
intersection of users’ personality and social media use. Computers in Human Behavior, 
26, 247–253.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2000). The “what” and “why” of goal pursuits: Human needs 
and the self-determination of behavior. Psychological Inquiry, 11(4), 227–268.
Dhar, V., & Chang, E. A. (2009). Does chatter matter? The impact of user-generated content 
on music sales. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 23(4), 300–307.
Dweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. L. (1988). A social-cognitive approach to motivation and per-
sonality. Psychological Review, 95(2), 256–273.
Eisenbeiss, M., Blechschmidt, B., Backhaus, K., & Freund, P. A. (2012). “The (real) world is 
not enough:” Motivational drivers and user behavior in virtual worlds. Journal of Interac-
tive Marketing, 26(1), 4–20.
Fang, X., & Mowen, J. C. (2009). Examining the trait and functional motive antecedents of 
four gambling activities: Slot machines, skilled card games, sports betting, and promo-
tional games. Journal of Consumer Marketing, 26(2), 121–131.
Feick, L. F., & Price, L. L. (1987). The market maven: A diffuser of marketplace information. 
Journal of Marketing, 51(1), 83–97.
Fournier, S., & Lee, L. (2009). Getting brand community right. Harvard Business Review, 
87(4), 105–111.
Füller, J. (2010). Refining virtual co-creation from a consumer perspective. California Man-
agement Review, 52(2), 98–122.
Füller, J., Matzler, K., & Hoppe, M. (2009). Brand community members as a source of 
innovation. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 25(6), 608–619.
Gerber, A. S., Huber, G. A., Doherty, D., Dowling, C. M., & Panagopoulos, C. (2012). Big 
five personality traits and responses to persuasive appeals: Results from voter turnout 
experiments. Political Behavior, published online, doi: 10.1007/s11109-012-9216-y.
Gladwell, M. (2000). The tipping point: How little things can make a big difference. New York, 
NY: Little Brown.
Godes, D. (2011). Invited comment on “opinion leadership and social contagion in new 
product diffusion.” Marketing Science, 30(2), 224–229.
Godes, D., & Mayzlin, D. (2009). Firm-created word-of-mouth communication: Evidence 
from a field test. Marketing Science, 28(4), 721–739.
Godes, D., Mayzlin, D., Chen, Y., Das, S., Dellarocas, C., Pfeiffer, B., Libai, B., Sen, S., Shi, 
M., & Verlegh, P. W. J. (2005). The firm’s management of social interactions. Marketing 
Letters, 16(3/4), 415–428.
Goldsmith, R. E., Clark, R. A., & Goldsmith, E. B. (2006). Extending the psychological 
pro-file of market mavenism. Journal of Consumer Behaviour, 5(5), 411–419.

280  Muntinga, Moorman, Verlegh, and Smit
Goodey, C., & East, R. (2008). Testing the market maven concept. Journal of Marketing Man-
agement, 24(3–4), 265–282.
Granovetter, M. S. (1973). The strength of weak ties. American Journal of Sociology, 78(6), 
1360–1380.
Haridakis, P.,  & Hanson, G. (2009). Social interaction and co-viewing with YouTube: 
Blending mass communication and social connection. Journal of Broadcasting and Elec-
tronic Media, 53(2), 317–335.
Hayes, A. F. (2012). PROCESS: A versatile computational tool for observed variable medi-
ation, moderation, and conditional process modeling. Retrieved from http://www.
afhayes.com/public/process2012.pdf.
Hennig-Thurau, T., Gwinner, K. P., Walsh, G., & Gremler, D. D. (2004). Electronic word of 
mouth via consumer-opinion platforms: What motivates consumers to articulate them-
selves on the internet. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 18(1), 38–52.
Hinz, O., Skiera, B., Barrot, C., & Becker, J. U. (2011). Seeding strategies for viral marketing: 
An empirical comparison. Journal of Marketing, 75(6), 55–71.
Hughes, D. J., Rowe, M., Batey, M., & Lee, A. (2012). A tale of two sites: Twitter vs. Face-
book and the personality predictors of social media usage. Computers in Human Behavior, 
28(2), 561–569.
Iyengar, R., Van den Bulte, C., & Valente, T. W. (2011). Opinion leadership and social con-
tagion in new product diffusion. Marketing Science, 30(2), 195–212.
Katz, E., Blumler, J. G., & Gurevitch, M. (1974). Utilization of mass communication by the 
individual. In J. G. Blumler & E. Katz (Eds.), The uses of mass communications: Current per-
spectives on gratifications research (Vol. 3, pp. 19–32). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
Katz, E., & Lazarsfeld, P. F. (1955). Personal influence. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Keller, E. B., & Berry, J. L. (2003). The influentials: One American in ten tells the other nine how 
to vote, where to eat, and what to buy. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.
Kietzmann, J. H., Silvestre, B. S., McCarthy, I. P., & Pitt, L. F. (2012). Unpacking the social 
media phenomenon: Towards a research agenda. Journal of Public Affairs, 12(2), 109–119.
Laughlin, J. D., & MacDonald, J. B. (2010). Identifying market mavens online by their social 
behaviors in community-generated media. Academy of Marketing Studies Journal, 14(1), 
55–70.
Lester, D., Tudor, R. K., Loyd, D. D., & Mitchell, T. (2012). Marketing mavens’ fusion with 
social media. Atlantic Marketing Journal, 1(1). Retrieved from http://digitalcommons.
kennesaw.edu/amj/vol1/iss1/6.
Levy, M. R., & Windahl, S. (1984). Audience activity and gratifications: A conceptual clari-
fication and exploration. Communication Research, 11(1), 51–78.
Li, J., & Chignell, M. (2010). Birds of a feather: How personality influences blog writing 
and reading. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 68(9), 589–602.
Libai, B., Muller, E., & Peres, R. (2013). Decomposing the value of word-of-mouth seed-
ing programs: Acceleration vs. expansion. Journal of Marketing Research, 50(2), 161–176.
Lin, K.-Y., & Lu, H.-P. (2011). Why people use social networking sites: An empirical study 
integrating network externalities and motivation theory. Computers in Human Behavior, 
27(3), 1152–1161.
Liu-Thompkins, Y., & Rogerson, M. (2012). Rising to stardom: An empirical investigation 
of the diffusion of user-generated content. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 26(2), 71–82.
Maslow, A. H. (1970). Motivation and personality. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
McQuail, D. (2010). Mass communication theory (6th ed.). London: Sage Publications.
Moore, K., & McElroy, J. C. (2012). The influence of personality on Facebook usage, wall 
postings, and regret. Computers In Human Behavior, 28(1), 267–274.

Who Creates Brand-Related Content and Why  281
Moran, E., & Gossieaux, F. (2010). Marketing in a hyper-social world: The tribalization of 
business study and characteristics of successful online communities. Journal of Advertising 
Research, 50(3), 227–228.
Muñiz, A. M. Jr., & Schau, H. J. (2011). How to inspire value-laden collaborative consumer 
generated content. Business Horizons, 54(3), 209–217.
Muntinga, D. G. (2013). Catching COBRAs. Amsterdam: SWOCC.
Muntinga, D. G., Moorman, M., & Smit, E. G. (2011). Introducing COBRAs: Exploring 
motivations for brand-related social media use. International Journal of Advertising, 30(1), 
13–46.
Nambisan, S., & Baron, R. (2009). Virtual consumer environments: Testing a model of 
voluntary participation in value co-creation activities. Journal of Product Innovation Man-
agement, 26(4), 388–406.
Nelson, P. (1974). Advertising as information. The Journal of Political Economy, 82(4), 
729–754.
Nisbet, E. C. (2006). The engagement model of opinion leadership: Testing validity within 
a European context. International Journal of Public Opinion Research, 18, 3–30.
Nisbet, M. C., & Kotcher, J. (2009). A two-step flow of influence? Opinion-leader cam-
paigns on climate change. Science Communication, 30, 328–354.
Ong, E. Y. L., Ang, R. P., Ho, J. C. M., Lim, J. C. Y., Goh, D. H., Lee, C. S., & Chua, A. Y. K. 
(2011). Narcissism, extraversion and adolescents’ self-presentation on Facebook. Journal 
of Personality and Individual Differences, 50, 180–185.
Paunonen, S. V., & Ashton, M. C. (2001). Big five factors and facets and the prediction of 
behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81(3), 524–539.
Pettijohn II, T. F., LaPienne, K. E., Pettijohn, T. F., & Horting, A. L. (2012). Relationships 
between Facebook intensity, friendship contingent self-esteem, and personality in U.S. 
college students. Cyberpsychology: Journal of Psychosocial Research on Cyberspace, 6(1), 1–8. 
Retrieved from http://www.cyberpsychology.eu/view.php?cisloclanku=2012042901.
Petty, R. E., & Wegener, D. T. (1998). Attitude change: Multiple roles for persuasion vari-
ables. In D. Gilbert, S. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of social psychology (4th 
ed., pp. 323–390). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Porter, C. E., Donthu, N., MacElroy, W. H., & Wydra, D. (2011). How to foster and sustain 
engagement in virtual communities. California Management Review, 53(4), 80–110.
Preacher, K. J., & Kelley, K. (2011). Effect size measures for mediation models: Quantitative 
strategies for communicating indirect effects. Psychological Methods, 16(2), 93–115. doi: 
10.1037/a0022658.
Rhodes, N. D., & Wood, W. (1992). Self-esteem and intelligence affect influenceability: The 
role of message reception. Psychological Bulletin, 111, 156–169.
Rosen, E. (2009). The anatomy of buzz revisited: Real-life lessons in word of mouth marketing. 
New York, NY: Doubleday.
Rosengren, K. E. (1974). Uses and gratifications: A paradigm outlined. In J. G. Blumler & 
E. Katz (Eds.), The uses of mass communications: Current perspectives on gratifications research 
(pp. 269–286). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
Ross, C., Orr, E. S., Sisic, M., Arseneault, J. M., Simmering, M. G., & Orr, R. R. (2009). 
Personality and motivations associated with Facebook use. Computers in Human Behav-
ior, 25(2), 578–586.
Rubin, A. M. (2002). The uses and gratifications perspective of media effects. In J. Bryant & 
D. Zillmann (Eds.), Media effects: Advances in theory and research (pp. 525–548). Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

282  Muntinga, Moorman, Verlegh, and Smit
Ruggiero, T. E. (2000). Uses and gratifications theory in the 21st century. Mass Communica-
tion & Society, 3(1), 3–37.
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: Classic definitions 
and new directions. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 25(1), 54–67.
Ryckman, R. (2004). Theories of personality. Belmont, CA: Thomson/Wadsworth.
Saris, W. E., & Gallhofer, I. N. (2007). Estimation of the effect of measurement characteris-
tics on the quality of survey questions. Survey Research Methods, 1(1), 29–43.
Skues, J. L., Williams, B., & Wise, L. (2012). The effects of personality traits, self-esteem, 
loneliness, and narcissism on Facebook use among university students. Computers in 
Human Behavior, 28(6), 2414–2419.
Smith, A. N., Fischer, E., & Yongjian, C. (2012). How does brand-related user-generated 
content differ across YouTube, Facebook, and Twitter? Journal of Interactive Marketing, 
26(2), 102–113.
Smith, T., Coyle, J., Lightfoot, E., & Scott, A. (2007). Reconsidering models of influence: 
The relationship between consumer social networks and word of mouth effectiveness. 
Journal of Advertising Research, 47(4), 387–397.
Sun, T., Youn, S., Wu, G., & Kuntaraporn, M. (2006). Online word-of-mouth (or mouse): 
An exploration of its antecedents and consequences. Journal of Computer-Mediated Com-
munication, 11(4), 1104–1127.
Taylor, D. G., Lewis, J. E., & Strutton, D. (2011). Friends, fans, and followers: Do ads work 
on social networks? How gender and age shape receptivity. Journal of Advertising Research, 
51(1), 258–275.
Watts, D. J., & Dodds, P. S. (2007). Influentials, networks, and public opinion formation. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 34(4), 441–458.
Westerman, D., Spence, P. R., & Van der Heide, B. (2012). A social network as information: 
The effects of system generated reports of connectedness on credibility on Twitter. 
Computers in Human Behavior, 28(1), 199–206.
Willemsen, L. M., Neijens, P. C., Bronner, F. E., & De Ridder, J. A. (2011). “Highly recom-
mended!” The relationship between message characteristics and perceived helpful-ness 
of online reviews. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 17, 19–38.
Zhao, X., Lynch Jr., J. G., & Chen, O. (2010). Reconsidering Baron and Kenny: Myths and 
truths about mediation analysis. Journal of Consumer Research, 37, 197–206.
Zhong, B., Hardin, M., & Sun, T. (2011). Less effortful thinking leads to more social net-
working? The associations between the use of social network sites and personality traits. 
Computers in Human Behavior, 27(3), 1265–1271.

APPENDIX A  Motivation Instrument
Motivation
Items 
Information
I am looking for information about [brand]
I want to know what other people think about, or do with 
[brand]
I want to know how to use [brand], or how I can solve a 
problem with [brand]
Entertainment
Just because I like it
I am bored
I think it is relaxing
Personal identity
I want to impress others with what I know or have of 
[brand]
I want to express what kind of person I am
It gives me self-confidence
Integration and social 
interaction
I feel a bond with other people that like [brand]
I want to talk, discuss, and share information with people 
that also like [brand]
I want to belong to a group of people that all like [brand]
I want to meet new people that are also interested in 
[brand]
Empowerment
I want to make [brand] suggestions about new or existing 
products
I want to influence other people
I want to influence [brand] to do, or to leave, something
APPENDIX

APPENDIX B  Result of Bivariate Correlations Between the Observed Variables
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
1. CRE
1
2. MAV
.35**
1
3. CON
.37**
.62**
1
4. PER
.20**
.64**
.55**
1
5. INF
.38**
.47**
.36**
.29**
1
6. ENT
.37**
.35**
.28**
.29**
.51**
1
7. PID
.41**
.41**
.48**
.25**
.50**
.48**
1
8. ISI
.41**
.52**
.46**
.34**
.60**
.53**
.62**
1
9. EMP
.38**
.43**
.45**
.28**
.50**
.40**
.63**
.59**
1
10. AGE
.05
.10**
–.02
.05
.07*
–.04
–.10**
.04
–.14**
1
11. SEX
.09**
.15**
.08**
.08**
.10**
.08**
.03
.13**
.02
.03
1
12. EDU
–.04
.09**
.01
.09**
.04
–.04
–.05
.03
–.06*
.40**
.08**
1
13. PRO
–.04
–.07**
–.06*
–.06*
–.04
.04
–.02
.00
–.00
–.12**
–.07**
–.03
1
Note. AGE = age; CON = connectivity; CRE = creating; EDU = education; EMP = empowerment; ENT = entertainment; INF = information; ISI = integration and 
social interaction; MAV = mavenism; PER = persuasiveness; PID = personal identity; PRO = product type; SEX = sex; * p < .05, ** p < .01.

Picture this. Candace Payne, a stay-home mom, buys a Chewbacca electronic 
mask from Kohl’s for herself. She decides to take a selfie video with the mask on 
her face and share it with friends and family. Payne puts on the mask and dis-
solves into uncontrollable laughter. She posts the video to her Facebook page for 
her friends and family to view. Within a few days, and through electronic word- 
of-mouth (eWOM), Payne’s selfie video was shared and viewed over 140 million 
times on Facebook, making it the most viewed Facebook Live video of all time 
(Guynn, 2016; Itkowitz, 2016). Payne’s video is an excellent example of how social 
media work, how it facilitates brand and product evolution, and most importantly, 
how it continues to alter the rules of advertising, marketing, and public relations, 
mainly by dissolving the boundaries between advertising, marketing, and public 
relations (Scott, 2015). While the traditional advertising model generally applied a  
linear progression from ideation, strategic thinking, execution to evaluation; social 
media advertising is an amalgamation of iterative processes intertwined to galva-
nize advertisers’ strategic input, public relations efforts, offline strategies (including 
point-of-purchase), mobile tactics, and most importantly, use of approaches that 
build on the organic nature of social media content. Social media amplify the 
importance of the human factor in that the highest salience is placed on under-
standing how consumers respond, react, and generate online content that fits (or 
modifies) an existing advertising strategy. As social media ad spending rapidly and 
exponentially increases, valued at $8.5 billion in 2014 and expected to hit $14 bil-
lion by 2018 (Hoelzel, 2014), social media advertisers are faced with two major 
questions. First, how can advertisers create genuine, unique, and viral experiences 
that affect consumers’ attention, engagement, and hopefully, purchase behavior? 
Second, how can advertisers quantify return on investment (ROI) from social 
media advertising? Or, an even better question: how should advertisers think and 
16
SOCIAL MEDIA ADVERTISING
Unraveling the Mystery Box
Saleem Alhabash, Juan Mundel, and Syed Ali Hussain

286  Alhabash, Mundel, and Hussain
rethink ROI from social media advertising given its nuances, intricacies, and com-
plexities? Responses to these questions are detailed in the sections below.
Social Media and Advertising: Concepts
Compared to traditional media, social media provide users the ability to not only 
view and access information, but also share, engage with, and create multimodal 
content distributed privately, semi-privately, and publicly through networks of 
friends, followers, and users (Scott, 2015). We define social media advertising as 
any piece of online content designed with a persuasive intent and/or distributed 
via a social media platform that enables internet users to access, share, engage with, 
add to, and co-create.
Social media advertising can be grouped into paid, owned, and earned media 
(Hurrle & Postatny, 2015). Platforms like Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and Ins-
tagram offer advertisers numerous ways to pay social media platforms for the 
exchange of behavior targeting to reach consumers through display ads, promoted 
content, and various applications and plug-ins. On the other hand, advertisers may 
resort to strategic tactics using organic presence, wherein the company directly 
disseminates content to their followers online. Finally, earned social media refers 
to instances where users engage with content either through eWOM or through 
user-generated content (UGC) related to the brand/service. In doing so, adver-
tisers invest in and cultivate consumers as brand/service ambassadors and social 
media influencers, who will generate content and online engagement with the 
brand for dissemination among their online social network (Roman, 2015; medi-
akix.com, 2016).
The Chewbacca mom viral video discussed at the beginning of this chapter is 
a prime example of user-generated brand mentions that not only offer brand vis-
ibility (e.g., mentioning Kohl’s, the Chewbacca electronic mask, association with 
the Star Wars brand) but also highlights the converged nature of the present adver-
tising world. In the example, Kohl’s responded immediately and posted a video in 
which they offered Payne and her family numerous gifts (Wahba, 2016). Facebook 
invited Payne to their headquarters to celebrate her video’s 140+ million views. 
Instances like this further underscore the opportunities and affordances provided 
by social media for advertising, marketing, and public relations.
Digital ad spending has been constantly growing in the United States, and 
advertisers are increasingly allocating larger budgets to social media (Okazaki & 
Taylor, 2013; Saxena & Khanna, 2013; Olmstead & Lu, 2015). As of mid-2015, 
advertisers spent $23.68  billion on social media advertising, with a projected 
growth to $35.98 billion in 2017, representing 16 percent of all digital spending 
(eMarketer, 2015). These figures only include activities in which advertisers pay 
social media platforms for any form of advertising, excluding organic advertising 
activities. In 2015, advertisers allocated roughly $13 for every $100 spent on all 
forms of paid advertising, including TV, print, radio, out-of-home, directories, and 

Social Media Advertising  287
other digital media, which is projected to grow to roughly $18 per $100 in 2017 
(eMarketer, 2016).
This points toward two important insights. First, the salience of social media 
advertising is no longer a nuance. Second, as advertisers continue to invest in 
social media, then it must be garnering effectiveness, something that warrants 
further investigation. There are several reasons for the claim that advertising on 
social media is more effective than advertising via traditional media (Sass, 2015). 
First, placing ads on social media is much cheaper than traditional media (Bhanot, 
2012). Second, advertisers now have the tools to better quantify and reach spe-
cific target audiences. Third, social media analytics provide improved accuracy to 
measure ad effectiveness through machine learning algorithms and data analytics, 
tracking not just views and impressions, but also different facets of online and 
offline forms of ad engagement.
Despite clear and evident advantages of social media for advertising, numer-
ous challenges exist that we attempt to emphasize in the remainder of this chap-
ter. First, success on social media is largely attributed to coincidental efforts and 
trial-and-error. Therefore, a theoretical discussion of the processes associated with 
social media advertising is critically important. Second, there are neither clear 
standards nor consistency in terms of what are the key outcomes to which adver-
tisers should pay attention, and more importantly, what do these outcomes mean 
and how do they translate and redefine traditional advertising and marketing out-
comes (e.g., purchase intention, purchase behavior, brand loyalty, etc.).
Re-Envisioning Persuasion Theories in  
a Social Media Context
Much social media advertising practice, while relying on strategic thinking pro-
cesses, is the result of considerable trial-and-error. The nature of social media—
how accessible, cheap (in most cases, free), and easy-to-use they are—has shifted 
industry standards in terms of the strategic ad production processes. The era of 
pre-tests, evaluations, and systematic consumer research has been replaced with 
systematic processes that reflect the  “always-on” nature of social media and users. 
The new era is of research as we go. However, existing persuasion theories can still 
be applied to design and measurement of social media advertising. The next sec-
tion details the ways in which three theoretical frameworks—often applied in 
advertising and persuasion research—can be used to unravel the phenomenon of 
social media advertising and its effects.
Dual Process Models of Persuasion
Among the multiple information processing models, the elaboration likelihood 
model (ELM, Petty & Cacioppo, 1981, 1986) and the heuristic systematic model 
(HSM, Chaiken, 1980, 1987; Chaiken, Liberman, & Eagly, 1989) have been widely 

288  Alhabash, Mundel, and Hussain
adopted in advertising research. The premise of ELM and HSM is that processing 
of persuasive messages often occurs in two distinctive ways: activating either the 
central route (systematic) or the peripheral route (heuristic) processing. Central 
route or systematic processing involve heightened allocation of elaboration and 
thinking about a message’s persuasive argument, while the peripheral route (heu-
ristic) processing is less cognitively involving and rather superficial in that humans 
rely on heuristic cues and short-cuts to evaluate the message and subsequently 
their acceptance of arguments. Source (e.g., model attractiveness, expertise, trust-
worthiness), message (e.g., advertising appeal, argument quality), and receiver (e.g., 
involvement) attributes are thought to influence the method of processing that is 
guided by an individual’s motivation and ability to process information.
ELM/HSM, stemming from the study of persuasive communication over the 
past four decades, envisioned the persuasive process as a linear one, similar to 
other communication models (e.g., Shannon & Weaver, 1949; Lasswell, 1971): a 
communicator develops a message, disseminates it through a channel to a receiver 
who is affected by that message with some instances of feedback. The uniqueness 
of social media persuasion lies in two areas: 1) information overload, and 2) blur-
ring persuasive lines.
Information Overload
First, the persuasion process is increasingly gravitating toward non-linearity that is 
mainly fueled by information overload, content abundance, and multitasking. With 
the abundance of content to which social media users are exposed to, attention, 
comprehension, and retention of persuasive messages occur in parallel with other 
activities, while other entities (including competing advertisers) concurrently dis-
seminate information to the user. Additionally, some users are rarely engaged in 
a single-medium or single-message use sessions (Kononova, 2013). Instead, they 
are often multitasking (though, in reality, it is frequent task-switching). Yeykelis, 
Cummings, and Reeves (2014) found that college student participants spent an 
average of 19 seconds on a single task, including writing term papers, answering 
emails, and checking social media, among other activities. Therefore, a significant 
challenge to advertisers and marketers is understanding how to effectively reach 
consumers and gain their attention toward persuasive messages disseminated via 
social media. Messages that do get noticed, liked, shared, and commented are either 
built on strong emotional appeals and/or display relevant information (Berger & 
Milkman, 2010; Eckler & Bolls, 2011; Alhabash et al., 2013; Alhabash, Baek, Cun-
ningham, & Hagerstrom, 2015). These are basic psychological processes that shape 
our understanding of persuasive communication (Lang, 2006; Lang, 2014; Lang & 
Bailey, 2015). Humans allocate cognitive resources to processing external stimuli 
(i.e., persuasive message) through motivational activation that is responsive to nov-
elty, emotionality, and motivational relevance (Lang, 2006). Messages that make it 
through the clutter filters are ones that strategically balance the three instigators 

Social Media Advertising  289
of motivational processing. Think of the Chewbacca Mom video: it’s novel in that 
an adult woman is trying on a children’s toy, it’s funny, and it relates to parent-
ing experiences. Most importantly, the video has a persuasive effect for multiple 
brands (i.e., Kohl’s, Star Wars, Chewbacca mask) that is seamless and unique from 
a traditional ad format. Even though this video was not originally created and 
disseminated as an advertisement, with its growing popularity and emphasis on 
the brand, it simulated an advertisement on social media. However, not all social 
media ads are created equal nor will they yield desired outcomes. Different mes-
sage types might lead to different forms of online and offline behaviors. A study 
using psychophysiological measurement showed that the physiological responses 
(namely, heart rate and skin conductance) preceding the performance of online 
behaviors varied as a function of whether the participant pressed the Like, Share, 
or Comment buttons (Al-Riyami et al., 2016).
Blurring Persuasive Lines
Second, the distinctions made between the sender, message, channel, and user 
are blurring, if not fading away. In the present era of UGC and eWOM, distin-
guishing persuaders from persuaded is hard, if not impossible, with little certainty 
about channel-specific effects in the emergence of cross-platform advertising. For 
example, person X posts an ad for brand A to her Facebook page with the caption 
“I love this ad, celebrity Y is so cute . . . I love brand A.” The ad featuring celebrity 
Y is seen by person Z, who presses the like button and writes a comment under 
the video, while person W shares it with his friends. Who is the source in this 
case? Who is the receiver? One may argue that these distinctions are contextual. 
Nonetheless, the traditional way of separating senders from receivers is no longer 
applicable. It is essential to redraw the lines between sources and receivers in the 
context of social media. The placement of individual consumers within this cir-
cular and iterative process of interchangeable roles and information could poten-
tially influence processing of persuasive communication as well as any persuasive 
outcomes. A revised dual processing approach not only highlights the intercon-
nectedness and interchangeable roles among senders, messages and channels, and 
receivers, but also signifies the interchangeability of processing routes and styles 
as consumers shift from one method to another as a function of direct effects 
and interactions, as well as magnitude of interconnectedness and interchange-
ability among the levels of influence (senders, message/channels, and receivers; 
see Figure 16.1).
Theory of Reasoned Action/Planned Behavior
The behavioral approach to persuasion effects can be understood through two 
related theories: the theory of reasoned action (TRA) and its extension, the 
theory of planned behavior (TPB). TRA/TPB explain what drives peoples’ 

290  Alhabash, Mundel, and Hussain
SENDER
RECEIVER
RECEIVER
CHANNEL
MESSAGE
SENDER
RECEIVER
CENTRAL ROUTE 
(SYSTEMATIC) 
PROCESSING
PERIPHERAL ROUTE 
(SYSTEMATIC) 
PROCESSING
FIGURE 16.1  Integrating Social Media into Dual Process Models of Persuasion
volitional or voluntary behavior as a function of ways in which persuasive com-
munication affects one’s attitudes, and in turn influences their behavioral inten-
tions, ultimately translating into behavior. This theoretical framework also posits 
that subjective norms, or the perceptions of the prevalence and acceptance of 
the behavior among one’s social ties, as well as an individual’s perceptions about 
his/her control over the behavior, also influence behavioral intentions and actual 
behaviors (Ajzen, 1985).
Within the context of social media, engagement with online persuasive mes-
sages (e.g., ad) in the form of viral behaviors: behaviors that contribute to online 
content’s virality (see Alhabash & McAlister, 2014) can mediate the relationship 
between attitudes and (offline) behavioral intentions, and subsequently actual 
behaviors. Past research showed strong associations between viral behavioral 
intentions (e.g., intentions to like, share, and comment on a social media message) 
and offline behavioral intentions (Alhabash, McAlister, Lou, & Hagerstrom, 2015; 
Alhabash, McAlister, Quilliam, Richards, & Lou, 2015). Not only did viral behav-
ioral intentions explain close to half of the variance in offline behavioral inten-
tions, but also, variations among different levels of viral behavioral intentions have 
been documented. More specifically, Alhabash et al. (2015) showed that across 
four different experimental studies, expressing intentions to “like” a persuasive 
message was the strongest mediator between attitudes toward the message and 
offline behavioral intentions. While past research suggests a causal order for the 

Social Media Advertising  291
ATTITUDE
SUBJECTIVE 
NORMS
PERCEIVED 
BEHAVIORAL 
CONTROL
VIRAL 
BEHAVIORAL 
INTENTIONS
OFFLINE 
BEHAVIORAL 
INTENTIONS 
BEHAVIOR
FIGURE 16.2  Integrating Social Media into Theory of Planned Behavior
relationship between attitudes, viral behavioral intentions, and offline behavioral 
intentions, respectively, arguments about reverse causality are also valid and need 
further study.
As viral behaviors directly affect offline behavioral intentions and behaviors, 
subsequently, they also mediate the relationship between attitudes toward the 
behavior, subjective norm, and perceived behavioral control, on one side, and 
behavioral intentions (offline), on the other. Holding (offline) behavioral inten-
tions and behaviors as constant outcomes for persuasive communication, the 
revised TPB model should include viral behavioral intentions (as well as viral 
behaviors) as a factor influenced by and also influencing the three behavioral 
predictors (attitudes, norms, control), along with an interrelationship with offline 
behavioral intentions. While perceived behavioral control is a function of an indi-
vidual’s psychological traits and processes, subjective norms are especially impor-
tant in the social media context.
Social Norms on Social Media
Social norms are perceptions that individuals have about the prevalence and accept-
ance of certain attitudes and/or behavior (Schultz, Nolan, Cialdini, Goldstein, & 
Griskevicius, 2007). Park and Smith (2007) identified five distinctive expressions 
of norms: subjective norms, personal descriptive norms, personal injunctive norms, 
societal descriptive norms, and societal injunctive norms. Per Park and Smith (2007), 

292  Alhabash, Mundel, and Hussain
subjective norms have been articulated in TPB and refer to the perceptions of how 
others expect the individual to behave, and they argue that the concept of subjective 
norm has been at times reflective of descriptive norms and, at other times, of injunc-
tive norms. Descriptive norms are defined as the perceived prevalence of the behav-
ior among a social group (e.g., close friends, people who are important to me, the 
general public), while injunctive norms refer to the perceived approval or accept-
ance of the behavior among the social group (Perkins & Berkowitz, 1986; Berkow-
itz, 1997; Perkins, 2003; Park & Smith, 2007). The distinction between individual 
and societal levels of descriptive and injunctive norms stems from the anchoring 
of a reference group an individual is asked to evaluate. Individual level perceptions 
deal with an individual’s perception of how prevalent (descriptive) and accepted 
(injunctive) the behavior is among people they believe are important. On the other 
hand, societal level norms are about perceptions of prevalence and acceptance of the 
behavior among a large group of people (e.g., Americans, university students).
Social norms-based marketing efforts provide specific information as a means 
for behavioral comparison. In doing so, descriptive norms reflect one’s actual 
behavior versus one’s beliefs about others. Research suggests that social norms 
advertising campaigns have been successful in preventing risky behaviors, such 
as alcohol abuse. The positive approach commonly used in these campaigns has 
largely led to positive outcomes (Wechsler et al., 2003).
The increasing prevalence of social media has also resulted in increased social 
network size of average users on platforms like Facebook and Twitter; not all of 
them may be close friends or frequent interactions. With that in mind, it becomes 
important to distinguish the influence of social norms on social media via strength 
of ties (Wellman, 1996; Haythornthwaite, 2002). The influence of strong versus 
weak ties—an expression of perceived social norms—can variably influence per-
suasive effects related to social media advertising, specifically in relation to UGC 
and eWOM. Chang, Chen, and Tan (2012) found advertisements endorsed by 
strong ties as more effective compared with those endorsed by weak ties when 
the product was hedonic as compared to being utilitarian. The study also found 
closely related people with similar values had a greater impact on purchase inten-
tions. Li, Lee, and Lien (2012) observed similar results in that users receiving 
advertisements endorsed by related others found them more relevant.
Given that social media enable users to establish and maintain social connec-
tions with others, and that one’s behavior is exposed to others, such publicity of an 
individuals’ life can create normative perceptions about a person’s behavior, both 
online and offline (Zeng, Huang, & Dou, 2009; Chu & Kim, 2011). Kim, Lee, and 
Yoon (2015) found that attitudes toward a reference behavior, subjective norms, 
and personal descriptive norms influence behavioral intentions to interact with 
“liking” public pages on Facebook.
Thus, a question arises: how are normative perceptions expressed and evaluated 
when consumers are interacting with branded content via social media platforms? 

Social Media Advertising  293
While considering descriptive and injunctive norms, social media affordances ena-
ble quantification of the norms that may influence behavioral perceptions among 
consumers. Descriptive norms can be expressed through access and sharing meas-
ures (e.g., number of views on YouTube, number of shares on Facebook), while 
injunctive norms can be inferred by looking at evaluative viral behaviors, such as 
the number of likes, as well as the tone of comments, and users’ own posts related 
to the object of persuasion. Additionally, distinguishing between individual-  
and societal-level norms, social media users are able to see posts and interaction 
by their network of friends (with varying degrees of social tie strength) as well as 
general public posts. For example, a Twitter user can see that a particular brand-
related hashtag is trending, which can express a societal-level norm. She can also 
see one of her close friends on Twitter using that hashtag, reflecting an individual-
level norm.
Another means of social normative influence on behavior via social media 
deals with how consumers think about their friends on social media in terms 
of behavioral prevalence and acceptance (Wang  & Yu, 2012; Hutter, Hautz, 
Dennhardt, & Füller, 2013). Within the context of social media, the number of 
“friends” a user has could reinforce the fear of sanctions by loss of reputation 
for disobeying what the user perceives to be customary (normative). Marwick 
and Boyd (2011) posited that content generators take into account different 
imaginary audiences when producing their material, and those users tend to 
self-censor themselves to avoid relationship problems and rants. Viken, Kim, 
Alhabash, and Smith (2016) also found that posts interacting with alcohol-
related content on Facebook influenced self-reported drinking behavior and 
descriptive drinking norms among close friends and acquaintances. Viken et al. 
(2016) also found that the strongest predictor of self-reported drinking behav-
ior is the perceived norms of how many drinks close Facebook friends had in 
a given time period.
Social Media Persuasion for Behavioral Change
The “million-dollar-question” in relation to social media advertising is: how can 
offline behaviors (e.g., purchase, consumption, etc.) be attributed to social media 
ads? Additionally, how can online behaviors translate to offline? As with previous 
models and studies of advertising effects, the most commonly used indicator of 
behavioral change is behavioral intentions. Per TRA/TPB, behavioral intentions 
are assumed to be the strongest predictors of actual behaviors. Therefore, research 
reviewed in this section looks mainly at effects of social media advertising and 
persuasion on behavioral intentions and, in some cases, proxies of actual behaviors. 
This section is organized by theme of effects. More specifically, we categorize 
social media advertising into: 1) incidental exposure effects, 2) engagement effects, 
and 3) UGC effects.

294  Alhabash, Mundel, and Hussain
Incidental Exposure
Incidental exposure is defined as instances when an individual is exposed to 
secondary information at a time when he/she is paying attention to a different 
(primary) task ( Janiszewski, 1988). It can be commonly observed that because 
of the clutter surrounding an individual in society, advertisements generally get 
only incidental attention from consumers (Pham & Vanhuele, 1997). However, 
research suggests that even though exposure to an ad might be brief and inciden-
tal, the pervasiveness of advertising influences ad recognition, familiarity, and recall 
(Hawkins & Hoch, 1992; Holden & Vanhuele, 1999), and helps build familiarity 
for the brand (Fang, Singh, and Ahluwalia, 2007). Kelly, Kerr, and Drennan (2010) 
studied attitudes and message avoidance toward social media advertising and found 
that participants did not mind excessive clutter as long as the SNS use was free of 
charge. While early studies on digital advertising and incidental exposure focused 
on participants’ attention to banners within search engines (Manchanda, Dubé, 
Goh, & Chintagunta, 2006), the emergence of social media platforms brought a 
new level of research in investigating whether online social media users indeed 
registered the displayed ads. A 2013 study that tracked participants’ visual atten-
tion found that online banners on Facebook attract less attention as compared 
with recommendations from friends (Barreto, 2013). However, this does not mean 
that ads went unnoticed. Instead, incidental exposure has been found to increase 
the likelihood of being considered for a future purchase (Shapiro, 1999). In a 
study by Alhabash et al. (2016), participants were exposed to Facebook ads that 
either featured an alcoholic (beer) or non-alcoholic (water) brand. Not only did 
participants indicate greater behavioral intentions to consume alcohol following 
exposure to beer than water ads, but they also were more likely to select a bar than 
a coffee shop gift card with which they were provided at the end of the study. 
Alhabash et al.’s (2016) findings offer an understanding of not only the impor-
tant—and often the considerable—effect of exposure to ads on social media; once 
ads are noticed and processed, the potential for effectiveness is heightened.
Engagement Effects
Research on engagement effects also reveals strong relationships between behav-
ioral intentions to like, share, and comment and expression of intentions to per-
form message-induced behaviors offline. In a number of studies, Alhabash and 
colleagues documented this strong effect among samples of college students 
(Alhabash et al., 2013; Alhabash, Baek et al., 2015; Alhabash et al., 2015). On a 
conceptual level, these effects can be explained by understanding different stages 
of behavioral change. Behavior change models that highlight the importance of 
readiness for change (e.g., Marcus, Selby, Niaura, & Rossi, 1992; Webb & Sheeran, 
2006) offer a clear explanation for the online-offline behavioral intention rela-
tionship. That is, engaging with an online message comes with and is the product 
of certain levels of cognitive and affective mechanisms. Pressing the “like” button, 

Social Media Advertising  295
sharing an ad, or commenting on someone else’s brand-related post can indicate 
endorsement by the individual of the brand and behavior advocated in the adver-
tisement. Thus, readiness for behavior change may increase. On the other hand, 
engaging in viral behaviors with branded content reflects higher-order mecha-
nisms for information processing and enhances memory storage of the ad content 
and brand-related attributes.
UGC Effects
The relationship between generating persuasive content as consumers and whether 
or not consumers will buy or use the product or service has been documented 
in a number of studies. For example, Viken et al. (2016) showed that participants 
who reported posting about alcohol during a major celebration were ones that 
actually consumed more alcohol than their counterparts who did not post about 
alcohol on Facebook. Based on Viken et al.’s (2016) findings, we can see that 
the act of generating UGC may be strongly associated with offline behaviors. 
UGC can also signify the source of persuasion. Paek, Hove, Jeon, and Kim (2011) 
showed that PSAs that were produced by peer users (UGC) received more favora-
ble attitude ratings than those produced by experts, mediated by involvement. 
Paek et al. (2011) argued that the effects of peer versus expert sources could be 
explained using the model similarity concept in relation to persuasive effects. Peer-
generated messages appear more genuine and are perceived as less “ad-looking”  
than ones where the source is an expert or a professional model.
Social media advertising proposes three distinct levels of outcomes: exposure, 
engagement, and UGC—all of which are thought to influence attitudes and 
offline behaviors. Lee (2015) provides a guide for measuring return on invest-
ment (ROI) from social media, based on identification of social media advertising 
goals, data aggregation, and impact measurement. Nonetheless, these recommen-
dations are limited only to assigning monetary values to online activities based 
on hypothetical assumptions. The task of valuing exposure to social media ads, 
online engagement, and UGC-engagement requires further investigation that not 
only relies on big data aggregation, but also triangulates data points from multiple 
sources, using multiple methodological approaches (e.g., combining server-level 
data with survey and experimental designs). Additionally, to maximize the value 
of social media advertising investment, one may need to revise the types of out-
comes that are attainable, measurable, and meaningful. To sum, is the immediate 
post-exposure sale the most important revenue on social media? Or is it the rela-
tionship and loyalty that stems from conversation, co-creation, and engagement?
Summary
The current chapter reviewed theoretical frameworks, traditionally used in adver-
tising and persuasion research, within the context of social media advertising. 
Additionally, we reviewed recent studies that tackled three areas of social media 

296  Alhabash, Mundel, and Hussain
advertising effects: exposure, engagement, and UGC. The questions posed at the 
beginning of this chapter have been partially answered by prior studies. Advertis-
ing scholars and practitioners should strive to further explore ways to systemati-
cally produce persuasive effects using evidence-based and strategically-oriented 
advertising campaigns with an aim to transform investment of time, effort, and 
money into meaningful intentions and behaviors, both online and offline.
References
Ajzen, I. (1985). From intentions to actions: A theory of planned behavior. In J. Kuhl & J. 
Beckmann (Eds.), Action control: From cognition to behavior (pp. 11–39). Berlin Heidelberg, 
Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Alhabash, S., Baek, J. H., Cunningham, C., & Hagerstrom, A. (2015). To comment or not 
to comment? How virality, arousal level, and commenting behavior on YouTube videos 
affect civic behavioral intentions. Computers in Human Behavior, 51, 520–531.
Alhabash, S., & McAlister, A. R. (2014). Redefining virality in less broad strokes: Predicting 
viral behavioral intentions from motivations and uses of Facebook and Twitter. New 
Media & Society, 17(8), 1317–1339.
Alhabash, S., McAlister, A. R., Hagerstrom, A., Quilliam, E. T., Rifon, N. J., & Richards, 
J. I. (2013). Between likes and shares: Effects of emotional appeal and virality on the 
persuasiveness of anticyberbullying messages on Facebook. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and 
Social Networking, 16(3), 175–182.
Alhabash, S., McAlister, A. R., Kim, W., Lou, C., Cunningham, C., Quilliam, E. T., & Rich-
ards, J. I. (2016). Saw it on Facebook, drank it at the bar! Effects of exposure to Facebook 
alcohol ads on alcohol-related behaviors. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 16(1), 44–58.
Alhabash, S., McAlister, A. R., Lou, C., & Hagerstrom, A. (2015). From clicks to behav-
iors: The mediating effect of intentions to like, share, and comment on the relation-
ship between message evaluations and offline behavioral intentions. Journal of Interactive 
Advertising, 15(2), 82–96.
Alhabash, S., McAlister, A. R., Quilliam, E. T., Richards, J. I., & Lou, C. (2015). Alco-
hol’s getting a bit more social: When alcohol marketing messages on Facebook increase 
young adults’ intentions to imbibe. Mass Communication and Society, 18(3), 350–375.
Al-Riyami, A., Almutairi, N., Eisele, M., Johnson, E., Kim, W., Lou, C., & Alhabash, S. 
(2016). Psychophysiological responses to likes, shares, comments, and status updates on 
Facebook. Psychophysiology, 51(S1), S47.
Barreto, A. (2013). Do users look at banner ads on Facebook? Journal of Research in Interac-
tive Marketing, 7(2), 119–139.
Berger, J., & Milkman, K. (2010). What makes online content viral? Journal of Marketing 
Research, 49(2), 192–205.
Berkowitz, A. D. (1997). From reactive to proactive prevention: promoting an ecology 
of health on campus. In P. C. Rivers & E. R. Shore (Eds.), Substance abuse on campus: 
A handbook on substance abuse for college and university personnel (pp. 119–139). Westport, 
CT: Greenwood Press.
Bhanot, S. (2012). Use of social media by companies to reach their customers. SIES Journal 
of Management, 8(1), 47–55.
Chaiken, S. (1980). Heuristic versus systematic information processing and the use of source 
versus message cues in persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39(5),  
752–756.

Social Media Advertising  297
Chaiken, S. (1987). The heuristic model of persuasion. In M. P. Zanna, J. M. Olson, & C. P. 
Herman (Eds.), Social influence: The Ontario symposium (pp. 3–39). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chaiken, S., Liberman, A.,  & Eagly, A. H. (1989). Heuristic and systematic processing 
within and beyond the persuasion context. In J. S. Uleman & J. A. Bargh (Eds.), Unin-
tended thought (pp. 212–252). New York, NY: Guilford.
Chang, K. T., Chen, W., & Tan, B. C. (2012). Advertising effectiveness in social networking 
sites: Social ties, expertise, and product type. IEEE Transaction on Engineering Management, 
59(4), 634–643.
Chu, S. C., & Kim, Y. (2011). Determinants of consumer engagement in electronic word-
of-mouth (eWOM) in social networking sites. International Journal of Advertising, 30(1), 
47–75.
Eckler, P., & Bolls, P. (2011). Spreading the virus: Emotional tone of viral advertising and its 
effect on forwarding intentions and attitudes. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 11(2), 1–11.
eMarketer. (2015). Social network ad spending to hit $23.68 billion worldwide in 2015. 
Retrieved from http://www.emarketer.com/Article/Social-Network-Ad-Spending- 
Hit-2368-Billion-Worldwide-2015/1012357.
eMarketer. (2016). US spending on paid media expected to climb 5.1% in 2016. Retrieved  
from http://www.emarketer.com/Article/US-Spending-on-Paid-Media-Expected-
Climb-51–2016/1013739.
Fang, X., Singh, S., & Ahluwalia, R. (2007). An examination of different explanations for 
the mere exposure effect. Journal of Consumer Research, 34(1), 97–103.
Guynn, J. (2016, May 24). Chewbacca mask video star visits Facebook. USA Today. Retrieved  
from http://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/news/2016/05/24/candace-payne-chew 
bacca-
Hawkins, S. A., & Hoch, S. J. (1992). Low-involvement learning: Memory without evalua-
tion. Journal of Consumer Research, 19(2), 212–225.
Haythornthwaite, C. (2002). Strong, weak, and latent ties and the impact of new media. The 
Information Society, 18(5), 385–401.
Hoelzel, M. (2014, November 13). The social-media advertising report: growth forecasts, 
market trends, and the rise of mobile. Business Insider. Retrieved from http://www.
businessinsider.com/social-media-advertising-industry-trends-2014–11.
Holden, S. J., & Vanhuele, M. (1999). Know the name, forget the exposure: Brand familiar-
ity versus memory of exposure context. Psychology and Marketing, 16(6), 479–496.
Hurrle, D., & Postatny, J. (2015). Social media for scientific institutions: How to attract young aca-
demics by using social media as a marketing tool. Berlin, Germany: Springer.
Hutter, K., Hautz, J., Dennhardt, S., & Füller, J. (2013). The impact of user interactions in 
social media on brand awareness and purchase intention: The case of MINI on Face-
book. Journal of Product & Brand Management, 22(5/6), 342–351.
Itkowitz, C. (2016, May 23). Why “Chewbacca Mom” is the viral video we didn’t know 
we needed. The Washington Post. Retrieved from https://www.washingtonpost.com/ 
news/inspired-life/wp/2016/05/23/why-chewbacca-mom-is-the-viral-video-we-didnt- 
know-we-needed/
Janiszewski, C. (1988). Preconscious processing effects: The independence of attitude for-
mation and conscious thought. Journal of Consumer Research, 15(2), 199–209.
Kelly, L., Kerr, G., & Drennan, J. (2010). Avoidance of advertising in social networking sites. 
The teenage perspective. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 10(2), 16–27.
Kim, S., Lee, J., & Yoon, D. (2015). Norms in social media: The application of theory of 
reasoned action and personal norms in predicting interactions with Facebook page like 
ads. Communication Research Reports, 32(4), 322–331.

298  Alhabash, Mundel, and Hussain
Kononova, A. (2013). Multitasking across borders: A cross-national study of media multi-
tasking behaviors, its antecedents, and outcomes. International Journal of Communication, 
7, 1688–1710.
Lang, A. (2006). Using the limited capacity model of motivated mediated message pro-
cessing to design effective cancer communication messages. Journal of Communication, 
56(S1), S57–S80.
Lang, A. (2014). Dynamic human-centered communication systems theory. The Information 
Society, 30(1), 60–70.
Lang, A., & Bailey, R. L. (2015). Understanding information selection and encoding from a 
dynamic, energy saving, evolved, embodied, embedded perspective. Human Communica-
tion Research, 41(1), 1–20.
Lasswell, H. D. (1971). Propaganda technique in World War I. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lee, K. (2015, March 26). The delightfully short guide to social media ROI. Retrieved 
from https://blog.bufferapp.com/guide-calculate-social-media-roi.
Li, Y. M., Lee, Y. L., & Lien, N. J. (2012). Online social advertising via influential endorsers. 
International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 16(3), 119–154.
Manchanda, P., Dubé, J. P., Goh, K. Y., & Chintagunta, P. K. (2006). The effect of banner 
advertising on internet purchasing. Journal of Marketing Research, 43(1), 98–108.
Marcus, B. H., Selby, V. C., Niaura, R. S., & Rossi, J. S. (1992). Self-efficacy and the stage of 
exercise behavior change. Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 63(1), 60–66.
Marwick, A., & Boyd, D. (2011). To see and be seen: Celebrity practice on Twitter. Con-
vergence: The International Journal of Research into New Media Technologies, 17(2), 139–158.
Mediakix.com. (2016). The differences between brand ambassadors, influencers, & celeb-
rities. Retrieved from http://mediakix.com/2016/06/brand-ambassadors-influencers- 
celebrities-differences/
Okazaki, S., & Taylor, C. (2013). Social media and international advertising: Theoretical 
challenges and future directions. International Marketing Review, 30(1), 56–71.
Olmstead, K., & Lu, K. (2015). Digital news revenue: Fact sheet. Pew Research Center. Retrieved 
from http://www.journalism.org/2015/04/29/digital-news-revenue-fact-sheet/
Paek, H.-J., Hove, T., Jeon, H. J., & Kim, M. (2011). Peer or expert? International Journal of 
Advertising, 30(1), 161–188.
Park, H. S., & Smith, S. W. (2007). Distinctiveness and influence of subjective norms, per-
sonal descriptive and injunctive norms, and societal descriptive and injunctive norms 
on behavioral intent: A case of two behaviors critical to organ donation. Human Com-
munication Research, 33(2), 194–218.
Perkins, H. (2003). The social norms approach to preventing school and college age substance abuse: 
A handbook for educators, counselors, and clinicians. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Perkins, H. W., & Berkowitz, A. D. (1986). Perceiving the community norms of alcohol use 
among students: Some research implications for campus alcohol education program-
ming. International Journal of the Addictions, 21(9–10), 961–976.
Petty, R. E.,  & Cacioppo, J. T. (1981). Attitudes and persuasion: Classic and contemporary 
approaches. Dubuque, IA: William C. Brown.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). Communication and persuasion: Central and peripheral 
routes to attitude change. New York, NY: Springer.
Pham, M. T., & Vanhuele, M. (1997). Analyzing the memory impact of advertising frag-
ments. Marketing Letters, 8(4), 407–417.
Roman, E. (2015, October 28). How brand ambassadors make social . . . more social. The 
Huffington Post. Retrieved from http://www.huffingtonpost.com/ernan-roman/how-
brand-ambassadors-mak_b_8395432.html.

Social Media Advertising  299
Sass, E. (2015, November 17). Survey: Social media more effective than traditional mar-
keting. MediaPost. Retrieved from http://www.mediapost.com/publications/article/ 
262819/survey-social-media-more-effective-than-tradition.html.
Saxena, A., & Khanna, U. (2013). Advertising on social network sites: A structural equation 
modeling approach. Vision: The Journal of Business Perspective, 17(1), 17–25.
Schultz, P. W., Nolan, J. M., Cialdini, R. B., Goldstein, N. J., & Griskevicius, V. (2007). The 
constructive, destructive, and reconstructive power of social norms. Psychological Science, 
18(5), 429–434.
Scott, D. M. (2015). The new rules of marketing and PR: How to use social media, online video, 
mobile applications, blogs, news releases, and viral marketing to reach buyers directly. Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Shannon, C. E., & Weaver, W. (1949). The mathematical theory of communication. Urbana, IL: 
University of Illinois Press.
Shapiro, S. (1999). When an ad’s influence is beyond our conscious control: Perceptual 
and conceptual fluency effects caused by incidental ad exposure. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 26(1), 16–36.
Viken, G., Kim, W., Alhabash, S., & Smith, S. (2016). An analysis of celebratory drinking and 
related Facebook activity on college campuses. Poster presented to the 2016 Kentucky Con-
ference on Health Communication, April 14–16, 2016, Lexington, KY.
Wahba, P. (2016, May 23). Kohl’s reaps marketing bonanza from “Chewbacca Mom.” For-
tune. Retrieved from http://fortune.com/2016/05/23/kohls-chewbacca-marketing/
Wang, X., & Yu, C. (2012). Social media peer communication and impacts on purchase 
intentions: A consumer socialization framework. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 26(4), 
198–208.
Webb, T. L., & Sheeran, P. (2006). Does changing behavioral intentions engender behavior 
change? A meta-analysis of the experimental evidence. Psychological Bulletin, 132(2), 
249–268.
Wechsler, H., Nelson, T. E., Lee, J. E., Seibring, M., Lewis, C., & Keeling, R. P. (2003). Per-
ception and reality: A national evaluation of social norms marketing interventions to 
reduce college students’ heavy alcohol use. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 64(4), 484–494.
Wellman, B. (1996). Are personal communities local? A Dumptarian reconsideration. Social 
Networks, 18(4), 347–354.
Yeykelis, L., Cummings, J. J., & Reeves, B. (2014). Multitasking on a single device: Arousal 
and the frequency, anticipation, and prediction of switching between media content on 
a computer. Journal of Communication, 64(1), 167–192.
Zeng, F., Huang, L., & Dou, W. (2009). Social factors in user perceptions and responses to 
advertising in online social networking communities. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 
10(1), 1–13.

Targeted digital advertising has grown rapidly and become increasingly sophisti-
cated. The internet allows the collection, aggregation, and synthesis of clickstream 
data; purchase behavior; etc. to deliver advertisements tailored to previous online 
behavior (Barnes, 2002). Search engines, social media, and other types of digital 
content rank messages displayed to consumers based on algorithms or rules (Sul-
livan, 2002). Tailoring allows for potentially more relevant search results and accom-
panying advertisements based on consumer behavior in the digital context (e.g., 
past searches, clickstream activity, etc.) (FTC, 2007; Milne, Rohm, & Bahl, 2009). 
For example, consider the newly released Pokemon Go application. The app is 
based on geo-location technology, which has attracted millions of users within days 
of its initial launch. The app is able to capture email addresses, web pages viewed 
before entering the app, geographic location, IP address, Google profile informa-
tion (if a person signed into the app using a Google account), and more (Bernstein, 
2016). All of the information captured by this popular app could be used to design 
and serve digital advertising specifically tailored to a consumer based on his/her 
behavior in the digital context. However, as tailored messaging in the digital context 
grows, so too does the concern that consumer privacy expectations may not be met.
The editors of this book note in Chapter 2 that in the realm of digital adver-
tising, there is a network of message movements across platforms. The issue of 
targeted digital advertising and privacy touches upon message curation, manipula-
tion, and creation of messages as information about consumers’ online behavior is 
stored, analyzed, and used to create personalized search results and serve targeted 
advertisements. There are clear benefits for advertisers and consumers in that per-
sonalized messages based on past consumer behavior are the advertising that con-
sumers see. Advertisers are able to offer more relevant content and, subsequently, 
consumers receive more relevant messages.
17
TARGETED DIGITAL ADVERTISING 
AND PRIVACY
Heather Shoenberger

Digital Advertising and Privacy  301
As digital advertisers work to interpret and apply seemingly infinite amounts 
of data, curate the important pieces of information, and manipulate the informa-
tion to provide messages to consumers, the issue of how to address consumer pri-
vacy concerns persists. What is the meaning and value of privacy in relation to the 
benefits of digital advertising? Do consumers receive adequate notification and/
or options for controlling their data? Where should the line be drawn between 
consumer-reported anxiety over data privacy, and unfocused, rather nonchalant 
behavior regarding data protection?
In considering the above questions, this chapter will begin with a short dis-
cussion of privacy and digital advertising. In doing so, the current regulation of 
privacy in the digital advertising context will be discussed, and the literature on 
consumer concerns versus their actual behaviors online will be highlighted. The 
chapter concludes with some suggestions for future research to address the com-
plex issue of privacy concerns as they relate to digital advertising.
Information and Privacy
People constantly negotiate a balance between privacy and the need to be stimu-
lated by other human beings. Violation of expected privacy boundaries may harm 
the human psyche and cause emotional or even physical ailments to arise (Westin, 
1967). Privacy is important to the emotional and cognitive functioning of people 
because it allows them to pursue self-actualization (Calo, 2015).
Privacy is easy to understand when considered analogous to a physical door 
that provides privacy for people in their homes. It becomes more complicated as it 
relates to how and when data about a person is used. It may not be as easy to grasp 
or protect privacy in a context that is not understood through physical bounda-
ries. Companies involved in digital advertising have to grapple with defining an 
appropriate line between offering relevant messages based on profiles curated 
online and failing to respect the privacy expectations of the consumer. Privacy, 
in the digital advertising context, involves how the data collected about consum-
ers is employed to deliver tailored advertisements. The tension is generated by 
what consumers expect advertisers to do with their personal information and what 
advertisers actually do the personal details that consumers provide online.
In the economic context, consumer advocates worry that unfettered data col-
lection by companies for advertising purposes will be harmful to the consumer, 
incorrect digital profiles may be created, and using personal profiles may be used 
to discriminate against people and cause other harms (Podesta et al., 2014). The 
other side of the issue includes fear that stifling of data collection will result in 
stunted innovation and an inefficient marketplace (Calo, 2015).
Control over the information created by consumers in the digital context is 
controversial with some scholars advocating for the information to remain under 
the control of the consumer and others advocating for more control to be held by 
those who may curate and use the data for market purposes (Calo, 2015). Targeted 

302  Shoenberger
digital advertising will be the focus of this chapter because the very existence of 
targeted digital advertising depends, in large part, on the data provided by con-
sumers. While digital advertising could be any advertisement placed on digital 
media such as mobile devices or the internet, targeted digital advertising uses 
consumer data to serve ads to consumers based on their behavior online.
Respect for information privacy can be useful to the growth and maintenance 
of markets because it has the capacity to increase trust between consumers and 
companies. Trust on the part of consumers is necessary for digital commerce 
to prove satisfactory to consumers and grow (Pavlou, 2003). Trust is especially 
important in this context as consumers have little bargaining power when it 
comes to digital transactions of personal data (Beldad, De Jong, & Steehouder, 
2010). The Federal Trade Commission enforces companies’ privacy policies to 
mollify consumer trust issues and allow privacy to bolster an efficient marketplace 
(Calo, 2015). Privacy allows transactions online to take place based on relevant 
information (e.g., the price of a product) instead of based on entire profiles (e.g., 
information about the seller or buyer’s spiritual practices) (Calo, 2015).
Some companies may keep consumer data collected via use of their website 
or application proprietary but may use the data in ways that violate consumer 
expectations of privacy. For example, Facebook holds consumer data proprietary 
within its own network to offer pieces of content such as news stories, friend 
photos, etc. to people based on their interests (Sutton, 2016). The idea of a con-
sumer within Facebook’s walls being served only stories interesting to them based 
on prior behavior is defended as a good business decision though some crit-
ics have noted the content may be biased toward Facebook leaders’ sensibilities, 
especially in the news story realm (Sutton, 2016). Facebook also ran into trouble 
when its “People You May Know” feature was connected to geo-location data 
about people, although the company later denied it used geo-location data to 
suggest new friends (Burlacu, 2016). The feature, when based on geo-location 
and other information, may expose physical locations a consumer meant to keep 
private (Nicks, 2016). For example, one story included a consumer who received 
a friend suggestion based on an anonymous meeting he attended (Nicks, 2016). 
In both instances of companies housing vast amounts of consumer data, there is 
a concern over hacking. What if a hacker was able to expose nearly every aspect 
of someone’s private life, including medical visits or anonymous meetings, with 
one successful attempt to access Facebook’s data? Of course, once again, consumer 
control as a mechanism of privacy protection is paramount. In this and most digi-
tal advertising settings, the onus is on the consumer to opt-out of geo-location 
tracking via their mobile settings and other privacy settings within each respective 
application or device.
The integrity of consumer data privacy remains an important topic upon 
which regulators and scholars routinely discuss and debate as more information 
is collected about consumer behavior via better analytics and emerging tech-
nologies. The discussion involves balancing consumer privacy expectations against 

Digital Advertising and Privacy  303
the interests of the market. A right to privacy was not explicitly included in the 
United States’ law, thus regulators and privacy advocates are forced to search for 
ways to carve out such a right or institute safeguards to hold companies account-
able for data use and distribution, and provide notice to consumers about how 
their data may be used.
Regulating Privacy in the Digital Advertising Context
The first mention of a right to privacy was spurred by technological advance-
ment and a concern that the government may be able to conduct surveillance on 
citizens in ways that would chill behavior and information sharing (Solove, 2006). 
Warren and Brandeis (1890) noted that what was once whispered behind closed 
doors would one day be screamed from the rooftops. This sentiment of privacy, 
actions taken with no obvious onlooker, is relevant to the discussion of privacy in 
the context of digital advertising today.
Currently, the legal definition for privacy exists in the consumers’ ability to 
show that they had an expectation of privacy in the matter at hand (Solove, 2006). 
If a consumer cannot show a reasonable expectation of privacy, there are few pro-
tections available under privacy law. Thus, the definition of privacy in the context 
of digital advertising is important.
Under the umbrella of digital advertising, privacy has often been synonymous 
with control (Solove, 2006; Brandimarte, Acquisti,  & Loewestein, 2013). Thus, 
ensuring meaningful control over data in the digital context is the crux of the 
privacy debate in the digital advertising context. Privacy operationalized as control 
requires the consumer to carefully be aware of how online sites say they are using 
the customer’s data (Milne, Labrecque, & Cromer, 2009). Consumers are obliged 
to digest each site or device’s privacy policy, if available, and to decide whether to 
agree with the terms and conditions. The U.S. legal system holds consumers to 
“click-thru” contracts in the same way as contracts physically signed despite the 
differences in the motivation to read the digital contracts, the asymmetry of the bar-
gaining relationships, etc. (Moringiello, 2014), and privacy law expects consumers 
to proactively protect their interests (Schlosser, White, & Lloyd, 2006; Moringiello, 
2014; Shield, 2014).
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC), in its regulatory role, works to ensure 
consumer control over data. The FTC began its foray into privacy protection in 
the 1990s when it started enforcing companies’ existing privacy policies in the 
interest of preventing unfair or deceptive acts that affect commerce (Calo, 2015). 
The theory behind the enforcement was to encourage trust among consumers 
that privacy policies presented by companies could be relied on (Solove & Hart-
zog, 2014).
The FTC encourages notice and choice, often in the form of a link or icon 
directing the consumer to a stated privacy policy, in an effort to allow control over 
data collection and use (Federal Trade Commission, 2007). In addition to icons 

304  Shoenberger
and links, privacy information may pop up just before a consumer downloads an 
application or navigates through a site. The looming issue for privacy advocates 
and regulators is how to approach the issue of consumers’ control over data/pri-
vacy in a meaningful way. Consumers’ paradoxical behavior makes privacy protec-
tion via notice and choice challenging.
Consumers’ Actual Behavior Versus Concerns
Both consumers’ actual behavior and their voiced concerns are important to con-
sider in addressing the issue of privacy and digital advertising. Those who col-
lect and use consumer data must be aware of the concern or anxiety consumers 
have about how data is collected and used in the digital context. Such concern 
may lead to a lack of trust of e-commerce and result in lower engagement with 
the digital economy (e.g., Malhotra, Kim & Agarwal, 2004). However, even the 
most vigilant consumer advocate is faced with the reality of the “privacy para-
dox,” which refers to the common observation that while people voice anxiety 
about their data privacy and security, they often freely offer personal information 
(LaRose & Rifon, 2007; Norberg, Horne, & Horne, 2007; Yap, Beverland, & Bove, 
2009). The paradox between consumers’ stated attitudes and behavior inconsistent 
with those attitudes makes the idea of equating consumer control of data with 
sufficient respect for privacy problematic.
Linking control over one’s own data with privacy protection assumes (Kang, 
1998; Solove, 2006) that a consumer’s ability to control usage and dissemination of 
their personal information is integral to their ability to monitor privacy interests 
(Brandimarte, Acquisti, & Loewenstein, 2013). However, though consumers con-
sistently indicate anxiety over privacy online, they show little interest in attending 
to such policies, rarely taking the initiative to control their data (Metzger, 2007; 
Joinson, Reips, Buchanan,  & Schofield, 2010). While previous studies suggest 
consumers want additional regulation of privacy concerns in the digital context 
(Turow et al., 2009; McDonald & Cranor, 2010), a recent White House report 
stated that consumers agree to policies and terms of agreement without reading 
them, spurring privacy advocates and researchers to reflect on whether current 
privacy policies are effective at ensuring consumers have meaningful notice and 
choice/control over the use of their data (Leon et al., 2012; Sanger & Lohr, 2014). 
In fact, consumers appear apathetic in regard to privacy information offered, par-
ticularly when considering entertainment technologies, such as a shopping web-
site or Snapchat. For example, Snapchat users were asked if they knew their snaps 
could be captured and saved. Almost 80 percent of the consumers queried said 
they knew that snaps could be captured and just over half noted that they did not 
care (Roesner, Gill, & Kohno, 2014).
This example magnifies the notion that consumers do want control over their 
personal information in a digital context but often do not use the various con-
trol mechanisms offered to them by advertisers or brands (such as opt in/opt out 

Digital Advertising and Privacy  305
functions) (Milne & Rohm, 2000; Miyazaki & Fernandez, 2000; Milne & Culnan, 
2002; Malhotra, Kim, & Agarwal, 2004; Okazaki, Li, & Hirose, 2009). The desire 
and ability to control ones’ data requires knowledge and self-efficacy in the area of 
data collection and use online. The literature suggests consumers’ lack of knowl-
edge is linked to a lack of trust in the advertising that results from such collection 
(McDonald & Cranor, 2010). Additionally, some research suggests that consumers 
are likely to change their behaviors online upon realizing how data is collected 
and used to create tailored messages (Milne, Rohm, & Bahl, 2009). However, 
other research notes that higher belief in one’s ability to control data online actu-
ally led to sharing more sensitive information (Brandimarte, Acquisti, & Loewen-
stein, 2013). The digital context is cluttered with advertising (see Chapter 5), so 
it is up to advertising scholars to understand how consumers navigate this clutter, 
and how data privacy and data management may be improved within a cluttered 
space (see Shoenberger & McNealy, 2016).
Another important factor is that of convenience. Consumer perceptions of 
convenience may vary depending on the context, and convenience is considered 
one of the most influential variables driving online shopping and engagement 
with activities in the digital context (Jiang, Yang, & Jun, 2013). In fact, conveni-
ence has been said to overshadow feelings of risk when engaging with online 
shopping (Bhatnagar, Misra, & Rao, 2000). Though consumers noted their con-
cern about sending credit card and other personal information over the internet 
to shop online or participate in “for-pay” activities, the convenience of engaging 
in activities online outweighed those concerns (Horrigan, 2008). It is well estab-
lished that consumers are often willing to exchange certain information for the 
benefits of free content or other kind of benefit (Milne & Gordon, 1993). In other 
words, they are willing to trade privacy for access to content (Calo, 2015). What 
other shortcuts do they rely on to navigate the digital context?
The use of cues in the digital context is paramount as consumers, with the 
desire for convenience, navigate a sea of information. This is especially true in 
the digital context (Mayer, Huh, & Cude, 2005; Sundar, 2008; Shoenberger & 
McNealy, 2016). Research on the use of heuristics or peripheral processing shows 
that most consumers do not engage in careful, cognitive processing to evaluate 
information and, instead, use design cues and website usability to make decisions 
about credibility of websites (Metzger, Flanagin, & Medders, 2010). In fact, “site 
presentation” is the first visual quality of a website that consumers use to deter-
mine credibility (Metzger et al., 2010, p. 416). Thus, there is an important link 
between visual aesthetics and perceived credibility (Robins & Holmes, 2008).
This is why researchers called for privacy logos early in the privacy and digi-
tal advertising context because they were believed to be important cues of trust 
given that people were not likely to read an entire policy online (Mayer, Huh, & 
Cude, 2005). Research confirmed the psychological link between logos and trust, 
finding that when people see a familiar logo (e.g., TRUSTe) they assume the site 
or app is safe without the provision of any additional investigation (Miyazaki & 

306  Shoenberger
Krishnamurthy, 2002; Mayer, Huh, & Cude, 2005; LaRose & Rifon, 2007; Shoen-
berger & McNealy, 2016). However, the existence of a logo may mean very little 
in reality, and the privacy policy underneath the logo may not offer any substantial 
protection. The challenging paradox of consumer desire for control over their 
data but lack of action with regard to that control is an interesting puzzle for 
regulators and researchers.
Conclusion
The concerns of data curation and manipulation by advertisers to provide tai-
lored advertising to consumers is problematic, first of all, because of the consumer 
privacy paradox. That is, consumers seem to desire (even ask for) greater pri-
vacy and greater control over their privacy online but frequently (and sometimes 
freely) give out personal information to brands that request it. As we have seen in 
this chapter, there is much public concern over who controls the almost infinite 
amount of data generated in the communication digital network. At the same 
time, there is clear evidence that when people are in the network, they often 
divulge information without checking on how it will be used. Researchers and 
others have also pointed out how important it is in the digital marketplace to 
maintain consumer trust in the information and transactions they are presented 
with (Malhotra, Kim, & Agarwal, 2004; Richards & Hartzog, 2015).
This issue is further complicated when considering that search engines like 
Google, and social media sites, like Facebook, are becoming more and more adept 
at collecting, storing, and analyzing data. Although the algorithms these com-
panies use are proprietary, it is clear that they are built on massive and detailed 
knowledge of what people are doing when they are in the digital communication 
network (see Chapter 2), and probably a lot of what they are doing outside their 
digital participation. Already a “creepy factor” exists for advertisements that follow 
people around on the internet based on previous search behavior (Sloane, 2015, 
n.p.). The question of how far companies should go with targeted advertising 
using the vast amount of data collected on consumer behavior online will loom 
large in the future (Sloane, 2015).
With respect to findings of consumer behavior in the privacy arena, future 
research must seek to find a way to understand what types of information being 
collected may harm consumers and with what effects. Additionally, based on con-
sumer reliance on cues and their need for convenience in the digital context, 
more research is needed to discover how and when privacy policies/icons are 
processed and used by consumers.
Advertisers and regulators may seek to create uniform policies related to the 
type of information collected, perhaps to give consumers a visual cue of what 
the language of the policy contains without having to click through and digest 
a policy. Further research is needed to examine whether the implementation of 
more uniform policies delineated by icon type or color may decrease indications 
of privacy anxiety for consumers and increase social trust.

Digital Advertising and Privacy  307
References
Barnes, S. J. (2002). Wireless digital advertising: Nature and implications. International Journal 
of Advertising, 21(3), 399–420.
Beldad, A., De Jong, M., & Steehouder, M. (2010). How shall I trust the faceless and the 
intangible? A literature review on the antecedents of online trust. Computers in Human 
Behavior, 26(5), 857–869.
Bernstein, J. (2016). You should probably check your Pokemon Go privacy settings. Buzz-
Feed. Retrieved from https://www.buzzfeed.com/josephbernstein/heres-all-the-data- 
pokemon-go-is-collecting-from-yourphone?bffbmain&ref=bffbmain&utm_term=.gxW4 
E8169#.smLEJBWM.
Bhatnagar, A., Misra, S., & Rao, H. R. (2000). On risk, convenience, and Internet shopping 
behavior. Communications of the ACM, 43(11), 98–105.
Brandimarte, L., Acquisti, A., & Loewenstein, G. (2013). Misplaced confidences privacy and 
the control paradox. Social Psychological and Personality Science, 4(3), 340–347.
Burlacu, A. (2016). Facebook allegedly tracks phones’ location to serve friend suggestions: 
How to turn this off. TechTimes.com. Retrieved from http://www.techtimes.com/arti 
cles/167397/20160629/facebook-allegedly-tracks-phones-location-to-serve-friend-
suggestions-how-to-turn-this-off.htm.
Calo, R. (2015). Privacy and markets: A  love story. Notre Dame Law Review, 91, 649. 
Retrievable from http://heinonline.org/HOL/LandingPage?handle=hein.journals/
tndl91&div=19&id =&page=
Federal Trade Commission. (2007). FTC staff proposes online behavioral advertising privacy 
principles. Retrieved from https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-releases/2007/12/
ftc-staff-proposes-online-behavioral-advertising-privacy.
Horrigan, J. (2008). Online shopping. Retrieved from http://www.pewinternet.org/ 
2008/02/13/online-shopping/
Jiang, L., Yang, Z., & Jun, M. (2013). Measuring consumer perceptions of online shopping 
convenience. Journal of Service Management, 24(2), 191–214.
Joinson, A. N., Reips, U. D., Buchanan, T., & Schofield, C. B. P. (2010). Privacy, trust, and 
self-disclosure online. Human-Computer Interaction, 25(1), 1–24.
Kang, J. (1998). Information privacy in cyberspace transactions. Stanford Law Review, 50(4), 
1193–1294.
LaRose, R., & Rifon, N. J. (2007). Promoting i-safety: Effects of privacy warnings and 
privacy seals on risk assessment and online privacy behavior. Journal of Consumer Affairs, 
41(1), 127–149.
Leon, P., Ur, B., Shay, R., Wang, Y., Balebako, R., & Cranor, L. (2012). Why Johnny can’t opt 
out: A usability evaluation of tools to limit online behavioral advertising. In Proceedings 
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 589–598). ACM.
Malhotra, N. K., Kim, S. S., & Agarwal, J. (2004). Internet users’ information privacy con-
cerns (IUIPC): The construct, the scale, and a causal model. Information Systems Research, 
15(4), 336–355.
Mayer, R. N., Huh, J., & Cude, B. J. (2005). Cues of credibility and price performance of 
life insurance comparison web sites. Journal of Consumer Affairs, 39(1), 71–94.
McDonald, A., & Cranor, L. F. (2010, August). Beliefs and behaviors: Internet users’ under-
standing of behavioral advertising. TPRC. Retrieved from http://aleecia.com/authors-
drafts/tprc-behav-AV.pdf.
Metzger, M. J. (2007). Making sense of credibility on the Web: Models for evaluating online 
information and recommendations for future research. Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science and Technology, 58(13), 2078–2091.

308  Shoenberger
Metzger, M. J., Flanagin, A. J., & Medders, R. B. (2010). Social and heuristic approaches to 
credibility evaluation online. Journal of Communication, 60(3), 413–439.
Milne, G. R., & Culnan, M. J. (2002). Using the content of online privacy notices to inform 
public policy: A longitudinal analysis of the 1998–2001 US Web surveys. The Information 
Society, 18(5), 345–359.
Milne, G. R., & Gordon, M. E. (1993). Direct mail privacy-efficiency trade-offs within an 
implied social contract framework. Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 12(2), 206–215.
Milne, G. R., & Rohm, A. J. (2000). Consumer privacy and name removal across direct 
marketing channels: Exploring opt-in and opt-out alternatives. Journal of Public Policy & 
Marketing, 19(2), 238–249.
Milne, G. R., Labrecque, L. I., & Cromer, C. (2009). Toward an understanding of the online 
consumer’s risky behavior and protection practices. Journal of Consumer Affairs, 43(3), 
449–473.
Milne, G. R., Rohm, A., & Bahl, S. (2009). If it’s legal, is it acceptable? Journal of Advertising, 
38(4), 107–122.
Miyazaki, A. D., & Fernandez, A. (2000). Internet privacy and security: An examination of 
online retailer disclosures. Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 19(1), 54–61.
Miyazaki, A. D., & Krishnamurthy, S. (2002). Internet seals of approval: Effects on online 
privacy policies and consumer perceptions. Journal of Consumer Affairs, 36(1), 28–49.
Moringiello, J. M. (2014). Notice, assent, and form in a 140 character world. Southwestern 
Law Review, 44, 275.
Nicks, D. (2016). Facebook might be using your location to suggest friends: Here’s how to 
make sure it doesn’t. Money.com. Retrieved from http://time.com/money/4386138/
facebook-friend-suggestions-privacy-concerns/.
Norberg, P. A., Horne, D. R., & Horne, D. A. (2007). The privacy paradox: Personal informa-
tion disclosure intentions versus behaviors. Journal of Consumer Affairs, 41(1), 100–126.
Okazaki, S., Li, H., & Hirose, M. (2009). Consumer privacy concerns and preference for 
degree of regulatory control. Journal of Advertising, 38(4), 63–77.
Pavlou, P. A. (2003). Consumer acceptance of electronic commerce: Integrating trust and 
risk with the technology acceptance model. International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 
7(3), 101–134.
Podesta, J., Pritzker, P., Moniz, E., Holdren, J., & Zients, J. (2014). Big data seizing oppor-
tunities, preserving values. Executive Office of the President. Retrieved from http://www.
whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/big_data_privacy_report_may_1_2014.pdf.
Richards, N. M.,  & Hartzog, W. (2015). Taking trust seriously in privacy law. SSRN. 
Retrieved from http://ssrn.com/abstract=2655719.
Robins, D., & Holmes, J. (2008). Aesthetics and credibility in web site design. Information 
Processing & Management, 44(1), 386–399.
Roesner, F., Gill, B. T., & Kohno, T. (2014, March). Sex, lies, or kittens? Investigating the use 
of Snapchat’s self-destructing messages. In International Conference on Financial Cryptogra-
phy and Data Security (pp. 64–76). Berlin Heidelberg: Springer.
Sanger, D., & Lohr, S. (2014). Call for limits of web data on consumers. The New York Times. 
Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/02/us/white-house-report-calls-
for-transparency-in-online-data-collection.html?_r=0.
Schlosser, A. E., White, T. B., & Lloyd, S. M. (2006). Converting web site visitors into buy-
ers: How web site investment increases consumer trusting beliefs and online purchase 
intentions. Journal of Marketing, 70(2), 133–148.
Shield Jr., J. J. (2014). Apple, Inc. v. Superior Court: Caveat emptor: The future of online 
credit card transactions. DePaul Business & Commercial Law Journal, 13, 529.

Digital Advertising and Privacy  309
Shoenberger, H., & McNealy, J. (2016). Offline v. online: Re-examining the reasonable 
consumer standard in the digital context. Retrieved from https://www.ftc.gov/system/
files/documents/public_comments/2015/10/00046-98087.pdf.
Sloane, G. (2015). 2016 year in preview: Ad targeting toes the creepy line. Digiday.com. Retrieved 
from http://digiday.com/brands/2016yearinpreview-targeting-ads-get-lot-creepier/
Solove, D. J. (2006). A taxonomy of privacy. University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 154(3), 
477–564.
Solove, D. J., & Hartzog, W. (2014). The FTC and the new common law of privacy. Colum-
bia Law Review, 114, 583–676.
Sullivan, D. (2002). How search engines work. Search Engine Watch. Retrieved from http://
www. searchenginewatch.com/webmasters/work.html.
Sundar, S. S. (2008). The MAIN model: A  heuristic approach to understanding tech-
nology effects on credibility. In M. J. Metzger & A. J. Flanagin (Eds.), Digital media, 
youth, and credibility (pp. 73–100). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, doi: 10.1162/
dmal.9780262562324.073.
Sutton, K. (2016). With news feed values, Facebook pushes back against bias claims.  
Politico.com. Retrieved from http://www.politico.com/media/story/2016/06/with- 
news-feed-values-facebook-pushes-back-against-bias-claims-004634.
Turow, J., King, J., Hoofnagle, C. J., Bleakley, A., & Hennessy, M. (2009). Americans reject 
tailored advertising and three activities that enable it. SSRN 1478214. Retrievable from 
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1478214.
Warren, S. D., & Brandeis, L. D. (1890). The right to privacy. Harvard Law Review, 4(5), 
193–220.
Westin, A. F. (1967). Privacy and freedom. Washington and Lee Law Review, 25(1), 166.
Yap, J. E., Beverland, M. B., & Bove, L. L. (2009). A conceptual framework of the causes 
and consequences of the privacy paradox. In The Australian and New Zealand Marketing 
Academy Conference.

Introduction
Digital games are firmly ingrained in our culture. From the 1970s onwards, they  
have evolved into an extremely popular entertainment medium that is able to 
attract interest across genders, age groups, and cultures. In 2015, the global games 
industry generated software revenues of just over $80 billion; numbers are expected 
to rise even further, to $104 billion, by the end of 2018 (Juniper Research, 2015). 
Given this explosive growth, in-game advertising has emerged as a promising new 
advertising medium, sparking the interest of the advertising industry, game sec-
tor, and academic research. The aim of this chapter is twofold. First, it intends to 
give an introduction to this practice of in-game advertising: providing a defini-
tion, an overview of its benefits and drawbacks, and an outline of the (industry-
commissioned and academic) research that has been conducted on its effectiveness. 
Second, it will bring together the gathered information and illustrate the potential 
impact of in-game advertising by drawing on a case study (Herrewijn, 2015). This 
case study was designed to investigate player responses toward different types of 
advertisements that are integrated into a digital game, with a focus on the inter-
activity they allow.
In-game advertising (IGA) concerns the incorporation of advertisements into 
the environment of a digital game, a practice similar to the integration of product 
placements in movies or television shows (Herrewijn & Poels, 2014). IGA can take 
a lot of different forms, ranging from sponsorship deals to the use of real-world 
analogs (e.g., banner ads such as billboards and posters, radio spots, television com-
mercials), brand placements (e.g., branded cars, clothing, food and drinks, build-
ings, accessories), branded music and sounds (e.g., the use of branded music, brand 
sound effects, the voices of licensed characters and sports commentators), branded 
18
EXPLORING PLAYER RESPONSES 
TOWARD IN-GAME ADVERTISING
The Impact of Interactivity
Laura Herrewijn and Karolien Poels

Player Responses to In-Game Advertising  311
characters (e.g., the use of mascots, celebrities), etc. (for an elaborate overview, 
see Herrewijn & Poels, 2014). Some of these placements merely appear as part of 
the game’s scenery, serving as passive background props, while other placements 
can be meaningfully interacted with and constitute a major part of the player’s 
gameplay (e.g., when the player has to actively use a brand in order to progress 
in the game) (Nelson, 2005; Skalski, Bracken, & Buncher, 2010). For instance, a 
large percentage of sports games are produced from licensed properties. Sport-
ing leagues such as the International Federation of Association Football license 
sports games yearly, i.e., the FIFA game series (Electronic Arts, 1993–2015), and in 
these games, billboards for real products are placed around the sports stadium, the 
athletes’ clothes are adorned with the logos of sponsors, and the voices of well-
known sports commentators are heard in the background. Moreover, in racing 
games such as the Need For Speed series (Electronic Arts, 1994–2015), there are 
not only billboards placed around the race tracks, players can further choose from, 
and race with, a large range of real-world cars (including cars from Audi, Alfa 
Romeo, BMW, Ford, Honda, Jaguar, Nissan, Porsche, Toyota, Volkswagen, etc.).
It is important to note, however, that, unlike advergames (i.e., digital games 
that are specially made to promote a certain brand and thus act as de-facto ads in 
themselves), when IGA is incorporated in a digital game, the main purpose of the 
game remains the entertainment of the player and not the communication of the 
brand message (Herrewijn & Poels, 2014).
In-Game Advertising: Benefits and Drawbacks
From the early 2000s on, both the advertising industry and academia have been 
showing explicit and increasing interest in IGA, citing that digital games offer a 
wide variety of opportunities and benefits for the inclusion of advertisements.
For advertisers, the appeal of IGA lies first and foremost in the ability of digital 
games to reach an ever growing, diverse audience. Digital gaming has become 
one of the fastest growing and most popular forms of entertainment ( Juniper 
Research, 2015). There is a global audience of over half a billion people playing 
digital games, and best-selling games such as World of Warcraft, Call of Duty: Mod-
ern Warfare 3, and Grand Theft Auto V have been among the highest revenue- 
generating entertainment products ever. Moreover, games have surpassed their 
status as being a pastime for adolescent boys and have grown into a mainstream 
medium that touches every segment of the population. According to the Enter-
tainment Software Association (2015), 42  percent of U.S. citizens play digital 
games on a regular basis (three hours or more per week), 44 percent of all game 
players are women, and the average game player is 35 years old and has been play-
ing games for 13 years.
Additionally, digital games are potentially interesting vehicles for the integra-
tion of advertising because they possess several unique characteristics that can 
give them advantages over other advertising media (e.g., print, radio, television, 

312  Herrewijn and Poels
movies, the internet) (Nelson, 2002; Chambers, 2005). First of all, digital games 
have the benefit of a long shelf life and high replay value. Games typically take 
between 10 and 200 hours to complete, meaning that the chance of repeated 
and extensive exposure to integrated advertising is considerably high (Internet 
Advertising Bureau, 2007).
Additionally, where other media are often suffering from a lack of focused 
attention, games continue to demand more concentration (Internet Advertising 
Bureau, 2007). External stimuli can distract people from paying complete atten-
tion to medium content. People are often multitasking, eating, reading, talking, 
or doing household tasks while also consuming content from multiple media 
at the same time. For instance, it is possible, and not uncommon, for people to 
watch television while also catching up with their family members, eating dinner, 
checking their email, and/or surfing the internet on their laptop or mobile device. 
Gaming, however, is different. It is a medium where if the audience is not focused, 
there will be consequences for their progress in-game. In the majority of cases, if 
people are not concentrating while playing a game, there is a good chance that 
their performance will suffer, resulting in lower game scores and maybe even the 
death of their game character (Internet Advertising Bureau, 2007).
Further, it is more difficult to skip, block, or avoid the advertisements that are 
integrated as part of the game environment. Lately, popular advertising media such 
as television and the internet are increasingly disadvantaged by the emergence 
of technology and software that enables people to avoid advertising (Chambers, 
2005). People can record movies or television programs using their digital video 
recorders (DVRs) and fast-forward through, or simply remove, commercials while 
watching these programs later on. Moreover, content filtering and ad-blocking 
software are becoming more and more popular among the internet-using popu-
lation (Chambers, 2005). For example, ad block plugins are some of the most 
popular internet browser extensions worldwide. These plugins prevent advertise-
ments from being displayed all over the web and currently count over 198 million 
users (PageFair & Adobe, 2015). Consequently, practices where advertisements 
are programmed within the entertainment context, such as product placement 
in television programs, movies, and games (i.e., IGA), offer advertisers the chance 
of promoting their brands in an environment where users cannot blatantly avoid 
them (Herrewijn, 2015).
Throughout the years, IGA has also advanced from a very static toward a more 
dynamic advertising medium (Schneider & Cornwell, 2005; Internet Advertising 
Bureau, 2007). In the beginning, IGA was hard-coded into a game in its develop-
ment stage, resulting in static ads that could never be changed or updated once 
the game was released. However, from the mid-2000s onwards, IGA has become 
much more flexible. Due to the online capabilities of modern digital games, adver-
tisements can now be dynamically embedded into games. Access to the internet 
enables advertisers to dynamically place and alter ad units in games and gather 
gameplay statistics. This way, ads do not have to be integrated in games in the form 

Player Responses to In-Game Advertising  313
of static, unchanging images anymore but can be delivered and updated in-game 
based on multiple criteria, such as date, time of day, ad frequency, and players’ 
demographic, regional, and gamer profile, providing brand campaigns with a great 
amount of flexibility (Schneider & Cornwell, 2005; Internet Advertising Bureau, 
2007).
Finally, games can offer brands the opportunity to become an integral part of 
the digital game experience, reaching out to players in a highly vivid, interactive, 
and immersive entertainment environment. First of all, while other media rely 
primarily on one or two sensory channels (visual and/or auditory), digital games 
are able to produce a sensorial rich and vivid environment that is capable of pre-
senting information to additional senses. Haptic technology, for instance, allows 
players to receive kinesthetic and tactile cues while playing a digital game, ena-
bling them to feel vibrations in their game controllers when their game characters 
take damage or when their racing car collides with an obstacle, providing a sense 
of danger (Nelson, 2005). Moreover, digital games are an interactive medium that 
requires an active audience. They give players the ability to control their own 
actions and perceptions: players do not just observe a car race across the screen; 
they actively control it, feeling its speed, maneuvering it between obstacles and 
opponents (Nelson, Keum, & Yaros, 2004).
Lastly, digital games offer players a highly immersive experience; they provide 
a particular form of mediated experience that is able to create the feeling of being 
drawn into the game world represented on-screen (Calleja, 2011). These charac-
teristics provide new and interesting ways to interact with the game environment 
altogether (Nelson, 2005), but more importantly, they offer a unique opportunity 
for the integration of advertisements; high degrees of player interactivity, immer-
sion, and vividness can make players feel as if they are first-hand controlling and 
interacting with a brand in a lively and exciting environment (Nelson et al., 2004).
Advertisers are not the only party that can potentially benefit from IGA though. 
The practice is also attractive to game companies because it offers an additional 
revenue stream to subsidize the rising game development costs beyond the tra-
ditional model of revenue from retail sales (Chambers, 2005; Internet Advertis-
ing Bureau, 2007; Boyd & Lalla, 2009). This ultimately also benefits the gamer as 
end-user. Digital games are more and more expensive to make, but game players 
have not felt this increase; due to alternative revenue streams such as IGA, the 
retail prices of games have remained relatively static (Chambers, 2005; Internet 
Advertising Bureau, 2007; Boyd & Lalla, 2009). Finally, if the advertising fits natu-
rally in the game and does not interrupt the player’s game experience, it can even 
make the virtual environment more realistic and immersive (Internet Advertising 
Bureau, 2007).
Despite its promising new branding opportunities and growth potential, how-
ever, IGA also faces several obstacles. The most obvious manifestation of this can 
be found in the rise and subsequent fall of several IGA-related companies dur-
ing the last decade. In the early- to mid-2000s, several companies were founded 

314  Herrewijn and Poels
that focused exclusively on offering IGA services, such as Massive Incorporated 
(Microsoft), Adscape Media (Google), IGA Worldwide, and Double Fusion. By 
the end of 2010, however, the majority of these companies ceased to exist. This 
development can be primarily attributed to two factors.
First of all, both advertisers and game companies have been struggling with the 
audience’s negative reactions toward IGA they deem to be too intrusive. Gamers 
are extremely protective of their passion. If they disapprove of the commercial 
messages within their favorite games (e.g., when the advertisements do not fit 
within the context of the game, disrupt their game experience, or simply start 
to annoy them), they will voice their discontent among the widespread gam-
ing community, potentially resulting in consumer backlash or a negative impact on 
the popularity and sales of both the game and the incorporated brands (Internet 
Advertising Bureau, 2007; Shields, 2012).
Moreover, many advertisers still do not fully embrace digital games as a via-
ble advertising vehicle because of the continuing difficulties in determining and 
optimizing the advertisements’ effectiveness (Nelson, 2002; Internet Advertising 
Bureau, 2007; Boyd & Lalla, 2009; Shields, 2012). IGA and its effectiveness have 
attracted the attention of both industry-commissioned and academic research, 
which have repeatedly looked at the impact of IGA on people’s cognitive response 
(i.e., brand awareness), affective (i.e., brand evaluation), and conative responses 
(i.e., purchase intention, buying behavior) to the brand(s) (Nelson, 2005; Skalski 
et al., 2010). However, most of these studies have produced mixed (and often 
contradictory) results.
In-Game Advertising Effectiveness
According to several industry-commissioned studies carried out by Nielsen 
Entertainment, IGA in sports and racing games helps to drive brand awareness 
and is able to significantly change consumer opinions in a positive way (Acti-
vision, 2005; Microsoft Corporation, 2007; GamesIndustry International, 2008). 
Research results show that average brand recall rates are considerably higher, with 
brands being spontaneously recalled by more than 40  percent of participants. 
Moreover, these industry reports state that a high percentage of gamers show a 
more favorable attitude toward the brands and ads after playing the game, and that 
in general, participants do not mind IGA and even think it contributes to the real-
ism of the game (Activision, 2005; Microsoft Corporation, 2007; GamesIndustry 
International, 2008). For example, in a research study conducted by Nielsen on 
behalf of IGA Worldwide, 82 percent of participants felt that games were just as 
enjoyable with ads as without, and there was a 61 percent increase in consumers’ 
favorable opinions toward the brands advertised in-game (GamesIndustry Inter-
national, 2008).
Another study of Nielsen in collaboration with Electronic Arts builds on these 
results and expands them even further by studying the impact of in-game ads 

Player Responses to In-Game Advertising  315
occurring in several sports games in a large-scale field experiment. Using its con-
sumer panel of 100,000 U.S. households, Nielsen found that IGA also influences 
buying habits. The study focused on households that purchased at least one of 
six EA Sports games containing a variety of product placements of the brand 
Gatorade and compared them with households that did not purchase any of these 
games. Results show that the advertising integrated into the games increased 
household dollars spent on Gatorade by 24 percent (Guzman, 2010).
These Nielsen Entertainment studies have to be interpreted with caution 
though, since it concerns research by and in the interest of the industry. However, 
not only the industry has shown a growing interest in IGA research; academic 
studies have also increasingly turned their attention to the effectiveness of IGA 
in recent years.
In the first published academic study on IGA, Nelson (2002) explored the 
effectiveness of placing advertisements in racing games in two experimental stud-
ies. Participants were asked which brands they spontaneously recalled immedi-
ately after gameplay and after a delay of five months. On average, players were 
able to recall 25 to 30 percent of brands in the short-term and 10 to 15 percent 
in the long-term. However, results differed greatly depending on the type of IGA 
(e.g., passive billboard versus interactive product placement) and the type of brand 
(e.g., local versus (inter)national, relevant versus irrelevant) that were employed.
Since then, academic research has focused on the effectiveness of IGA in a 
wide variety of game genres and situations. Results of these studies have been 
mixed. Chaney et al. (2004), for example, looked at IGA effects in a first-person 
shooter game and observed brand recall rates that were rather low. Participants 
generally recalled going past billboards in the game, but they had little memory 
for the brands that were featured on them. More specifically, the brands that were 
integrated were only recalled by 5 to 20 percent of the participants. Further, the 
in-game ads had a very limited effect on players’ purchase intentions of the fea-
tured brands. These findings oppose those of Mau, Silberer, and Constien (2008), 
however, who also looked at the effectiveness of advertising inside a first-person 
shooter game and found recall rates that were considerably higher. In their study, 
68 percent of participants could recall the integrated brands correctly. Participants’ 
attitudes toward the integrated brands depended greatly on the players’ familiarity 
with the integrated brands; attitudes toward an unfamiliar brand were enhanced, 
while attitudes toward a familiar brand deteriorated.
Academic analyses such as these offer a more nuanced view on the practice 
of IGA than the one publicized by the industry; they show that the integration 
of IGA is a complicated matter that is subject to a wide variety of characteristics. 
Findings often parallel the results of research looking at the effectiveness of adver-
tising in other media (e.g., print, television, and the internet), which has repeatedly 
demonstrated that ad effectiveness is dependent on a multitude of characteristics 
related to the advertisement (e.g., the type of brand that is featured, the promi-
nence of the brand), the audience (e.g., gender, age, culture, prior experience 

316  Herrewijn and Poels
with the medium), and the advertising context (e.g., the type of vehicle that is 
used, the amount of congruity between the context and the ad, a person’s social 
environment, his subjective responses in reaction to the medium content) (Moor-
man, 2003).
Many of these factors have been shown to be of importance when examin-
ing the effectiveness of IGA as well (for an elaborate overview, see Herrewijn & 
Poels, 2014). For instance, concerning the characteristics of the advertisement 
that is integrated into the game, research has shown that IGA effectiveness greatly 
depends on the type of brand (e.g., local versus international brands) and the 
prominence of the brand placement (e.g., central versus peripheral location) that 
is being integrated. Furthermore, several studies argue that IGA effects are not 
only a function of the ad itself, since IGA is not encountered in a vacuum by 
a passive audience; the characteristics of the player, like his prior level of game 
experience, also seem to play an important role. Finally, research has demonstrated 
that the characteristics of the context in which the advertisement is embedded 
or encountered are crucial in light of its effectiveness as well, with examples 
including the congruity of the game and the ad (e.g., low versus high), the social 
setting in which the game is played (e.g., alone versus together with others), and 
the player’s subjective experience during gameplay (e.g., enjoyment, immersion) 
(Herrewijn & Poels, 2014).
Theoretical Models
Academics studying IGA and its effectiveness generally use several theoretical 
models to ground their research. Two theoretical models are of particular impor-
tance when studying the impact of commercial messages in the context of digi-
tal games, namely, the limited capacity model of motivated mediated message 
processing (Lang, 2009) and the excitation transfer model (Zillman, Katcher, & 
Milavsky, 1972).
The limited capacity model of motivated mediated message processing 
(LC4MP) states that a person’s ability to process information is limited, with 
people having access to only a limited pool of cognitive resources at a particular 
time (Lang, 2009). More specifically, the model implies that when people are 
oversaturated with stimuli, their processing capabilities (i.e., the encoding, stor-
age, and retrieval of information) will diminish (Lang, 2009). This has important 
implications for the effectiveness of IGA in terms of brand awareness. Digital 
games are highly interactive and involve media that bombard the player with 
a multitude of tasks and stimuli that all vie for attention at the same time. Get-
ting a brand noticed and remembered in such an involving game context is not 
self-evident, since people allocate their cognitive resources to those aspects of an 
activity that are most relevant to them at a particular time, namely their primary 
task. In a digital game context, the primary task consists of actually playing the 
game; the player tries to process and act on the information that is most essential 

Player Responses to In-Game Advertising  317
Case Study: The Impact of Brand Interactivity
The previous section gave an overview of the different studies that 
have been conducted on the effectiveness of IGA, simultaneously 
showing which factors might influence effectiveness and which theo-
retical models have been used to ground IGA studies.
Next, we take a closer, more elaborate look at the mechanisms that 
might underlie the effectiveness of an advertisement integrated into 
the world of a digital game. Consequently, we present a case study 
in which we consider the impact of one factor, in particular, that can 
affect the way an in-game brand placement performs: its interactivity 
(Herrewijn, 2015).
As mentioned earlier, interactivity is a crucial factor to consider in a 
digital game context. It is one characteristic that distinguishes digital 
games from other, more passive media (e.g., print, television). By using 
an input device or game controller, players can exert agency over the 
actions and movements of their avatar in the game world (Calleja, 
2011): when they press a button (e.g., while playing computer or con-
sole games) or touch the screen (e.g., while playing mobile games), 
the game responds, and the avatar will act accordingly on the screen. 
They can control their avatar’s movements and perceptions, and make 
to his progression in the game (e.g., shooting enemies, driving a car as fast as pos-
sible in a race). Since people will focus their attention primarily on the playing of 
the game, this leaves fewer mental resources available for secondary tasks, such as 
the processing of advertisements that are embedded into the background of the 
game (Lang, 2009). The LC4MP (Lang, 2009) is, thus, of great importance when 
studying the player’s ability to cognitively process the advertising messages that are 
integrated into a digital game.
Furthermore, the excitation transfer model argues that affect evoked by one 
stimulus can transfer to, and even amplify, a person’s affective response to another 
stimulus (Zillman et al., 1972). In an advertising context, the excitation transfer 
model has been applied to explain a transfer of affect from medium content (e.g., 
a television program) to advertising that is encountered in its context (e.g., a tele-
vision commercial), influencing people’s evaluation of the ads and featured brands 
(Singh & Churchill, 1987; Yoo & MacInnis, 2005). The model is also believed 
to have implications for IGA. Advertisements in games are encountered inside 
the game and are seen as part of the game environment. When this environment 
induces a certain affective response (e.g., arousal, involvement), the valence of this 
response might subsequently transfer to the in-game ads as well.

318  Herrewijn and Poels
their own choices. Players do not just observe a predetermined chain 
of events as they unfold; they can actively participate in them and 
decide their outcome (Nelson, 2002; Nelson et al., 2004). This feed-
back loop between players and their avatar in the game world makes 
up a vital and indispensable part of the digital game experience; with-
out it, there would essentially be no game (Calleja, 2011).
The highly interactive environment offered by digital games also has 
important implications for IGA. Within such an environment, it becomes 
possible to let players interact with a brand in a meaningful way. Racing 
and sports games often contain a large range of branded vehicles and/
or clothing that the player can customize and compete with. Eating or 
drinking products and observing a certain effect on the player character 
(e.g., regaining a certain amount of health or energy points after drink-
ing a can of soda) is also commonplace in games, as is the integration 
of products that can be used as tools, accessories, or media (e.g., using 
a certain brand of cellphone to communicate with other players or non-
player characters). Finally, there have also been instances in which games 
let players actively engage with billboards, by unveiling more images and/
or information when the player touches or activates it (Herrewijn & Poels, 
2014). Such brand interactions can elevate a brand from being a mere 
background prop to being a major part of the player’s gameplay (Nelson, 
2005; Skalski et al., 2010). However, the impact of brand interactivity on 
the effectiveness of brand placements in terms of brand awareness and 
evaluations has barely been touched upon in academic research.
An exception is Nelson’s study (2002), which showed that vary-
ing degrees of brand interactivity could, indeed, have a significant 
impact on the effectiveness of IGA. She showed that in the context 
of a racing game, selecting and racing a branded car led to higher 
brand awareness than driving past passive billboards on the side of the 
road (Nelson, 2002). This finding can be framed in the context of the 
LC4MP (Lang, 2009) that was discussed earlier. Because the branded 
car constituted an essential part of the player’s gameplay (i.e., driving 
it was crucial to the player’s progress in the game), it was incorporated 
as a part of the player’s primary task. As such, the brand in question 
demanded more explicit attention, resulting in a more elaborate pro-
cessing. The passive billboards, on the other hand, were not imperative 
to the player’s headway in the game and therefore remained part of 
the player’s secondary task, receiving less attention.
Moreover, research shows that imagined interaction with a brand 
also leads to better brand attitudes. For instance, Escalas (2004) 

Player Responses to In-Game Advertising  319
Method and Rationale
To accomplish this goal, we designed an experiment in which we asked partici-
pants to play a digital game containing IGA for approximately 20 minutes. We 
worked with the computer version of the action role-playing game, Fallout: New 
Vegas. We used the game’s official editor to create our own game environment 
for use in the experiment. This made it possible to fully control the structuring of 
the gameplay (e.g., player perspective, spatial lay-out of the game level, game dif-
ficulty) and the creation and inclusion of IGA (e.g., types of brands, types of IGA, 
number of exposures) in the game environment, resulting in a highly authentic 
game scenario in which to analyze IGA effectiveness.
Within this game environment, we manipulated brand interactivity as a 
within-subjects factor. More specifically, we included two different types of IGA 
in the experimental game. We contrasted between brand placements that could be 
interacted with in order to gain an advantage in-game (and that thus constituted 
a central and active part of the player’s gameplay) on the one hand, and poster 
advertisements with a passive role on the other.
Because the original game makes use of advertising for fictitious food and 
drinks (e.g., “Nuka-Cola,” a soda brand), we decided to use these product catego-
ries as well. We chose to work with real brands that were unfamiliar to our experi-
mental population (since they are not available in their country of origin), namely 
“Mello Yello,” “Reese’s Pieces,” “Vernors,” and “Baby Ruth.” This was done to 
create a credible IGA scenario while avoiding effects of prior brand exposure or 
pre-existing brand attitudes. Familiarity with and attitudes toward the integrate 
brands were assessed beforehand, in a pre-test involving 43 people (32 male, 11 
female; Mage = 22.23, SDage = 4.02).
The brands “Mello Yello” and “Reese’s Pieces” were integrated as interactive 
brand placements (i.e., bottles of soda, boxes of candy) in the game. These product 
placements were scattered around the level (see Figure 18.1) and were available 
showed that when people imagine themselves using a product in a 
narrative context, they were distracted from its commercial nature and 
did not think critically about it. Moreover, in compliance with the exci-
tation transfer theory (Zillman et al., 1972), if the imagined interaction 
evoked positive feelings, those feelings get transferred to the adver-
tised product as well (Escalas, 2004). Surprisingly, this point-of-view 
has never been studied in an IGA setting before.
The goal of the current study was, therefore, to investigate the 
impact of brand interactivity on player responses toward IGA in greater 
detail, taking into account both brand awareness (i.e., brand recall, 
brand recognition) and brand evaluations (i.e., brand attitudes).

320  Herrewijn and Poels
FIGURE 18.1  The Interactive Brand Placements (“Mello Yello,” “Reese’s Pieces”) 
Integrated into the Game
from vending machines (see Figures 18.2 and 18.3). They could be picked up and 
consumed to gain health points (e.g., when the player got hurt). Since consuming 
these products was the only way to regain health in-game, people had to actively 
search for them and use them when needed. Moreover, the brands “Vernors” 
and “Baby Ruth” were integrated as passive poster ads, which were put against 
the walls of the game level (see Figure 18.4). Each brand was integrated into the 
experimental game level on six different locations and was encountered 7.25 
FIGURE 18.2  A Vending Machine for the Interactive Brand Placement “Mello Yello” 
Integrated into the Game

Player Responses to In-Game Advertising  321
FIGURE 18.3  A Vending Machine for the Interactive Brand Placement “Reese’s 
Pieces” Integrated into the Game
FIGURE 18.4  The Passive Brand Placements (“Vernors,” “Baby Ruth”) Integrated 
into the Game
times on average (SD = 1.73), with no significant differences in the number of 
exposures between the different brands (F(3, 162) = 2.35, p = .08).
When participants finished playing the game, they were asked to fill in a self-
report questionnaire. This questionnaire consisted of questions regarding the 
player experience (i.e., players’ pleasure and arousal during gameplay were meas-
ured by means of Lang’s (1980) 9-point self-assessment manikin), the effectiveness 

322  Herrewijn and Poels
of the in-game ads (i.e., brand awareness was assessed by measuring brand recall 
and brand recognition; brand evaluations were assessed by measuring brand atti-
tudes), and participants’ socio-demographic (e.g., gender, age), and play-related 
characteristics (e.g., prior game experience, game frequency).
Sixty-two people (57 male, 5 female) between 18 and 37 years old (M = 22.32, 
SD = 3.21) and of Belgian nationality participated in the experiment. Most of 
the participants were experienced gamers who had been playing digital games for 
six years or more (6 to 8 years: 22.6%, 9 years or more: 74.2%) and played games 
on a weekly or daily basis (weekly: 30.6%, daily: 64.5%). On average, participants 
experienced a fair amount of pleasure (M = 5.48, SD = 1.20) and a moderate 
amount of arousal (M = 3.77, SD = 2.05) during gameplay.
Results and Conclusions
The findings of the study show that, as expected, the manipulation of brand inter-
activity resulted in significant differences in brand awareness and brand attitudes, 
with the interactive brands attaining significantly higher awareness scores and 
attitudes than brands that were integrated in a passive way (see Table 18.1).
Concerning brand awareness, results show that the interactive product place-
ments were recalled (F(3, 174)  =  16.21, p < .001, η²  =  .22) and recognized 
(F(3, 183) = 23.53, p < .001, η² = .28) significantly better than their passive 
counterparts.
In the case of interactive brand placement “Mello Yello,” for instance, 27 per-
cent of the participants spontaneously recalled the brand, while 73 percent rec-
ognized the brand logo afterwards. Taking into account that people were not 
familiar with the brands prior to participation in the experiment and only played 
the game for a short period of time, memory for the interactive placements can 
be considered to be remarkably high. The brand awareness scores of the passive 
poster advertisements, on the other hand, were much lower. For instance, passive 
placement “Vernors” was recalled by no one, although its logo was later recog-
nized by 24 percent of the participants.
Additionally, we also found a significant difference in brand awareness between 
our two interactive brands, with “Mello Yello” attaining higher scores than 
“Reese’s Pieces.” This may have been a result of the way in which they were 
implemented into the game. Although both brands were integrated as interactive 
brand placements (i.e., bottles of soda, boxes of candy), they were also available 
from vending machines. The “Mello Yello” vending machine, however, featured an 
additional “Mello Yello” logo (see Figure 18.2), while the “Reese’s Pieces” vend-
ing machine did not (see Figure 18.3). Apart from the interactive nature of the 
brand placements, their prominence thus also seems to play an important role in 
determining their effectiveness.
Regarding brand awareness, the results are, therefore, in line with the study 
of Nelson (2002) discussed earlier, and offer further support for the theory put 

TABLE 18.1 The Impact of Brand Interactivity on IGA Effectiveness
Brand interactivity
Interactive brands
Passive brands
Mello Yello  
(a)
Reese’s Pieces  
(b)
Vernors  
(c)
Baby Ruth  
(d)
ANOVA
IGA Effectiveness
Mean (SD)
Mean (SD)
Mean (SD)
Mean (SD)
F
(df)
p
η²
Brand recall
.27 (.43)b,c,d
.09 (.27)a,c,d
.00 (.00)a,b
.02 (.13)a,b
16.21
(3, 174)
< .001
.22
Brand recognition
.73 (.45)b,c,d
.44 (.50)a,c,d
.24 (.43)a,b
.18 (.39)a,b
23.53
(3, 183)
< .001
.28
Brand attitude
3.37 (1.19)c
3.50 (1.10)c
2.98 (.92)a,b
3.14 (.92)
4.64
(3, 183)
.004
.07
Note. The results from Bonferonni post-hoc tests are indicated by the letters in superscript. Brand attitudes were measured by the means of three 7-point scales, with 0 
being very negative and 6 being very positive.

324  Herrewijn and Poels
forward by the LC4MP (Lang, 2009). That is, because the interactive brands make 
up an essential part of the gameplay, they are incorporated as a part of players’ pri-
mary task, demanding more explicit attention than the passive brands and result-
ing in more elaborate processing.
Furthermore, the interactive placements also attained significantly higher 
brand attitudes than the passive poster ads (F(3, 183) = 4.64, p = .004, η² = .07). 
Participants remained neutral toward the passive brands but reported slightly more 
positive attitudes toward the interactive brands. Again, considering that people 
were unfamiliar with the brands beforehand and only played the experimental 
game for approximately 20 minutes, this positive change in attitudes for the inter-
active brands is noteworthy. This finding is in line with the expectations formu-
lated by Escalas (2004) and the excitation transfer theory (Zillman et al., 1972). 
That is, interacting with a brand in a digital game context distracts players from its 
commercial nature, and if this interaction evokes positive feelings, these feelings 
can get transferred to the advertised brand as well.
In conclusion, the results of the study suggest that the integration of brand 
placements that can be meaningfully interacted with in-game is a far more effec-
tive IGA strategy than incorporating passive ads, both in terms of brand aware-
ness and brand evaluations. Playing digital games is an interactive experience that 
offers new and interesting ways for the integration of advertisements. When the 
player is able to interact with a brand in-game and has to actively use it in order 
to successfully finish the mission, the brand will be closely tied to the primary 
task, demanding more of the player’s attention and opening up possibilities for the 
transfer of positive feelings associated with the encounter. Brands that are simply 
used as props in a scene, however, are less meaningful to the player’s overall expe-
rience, resulting in lower brand recall, brand recognitions, and brand attitudes. It, 
therefore, seems best for advertisers to avoid the passive banner ad approach and 
work together with game developers to develop interactive approaches that give 
the player the opportunity to feel, control, and/or interact with the brand in crea-
tive ways.
References
Activision. (2005). Activision and Nielsen entertainment release results of pioneering 
research on in-game advertising. Retrieved from http://investor.activision.com/relea 
sedetail.cfm?releaseid=181109.
Boyd, G., & Lalla, V. (2009). Emerging issues in in-game advertising. Retrieved from http://
www.gamasutra.com/view/feature/3927/emerging_issues_in_ingame_.php.
Calleja, G. (2011). In-game: From immersion to incorporation. Cambridge, MA: London MIT 
Press.
Chambers, J. (2005). The sponsored avatar: Examining the present reality and future pos-
sibilities of advertising in digital games. In Proceedings of DiGRA 2005 Conference.
Chaney, I. M., Lin, K., & Chaney, J. (2004). The effect of billboards within the gaming 
environment. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 5(1), 54–69.

Player Responses to In-Game Advertising  325
Entertainment Software Association. (2015). 2015 Sales, demographic and usage data. 
Essential facts about the computer and video game industry. Retrieved from http://
www.theesa.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/ESA-Essential-Facts-2015.pdf.
Escalas, J. E. (2004). Imagine yourself in the product: Mental simulation, narrative transpor-
tation, and persuasion. Journal of Advertising, 33(2), 37–48.
GamesIndustry International. (2008). Landmark IGA-Nielsen study. Retrieved from 
http://www.gamesindustry.biz/articles/landmark-iga-nielsen-study—in-game-ads-
are-effective-and-well-received-by-the-gaming-community—it-transpires.
Guzman, G. (2010). Video game advertising: Playing to win. . . and sell. Retrieved from  
http://blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire/consumer/video-game-advertising-playing-to- 
win%E2%80%A6-and-sell/
Herrewijn, L. (2015). The effectiveness of in-game advertising: The role of ad format, game context 
and player involvement. Doctoral Dissertation. University of Antwerp.
Herrewijn, L., & Poels, K. (2014). Rated A for advertising: A critical reflection on in-
game advertising. In M. C. Angelides & H. Agius (Eds.), Handbook of digital games (pp. 
305–339). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-IEEE Press.
Internet Advertising Bureau. (2007). In-game advertising: The UK market. Retrieved from 
http://kaznowski.blox.pl/resource/IAB_ingame_advertising__the_UK_Market_
March_2007_1594.pdf.
Juniper Research. (2015). Digital games revenues to pass $100 billion per annum by 2018. Retrieved  
from http://www.juniperresearch.com/press/press-releases/digital-games-revenues-to- 
pass-$100-billion-per-an.
Lang, A. (2009). The limited capacity model of motivated mediated message processing. In 
R. L. Nabi & M. B. Oliver (Eds.), The SAGE handbook of media processes and effects (pp. 
193–204). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Lang, P. J. (1980). Behavioral treatment and bio-behavioral assessment: Computer applica-
tions. In J. B. Sidowski, J. H. Johnson, & T. A. Williams (Eds.), Technology in mental health 
care delivery systems (pp. 119–137). Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing.
Mau, G., Silberer, G., & Constien, C. (2008). Communicating brands playfully: Effects of 
in game advertising for familiar and unfamiliar brands. International Journal of Advertising, 
27(5), 827–851.
Microsoft Corporation. (2007). Massive study reveals in-game advertising increases average brand 
familiarity by up to 64 percent. Retrieved from http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/news/
press/2007/aug07/08–08InGameAdsPR.aspx.
Moorman, M. (2003). Context considered: The relationship between media environments and 
advertising effects. Doctoral Dissertation. Amsterdam: Universiteit van Amsterdam.
Nelson, M. R. (2002). Recall of brand placements in computer/video games. Journal of 
Advertising Research, 42(2), 80–92.
Nelson, M. R. (2005). Exploring consumer response to “advergaming.” In C. Haugtvedt, 
K. Machleit, & R. Yalch (Eds.), Online consumer psychology. Understanding and influencing 
consumer behavior in the virtual world (pp. 156–183). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, Inc.
Nelson, M. R., Keum, H., & Yaros, R. A. (2004). Advertainment or adcreep: Game play-
ers’ attitudes toward advertising and product placements in computer games. Journal of 
Interactive Advertising, 5(1), 3–21.
PageFair & Adobe. (2015). The cost of ad blocking. PageFair and Adobe 2015 ad blocking report. 
Retrieved from https://downloads.pagefair.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/2015_
report-the_cost_of_ad_blocking.pdf.

326  Herrewijn and Poels
Schneider, L., & Cornwell, B. T. (2005). Cashing in on crashes via brand placement in 
computer games: The effects of experience and flow on memory. International Journal of 
Advertising, 24(3), 321–343.
Shields, M. (2012). When it comes to ads in games, these guys aren’t playing around.  
Electronic arts is out to master the delicate dance of marketing and gaming. AdWeek.  
Retrieved from http://www.adweek.com/news/advertising-branding/when-it-comes-ads- 
games-these-guys-arent-playing-around-141158?page=1.
Singh, S. N., & Churchill, G. A. (1987). Arousal and advertising effectiveness. Journal of 
Advertising, 16(1), 4–40.
Skalski, P., Bracken, C. C., & Buncher, M. (2010). Advertising: It’s in the game. In M. S. 
Eastin, T. Daugherty, & N. M. Burns (Eds.), Handbook of research on digital media and 
advertising: User generated content consumption (pp. 437–455). Hershey, New York, NY: 
Information Science Reference.
Yoo, C., & MacInnis, D. J. (2005). The brand attitude formation process of emotional and 
informational ads. Journal of Business Research, 58(10), 1397–1406.
Zillman, D., Katcher, A. H., & Milavsky, B. (1972). Excitation transfer from physical exer-
cise to subsequent aggressive behavior. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 8(3), 
247–259.

Introduction
Advertisements—from traditional print, radio, and TV ads, to internet banners 
and online video advertisements—are placing increasing emphasis on emotional 
content. By creating ads that surprise, engage, and entertain, advertisers aim to 
create memorable content that will help consumers remember the product and 
build positive associations with the brand that trigger at the point of decision to 
purchase and ultimately drive sales. In today’s media landscape there are a number 
of additional benefits of emotional connections that were less prevalent in the 
past, including increasing the likelihood of pass-along sharing, message endorse-
ment, and brand “fandom.”
Advertisers have long striven to design ads that elicit emotion in viewers but 
have struggled to measure the extent to which they have been successful. Measur-
ing advertising efficacy is important to help avoid costly mistakes associated with 
publishing material that harms a brand; it is therefore critical to provide effective 
and efficient ways to measure emotional, in addition to cognitive, responses. This 
chapter will illustrate how new technology for measuring emotional responses has 
been applied to evaluating digital advertising effectiveness.
The appreciation of the role of emotions in advertising is not new. Zajonc 
(1980) argued that emotion can function independently of cognition and can, 
indeed, override it. Emotions have been posited to be markers, mediators, and 
moderators of consumer responses (Bagozzi, Gopinath,  & Nyer, 1999). Batra 
and Ray (1986) stressed the need to consider both the cognitive and affective 
aspects of responses to advertising, while Erevelles (1998) argued that advertising 
models that omit emotions do not adequately explain advertising effectiveness. 
Inevitably, advertisements will contain elements of both rational and emotional 
19
NEW METHODS FOR MEASURING 
ADVERTISING EFFICACY
Daniel McDuff

328  McDuff
content, even if their creators intended to emphasize one element over the other. 
Emotions have been shown to play a significant role in increasing brand liking 
(emotional rub-off) (Biel, 1990) and brand attitude (Russell, 2002), influencing 
favorability (Heath, Brandt, & Nairn, 2006), persuading consumers (Batra & Ray, 
1986; Johar, Maheswaran, & Peracchio, 2006), increasing respect and love (Rob-
erts, 2005; Pawle & Cooper, 2006), and predicting purchase intent toward a brand 
(Morris, Woo, Geason, & Kim, 2002). Moreover, the key to branding is build-
ing an emotional connection between consumers and a brand (Mehta & Purvis, 
2006). Emotions play a significant part in the decision-making process of purchas-
ing, and advertising is often seen as an effective source of enhancement of these 
emotional associations (Mehta & Purvis, 2006).
Cognitive responses to advertisements can be captured quite effectively via 
surveys. However, one caveat in considering the strength of findings related to 
emotion is that most of the measures have also been obtained from self-report 
questionnaires involving post-hoc cognitive reflection. While questionnaires are 
easy to administer, their accuracy about emotion can be unreliable. Post-hoc 
reporting of an earlier emotion can be influenced by the current (end-state) emo-
tion as well as by a person’s ability to map remembered, possibly complex, feelings 
to the various choices on the questionnaire, which tend to be simple descriptors 
(Fredrickson & Kahneman, 1993). Consequently, self-reported feelings may or 
may not accurately describe the truly experienced trajectory of visceral emotions.
The development of new technology now enables us to measure people’s 
physiological states and behaviors in a quantitative way. The technologies include 
the use of functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), electroencephalog-
raphy (EEG), eye-tracking (ET), electromyography (EMG), automated facial cod-
ing (FC), and other physiological sensors (for measuring electrodermal activity 
(EDA), heart rate (HR), and heart rate variability (HRV)). These techniques allow 
measurement of responses in real-time without requiring subjects to complete 
another task (as is the case with survey or dial measurement). However, the inter-
pretation of the data is often more challenging than with self-report responses. 
As an example, large individual differences in physiological parameters can exist. 
A person’s heart rate will be influenced by their overall physical condition, pos-
ture, and preceding activities, in addition to their emotional response to content 
they are viewing. An early survey of many techniques for quantitative measure-
ment of emotions in marketing research was published by Poels and Dewitte 
(2006). However, in the past decade, new measurement methods and frameworks 
have been developed and a great deal of new research has been performed.
In the past, the measurement of emotional responses to advertisements required 
subjects to be brought to a laboratory facility where experimenters could record 
their physiological or behavioral responses to content. The only alternative was 
for experimenters to travel to participants’ homes, an extra effort and consider-
able expense that helped achieve greater ecological validity. However, constraints 
related to travel, scheduling, and staffing limit the number of participants and the 

Measuring Advertising Efficacy  329
geographical area that can be included, making experiments unscalable. Studies 
using such methods typically included fewer than 100 participants from one city.
In recent years, new scalable methods for measuring emotional responses to 
advertisements have been developed. This chapter discusses these approaches and 
how they have been applied in measuring advertising efficacy. Particular emphasis 
is placed on quantitative, scalable approaches of capturing emotional responses. 
These methods allow experiments to be performed in-situ (e.g., in the subject’s 
home) and the passive capture of visceral responses to advertisements. Further-
more, they allow a broader and global demographic to be sampled than just those 
available in a close geographic locale; a global network of market research facili-
ties is not required as people can be reached via the internet. Large-scale emotion 
measurement approaches have great potential for extending our ability to measure 
advertising effectiveness and naturally complement more controlled laboratory 
testing.
The following chapter discusses recent research in digital advertising that has 
applied these new research methodologies and how the data collected are related 
to common advertising effectiveness measures including ad recall, purchase intent, 
ad likeability, and ad zapping. The chapter also presents future directions for this 
research and suggests how new research methods might be used to programmati-
cally deliver content based on emotional reactions in addition to being used for 
pre- and/or post-testing of advertisements.
Methods for Measuring Emotions and Engagement
As noted, the measurement of emotions in advertising is not a new concept. 
However, most methods for measuring emotional responses have relied on sub-
jects’ self-reports. Nevertheless, self-report is an imperfect measure of emotions. 
Emotions measured via behaviors, autonomic responses, and brain imaging 
solve several of the limitations associated with self-report by capturing changes 
related to emotion without cognitive bias and without interrupting one’s atten-
tion. Common physiological measures in advertising include measurements of 
facial expressions, skin conductance, and heart rate, to reflect people’s emotional 
changes in an objective way. In the following section, techniques are described for 
measuring emotional responses to advertisements.
Self-Report
Self-report methods remain the most commonly used means of measuring the 
efficacy of advertising, requiring essentially no training. Self-report includes ques-
tionnaires, verbal self-report, visual self-report, and moment-to-moment rating 
(such as turning a dial, or a pencil and paper approach, e.g., “warmth monitor” 
(Aaker, Stayman, & Hagerty, 1986)). Self-report is relatively simple, cheap, and 
quick. However, it is subject to bias from desire to please (or not) the interviewer, 

330  McDuff
as well as from comfort with the context and other factors unrelated to advertis-
ing interests (Aaker, Stayman, & Hagerty, 1986).
Visual self-report methods can make reporting emotions easier and remove 
some of the cognitive effort that is required in verbalizing emotions. Self Assess-
ment Mannequins (SAM) have proven to be a useful tool, with an advertising 
specific system (AD-SAM) being proposed (Morris et al., 2002). SAM uses a 
dimensional measure of emotions with axes of valence, arousal, and dominance. 
Another example of a visual self-report tool used in market research is an Emoti-
con approach for assessing emotional experience (Wood, 2012). These emoticons 
are images of facial expressions of discrete emotional states.
Dial methods allow subjects to report feelings continuously by turning a dial 
(or moving a slider, which is more common for web-based surveys). Continuous 
measurement is useful as emotions can change over time, and people may expe-
rience several “peaks” in emotional response when viewing an advertisement. 
In fact, many advertisements will have more than one scene that aims to elicit 
emotions.
However, it is becoming more and more apparent that self-report methods still 
have several weaknesses: 1) self-report methods (some more, some less) require the 
user to cognitively evaluate their experience; 2) subjects cannot easily perform 
another task at the same time, and their experience is interrupted; and 3) it is hard 
to get continuous measures of multiple states.
Eye Tracking
There is a sizeable body of literature using eye-tracking for assessing market-
ing effectiveness (Wedel & Pieters, 2008). Vision-based tracking systems allow 
the point of gaze of an individual to be estimated based on their eye position. 
Gaze patterns indicate whether people viewed a single point for a long time 
or viewed a range of points in quick succession. As an example, Teixeira, Wedel, 
and Pieters (2010) found that eye gaze patterns were linked to ad “zapping” 
behavior in an in-lab study. When focus was more consistent, subjects were less 
likely to “zap.”
Most eye-tracking studies are performed using commercially available hard-
ware systems, including a customized camera. However, eye-tracking solutions 
that utilize a standard webcam have been developed. These methods are less pre-
cise than eye-tracking solutions that use dedicated hardware. Even with some 
form of calibration, it remains challenging to isolate the point of gaze on a screen, 
in part because the position and dimensions of the screen and browser window 
are often not known but also because estimating eye positions and head pose 
with high accuracy is not trivial from a low resolution image. There remains lit-
tle published evidence of the efficacy of these webcam approaches. Nevertheless, 
they present the possibility of in-field eye-tracking studies that can be performed 
at scale.

Measuring Advertising Efficacy  331
Facial Analysis
Facial responses provide a passive way of measuring someone’s experience. 
Amongst other signals, the face communicates rich information about emotional 
experiences. The quantification of facial behavior has relied primarily on three 
approaches: 1) measurement of electrical muscle potentials on the face, known 
as electromyography (EMG), 2) manual coding of visible changes on the face 
from photographic images or video segments typically by a trained observer, and 
3) automatic coding of visible changes on the face from photographic images or 
video segments by a computer. Neither of the first two approaches is easily scal-
able, as discussed below. However, automated coding presents a highly efficient 
method of coding facial behavior.
Electromyography involves the measurement of muscle potential using elec-
trodes attached to the skin. The most commonly measured muscles are the zygo-
matic major (activated when people smile), the corrugator (activated when people 
furrow their brow), and the orbicularis oculi (activated when people raise their 
cheeks, as with a “Duchenne” smile). These capture elements of positive and neg-
ative emotional valence responses respectively (Cacioppo, Petty, Losch, & Kim, 
1986). Facial EMG has been used to assess valence of emotional responses to mes-
sages (Bolls, Lang, & Potter, 2001) and is typically a more interpretable measure 
of valence than physiological responses (Micu & Plummer, 2010). Hazlett and 
Hazlett (1999) found that EMG measurements to advertising were related to ad 
recall, with advertisements that elicited greater amounts of zygomatic major (smil-
ing) and corrugator (brow furrowing) muscle movements being more memorable.
EMG allows measurement of very subtle muscle movements that may not 
be visible to a human observer. However, they are also sensitive to head motion 
artefacts. As EMG measurements require specific, non-ubiquitous hardware and 
contact with the subject, it is not a scalable method of measuring responses. Fur-
thermore, it requires sticky electrodes to be attached to the subject’s face creating 
an unnatural viewing experience.
Facial coding is an observational method of capturing behavior on the face. 
Coding facial behavior can be based on “sign judgments” using an objective-coding  
scheme of facial actions (muscle movements) or “message judgments” using a 
subjective interpretation of emotion. Most objective coding uses the Facial Action 
Coding System (FACS) (Ekman  & Friesen, 1978; Cohn, Ambadar  & Ekman, 
2007), the most comprehensive and widely used taxonomy of facial behavior. 
FACS describes the appearance of the face when muscle movements are present; 
allowing trained human coders to identify them from images or videos. Subjective 
judgments involve human observers assessing the emotion or cognitive state of a 
person from their facial expression.
Manual facial coding (whether using an objective or subjective approach) 
requires trained human coders and is a laborious and time-consuming task. It is 
not a scalable approach for capturing responses to media and certainly could not 

332  McDuff
be used for any application that requires real-time results or even results within 
a short space of time. In recent years the development of computer-based algo-
rithms for automatic coding of facial behavior has enabled scalable and repeatable 
analysis of responses. This technology involves a computer analyzing the texture 
and shape of the faces within a video and estimating the likelihood of particular 
actions or expressions being present.
The first example of facial coding used in advertising research was presented 
by Derbaix (1995). Derbaix found that the contribution of affective responses 
on ad attitude and brand attitude were evident in verbal responses but not facial 
measures. The facial coders assigned basic emotion labels to the frames of the 
viewer’s response. However, basic emotions may not be a suitable taxonomy for 
this task as advertisements may not elicit prototypic displays of emotion. This 
study is in a minority, with many other examples showing utility in using facial 
expression measures to evaluate media success.
More recently, facial coding has been applied on a much larger scale thanks to 
automated techniques. Teixeira, Wedel, and Pieters (2012) analyzed facial expres-
sions in response to video advertisements and found that “zapping” behavior was 
reduced when ads elicited expressions of emotion. Similar results were obtained 
by Yang, Kafai, An, and Bhanu (2014) who designed an automated system for pre-
dicting “zapping” likelihood from smile responses. Several subsequent studies have 
analyzed facial responses collected over the internet (Teixeira, Picard, & Kaliouby, 
2014; Lewinski, Fransen, & Tan, 2014; McDuff, 2014; McDuff et al., 2015). Both 
Teixeira et al. (2014) and McDuff et al. (2015) found links between purchase 
intent and facial responses to advertisements. Other studies have linked facial 
responses to political debates to voting preferences (McDuff, Kaliouby, Kodra, & 
Picard, 2013).
Physiological Responses
EDA is one of the most reliable measures of sympathetic arousal (previously known 
as Galvanic Skin Response), which is associated with attention, arousal, cognitive 
overload, and memory. EDA has been typically measured through skin conduct-
ance at the fingertips using tethered systems. Measurement of EDA generally 
requires specialist hardware, although some commercial “wearable” devices (such 
as smartwatches) are able to measure EDA in addition to pulse rate. LaBarbera and 
Tucciarone (1995) argue strongly for the use of EDA in marketing research and 
present a number of studies to demonstrate the validity of physiological measure-
ment in evaluating ad effectiveness. The strongest link found was between EDA 
and sales. Subsequent studies have found EDA to be a better predictor of memory 
(free-recall and brand recognition tests) than valence, as measured via EMG or 
self-report (Bolls, Lang, & Potter, 2001).
Inter-beat intervals (IBI) of the heart and breathing patterns are controlled 
by both the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) and the parasympathetic nervous 

Measuring Advertising Efficacy  333
system (PNS). Heart rate variability (HRV) captures changes in the autonomic 
response. Tonic and phasic changes in heart rate can be used to capture arousal and 
attention of viewers. This was demonstrated by Lang (1990) in a study of view-
ers watching TV ads embedded between two sitcoms to simulate a more realistic 
viewing experience. Negative messages may receive more attention than positive 
messages (Bolls, Lang, & Potter, 2001). Respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) has 
been used as a measure of attention to business news messages. RSA was found to 
increase with emotional over neutral content—specifically, happy and angry faces 
(Ravaja, Kallinen, Saari, & Keltikangas-Jarvinen, 2004).
Recent research has presented methods of capturing cardiopulmonary 
parameters, including heart rate and heart rate variability, using a camera (Poh, 
McDuff, & Picard, 2011). Therefore, these signals could be measured in a scalable 
way using an online framework like the one described above. As video streaming 
and on-device analysis advance, the quality of these measurements will increase 
considerably. Combining heart rate and HRV measurements with facial expres-
sions will eventually provide a much richer picture of a subject’s emotional expe-
riences. However, there is still some way to go before robust HRV measurements 
are possible from video recorded in unconstrained settings over the internet.
Brain Imaging
Neuromarketing is a growing area of research in the media and marketing indus-
tries (Lewis & Phil, 2004). Electroencephalography (EEG) is the measurement 
of electrical activity in the brain using electrodes placed on the scalp. One of 
the main advantages of EEG over other brain imaging techniques is that it is 
a non-invasive. However, it is not possible to measure activity below the cor-
tex. Although it is non-invasive, it still requires subjects to wear a head-mounted 
device and, as with facial EMG, creates an unnatural experience for the subject. 
Commercial devices with less obtrusive form factors have recently been created, 
and these help make the experience more natural.
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is better suited to imaging 
subcortical brain structures more involved in emotion; however, it is very expen-
sive, and a person has to lie on his or her back and try not to move while being 
placed in a scanner that makes a loud repetitive noise. Thus, fMRI measurement 
results in a very unnatural viewing experience.
Interesting research questions could be answered using brain imaging tech-
niques, and there is potential for uncovering information not revealed using other 
measurement methods (Ariely & Berns, 2010). However, both EEG and fMRI 
are also highly sensitive to motion: all their measures can be easily corrupted by 
facial expressions or other movements. Telling a person they cannot move and 
having them lie on their back in a loud environment can interfere with emotional 
experience (e.g., if you are not permitted to laugh, you might try to suppress 
thinking that something is funny). Also, there is still no clear scientifically verified 

334  McDuff
mapping between brain regions and emotions that can be used accurately across 
all individuals. The lack of accurate emotion mappings, the obtrusive nature, and 
the financial cost of using most brain-imaging methods makes it almost impos-
sible to measure natural emotion responses of people over large populations or in 
real-consumption settings; however, there is still interesting basic research to be 
extended that is currently only possible in laboratory settings and with smaller 
groups, such as that by Ambler, Ioannides, and Rose (2000).
Frameworks for Studies
The collection and analysis of physiological data, in addition to self-report, requires 
suitable frameworks. In-lab and in-field data collection have a number of differences. 
Below is a summary of the state-of-the-art in both in-lab and in-field solutions.
In-Lab
Laboratory based studies have many benefits such as allowing highly accurate 
measurement of physiological parameters or muscle movements using hardware 
designed specifically for the task. However, there are also a number of challenges. 
Subjects can be influenced by the presence of an experimenter and/or their com-
fort with the situation and surroundings, factors that are unrelated to the stimulus 
of interest. These may impact the participant’s emotional experience (Wilhelm & 
Grossman, 2010), and the influence is difficult to quantify. In addition, running 
such studies is labor-intensive and may not be cost effective.
In most cases, emotion measurement techniques are still used in laboratory 
settings. In-lab data collection can make use of custom hardware for detecting 
affective signals. These might include eye-tracking, EMG, contact physiology (e.g., 
ECG or EDA) or brain imaging (e.g., EEG or fMRI). There are still a number 
of physiological signals that can be measured only in in-lab settings (fMRI being 
the most obvious).
Simultaneously synchronizing, storing, visualizing, and analyzing data from 
many sensors can be challenging. Software platforms that help simultaneously 
collect signals from multiple inputs are useful. Examples of companies who pro-
duce systems for collecting sensor data include Innerscope and iMotions.
In-Field
Conducting experiments in-field, and without the use of expensive, obtrusive, 
and uncomfortable sensors, can avoid some of the problems associated with in-
lab data experiments. However, this type of data collection also presents technical 
challenges. How can emotions be measured without physical contact with the 
viewer and by using devices that they already own? How can we collect data reli-
ably and efficiently when the viewing environment is not controlled?

Measuring Advertising Efficacy  335
Whilst laboratory data collection has been applied in advertising research 
studies for several decades, in-field studies have been limited due to technical 
challenges associated with measuring physiological parameters and behaviors in 
real-world contexts. This state of affairs is largely due to the severely limited scal-
ability of in-lab solutions used for data collection.
Several commercial companies (Affectiva, RealEyes, Kairos) now offer services 
for automated facial coding over the internet. The measurement of facial responses 
to content is now a standard procedure in copy-testing of advertising content; it 
is used on a daily basis to help evaluate whether an advertisement is achieving its 
intended goals. Many companies now use this methodology to test their content, 
including Mars, Kellogg’s, Unilever, and CBS. Unilever now tests every ad the 
company develops with facial coding technology (over 3000 ads annually).
Emotion measurement frameworks that allow in-field collection of affective 
responses typically utilize the subject’s webcam to capture their response. Viewers 
watching content online can choose to opt-in through a browser. Their response 
can be processed on the device or streamed to the cloud and processed there. As 
described above, facial actions and expressions, gestures, eye gaze, and physiologi-
cal responses can be extracted from video data used computer-vision technology. 
As these computer vision technologies mature, the power of internet-based emo-
tion measurement frameworks will grow considerably; at the time of writing, this 
technology is still evolving.
With the new scalability offered via in-field frameworks, companies have been 
able to collect far more emotion data than was possible previously. For example, at 
the start of 2016, Affectiva had a repository of over four million face videos. Data on 
this scale has enabled these companies to build normative databases for facial cod-
ing and other emotion measurement techniques (McDuff & Kaliouby, 2016). These 
are essential as the interpretation of emotional responses is complex and context-
dependent. As an example, gender, culture, and age differences in expressiveness have 
all been observed, and it is unlikely that these variables are entirely independent.
Applications
There are a number of distinct applications for emotion measurement techniques 
in digital advertising. As discussed above, advertising effectiveness measurement 
can take the form of laboratory or field tests. The content evaluated can be display, 
video, banner, or interactive ads, and anything from concepts through to finished 
content or digital experiences. The tests can be performed before the campaign 
begins (pre-tests) or after the campaigns has begun (post-tests). In the following 
sections, specific examples are presented of applications of emotion measurement 
techniques in measuring advertising efficacy, with a particular focus on how scal-
able measurement is used.
Emotion data is used primarily in two ways: 1) quantitative analysis modelling 
the relationship between emotions and advertising outcomes, and 2) qualitative 

336  McDuff
FIGURE 19.1  An Example of Aggregated Facial Expression Data Presented in a Dash-
board. Emotion measurement techniques allow for passive and continu-
ous measurement of responses—something that is difficult to achieve with 
self-report approaches. Dashboards are often used for diagnostic purposes.
Image: Affectiva, Inc.
analysis of content to help diagnose elements that are successful in eliciting desired 
responses and those that are not. The techniques described are often applied in 
both pre-tests and post-tests. However, qualitative analysis is relied on more heav-
ily in the pre-test phase to help optimize the media.
Concept Testing
Testing marketing concepts at early stages can help avoid wasting marketing 
resources, the idea being that at an early mock-up stage content can be edited 
to improve the likelihood of success. However, it is typically harder to capture 
and interpret emotional responses to concepts than finished media. The richer 
the media tested the more likely it is to elicit observable affective responses from 
viewers. Videos usually elicit more emotion than static images, and videos with 
audio elicit more obvious emotional responses than silent video. There is still 
much that is unexplored about emotional responses to concepts and how these 
predict the efficacy of finished material. Nevertheless, the use of facial coding in 
concept testing is now relatively common practice.
Copy Testing
The most common use of emotion measurement on a large-scale is in the copy-
testing of advertisements, from traditional print and TV adverts to online video 
adverts. Figure 19.1 shows an example of a facial coding results dashboard for an 

Measuring Advertising Efficacy  337
advertisement. This type of interface is typically how emotion data is delivered 
in copy-testing. Teixeira et al. (2012) showed that inducing affect is important in 
engaging viewers in online video advertisements and to reduce the frequency of 
“zapping” (skipping the advertisement). It was found that joy was one of the states 
that stimulated viewer retention in commercials. Using an internet-framework, 
Teixeira, Picard, and Kaliouby (2014) collected facial responses from 178 partici-
pants to 82 commercials. Entertainment (as measured by smiling responses from 
the participants) affected purchase likelihood, with too little or too much enter-
tainment being sub-optimal. Driving purchase intent is more complex than just 
making viewers smile: peak positive responses that are immediately preceded by 
a brand appearance are more likely to be effective (McDuff et al., 2015). Studies 
have found expressions of happiness (e.g., smiling) to be the most highly cor-
related with advertising effectiveness measures; for example, attitudes toward the 
ad and brand (Lewinski, Fransen, & Tan, 2014). This is to be expected, as gener-
ally speaking, ads intend to induce positive affect, and many are intentionally 
humorous.
These passive methods are particularly useful for studying wear-out effects of 
creative content. McDuff et al. (2012) showed examples of how facial responses 
to advertisements were significantly different in populations viewing for the first 
time versus not.
Digital advertising has yielded a number of new formats for presenting video 
content. For example, videos embedded in websites can autoplay (with or with-
out audio), play on click, and auto resize on the screen. Which of these formats 
is optimal for viewer engagement is not clear. Measurement of emotions and 
gaze behavior has been used to test different video formats. However, much 
more work is required to fully evaluate which formats are best for engaging 
viewers.
Tracking Studies
One of the next big changes in emotion measurement within advertising is 
the use of longitudinal data from in-the-field campaign tracking studies. There 
are several challenges that need to be overcome to make this successful. First, 
participants will need to be incentivized to provide access to their webcam 
on an ongoing basis and allow it to be switched on during everyday brows-
ing. Second, when subjects are viewing video media whilst browsing the web, 
rather than taking a market research survey, there is much less control over 
when the ad is seen and whether it is watched from start to finish. In addition, 
as described above, there are a number of different types of video formats and 
each will impact how the ad is viewed. Tracking studies will enable researchers 
to understand individual subjects’ baseline responses much more effectively, as 
they will provide access to longitudinal data, something that is rarely available 
in copy-testing studies.

338  McDuff
Single Source Studies
Are ads that are successful in evoking emotions also successful in driving sales? 
Understanding the answer to this question is ultimately the aim of much adver-
tising effectiveness research. However, few studies have been able to address the 
question systematically due to the lack of emotion response data tied with sales 
measures. We conducted a large online ad study investigating the link between 
emotions expressed to advertisements and single-source sales data. We recorded 
facial responses over the internet to 240 ads in four countries (United Kingdom, 
United States, France, and Germany). The ads were for products in a number of 
consumer packaged goods (CPG) categories (chocolate, gum, pet foods, instant 
meals). The single source data was collected from a four-week period during 
which the ad was aired on TV and four weeks prior to airing. Participants were 
given a set-top box for tracking their exposure to ads, and their purchases were 
logged. This study found that in the category of chocolate and confectionery 
ads, there was a positive relationship between level of smiling (entertainment or 
humor response) and sales effectiveness of the ads. However, for other categories 
(such as instant foods), the relationship was much weaker. Certainly, smiling and 
positive emotion expressions are simpler to detect and interpret than negative 
expressions (McDuff et al., 2013). Beyond advertisements for CPG products, the 
relationships between expressed emotions and sales effectiveness is still unclear.
Future Directions
As emotion measurement and data collection frameworks mature, the collec-
tion of facial expression, eye gaze, and physiological data will be possible as part 
of many different types of in-field advertising effectiveness studies. With scalable 
methods of measuring audience engagement and emotional responses to con-
tent, real-time monitoring of a campaign’s emotional impact will also be possible. 
Longitudinal panels will allow advertisers to track subjects’ responses throughout 
a campaign by analyzing their reactions every time they are exposed to an adver-
tisement on their computer. In addition, it may be possible to make use of these 
measurements to perform “emotion-based targeting.” Audience segments that  
show higher levels of emotional engagement to specific types of content may be 
targeted with similar content.
Measuring audience reactions in focus groups, theatres, and public spaces 
requires the ability to capture responses from multiple people simultaneously. 
Computer vision-based methods of emotion measurement, such as facial coding, 
are particularly suited as measurements can be made from the same video source. 
There is also a growing interest for in-situ methods of measurement such as this.
There are still limitations in the measurement and interpretation of emo-
tional responses. The meaning of physiological responses and behaviors are highly 
context-dependent and different types of ads intend to elicit different emotional 

Measuring Advertising Efficacy  339
responses. Therefore, the “effectiveness” of an ad cannot be evaluated without 
considering context. Building databases of emotional responses from which con-
text dependent models can be built is a vital future direction.
Ethics and Privacy
Recording and analyzing affective responses of people is a sensitive topic, and there 
are many justified concerns related to potential invasions of privacy. As this form 
of measurement becomes more and more mainstream, using frameworks similar 
to those that we have described above, additional safeguards will become neces-
sary. It is important as these technologies develop and become applied in field 
studies that social norms are developed around their use. Viewers should always 
be aware that their camera can be accessed in a study and should know when it is 
turned on. It is reasonable to argue that this will alter emotion responses; however, 
in the course of collecting many millions of videos, we have consistently found 
viewers’ reactions to be highly naturalistic.
Methods of anonymizing emotion data would allow researchers to protect 
subjects whilst still being able to measure the emotional impact of online content. 
This could take the form of processing videos on the client’s machine (therefore 
not requiring video data to be streamed to the cloud) or encrypting video data 
into an unidentifiable form from which the physiological and behavior signals are 
still recoverable.
Finally, as data collection moves to more longitudinal studies (rather than one-
off copy-test surveys), it becomes more difficult to guarantee that the subject 
being analyzed is the subject who consented.
Conclusion
Advertisements—from traditional print, radio, and TV adverts to internet ban-
ner and online video advertisements—are increasingly placing more emphasis 
on emotional content. However, traditional methods of measuring responses to 
advertising have a number of limitations. In recent years, new scalable methods for 
measuring advertising efficacy have been developed. I have presented a summary 
of these approaches for measuring advertising efficacy with a particular focus on 
quantitative, scalable methods of capturing emotional and cognitive responses. 
The measurement of emotions and memory of advertising in real consumption 
contexts and across larger populations will undoubtedly lead to a more accurate 
understanding of digital advertising effectiveness.
References
Aaker, D. A., Stayman, D. M., & Hagerty, M. R. (1986). Warmth in advertising: Measure-
ment, impact, and sequence effects. Journal of Consumer Research, 12(4), 365–381.

340  McDuff
Ambler, T., Ioannides, A., & Rose, S. (2000). Brands on the brain: Neuro-images of advertis-
ing. Business Strategy Review, 11(3), 17–30.
Ariely, D., & Berns, G. S. (2010). Neuromarketing: The hope and hype of neuroimaging in 
business. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11(4), 284–292.
Bagozzi, R. P., Gopinath, M., & Nyer, P. U. (1999). The role of emotions in marketing. 
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 27(2), 184–206.
Batra, R., & Ray, M. L. (1986). Affective responses mediating acceptance of advertising. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 13(2), 234–249.
Biel, A. L. (1990). Love the ad. Buy the product? Why liking the advertisement and prefer-
ring the brand aren’t strange bedfellows after all. Admap, 26, 21–25.
Bolls, P. D., Lang, A., & Potter, R. F. (2001). The effects of message valence and listener 
arousal on attention, memory, and facial muscular responses to radio advertisements. 
Communication Research, 28(5), 627–651.
Cacioppo, J. T., Petty, R. E., Losch, M. E., & Kim, H. S. (1986). Electromyographic activity 
over facial muscle regions can differentiate the valence and intensity of affective reac-
tions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 50(2), 260.
Cohn, J. F., Ambadar, Z., & Ekman, P. (2007). Observer-based measurement of facial expres-
sion with the facial action coding system. In J. A. Coan & J. B. Allen (Eds.), Handbook of 
emotion elicitation and assessment (pp. 203–221). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Derbaix, C. M. (1995). The impact of affective reactions on attitudes toward the advertise-
ment and the brand: A step toward ecological validity. Journal of Marketing Research, 32, 
470–479.
Ekman, P., & Friesen, W. V. (1978). Facial action coding system: Investigatoris guide. Alto, CA: 
Consulting Psychologists Press.
Erevelles, S. (1998). The role of affect in marketing. Journal of Business Research, 42(3), 
199–215.
Fredrickson, B. L., & Kahneman, D. (1993). Duration neglect in retrospective evaluations of 
affective episodes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65(1), 45.
Hazlett, R. L., & Hazlett, S. Y. (1999). Emotional response to television commercials: Facial 
EMG vs. self-report. Journal of Advertising Research, 39, 7–24.
Heath, R., Brandt, D., & Nairn, A. (2006). Brand relationships: Strengthened by emotion, 
weakened by attention. Journal of Advertising Research, New York, 46(4), 410.
Johar, G. V., Maheswaran, D., & Peracchio, L. A. (2006). Mapping the frontiers: Theoretical 
advances in consumer research on memory, affect, and persuasion. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 33(1), 139–149.
LaBarbera, P. A., & Tucciarone, J. D. (1995). GSR reconsidered: A behavior-based approach 
to evaluating and improving the sales potency of advertising. Journal of Advertising 
Research, 35(5), 33–54.
Lang, A. (1990). Involuntary attention and physiological arousal evoked by structural 
features and emotional content in TV commercials. Communication Research, 17(3), 
275–299.
Lewinski, P., Fransen, M. L., & Tan, E. S. (2014). Predicting advertising effectiveness by facial 
expressions in response to amusing persuasive stimuli. Journal of Neuroscience, Psychology, 
and Economics, 7(1), 1.
Lewis, D. B. D., & Phil, D. (2004). Market researchers make increasing use of brain imaging. 
Nature Neuroscience, 7(7), 683.
McDuff, D. (2014). Crowdsourcing affective responses for predicting media effectiveness. 
Doctoral Dissertation. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Measuring Advertising Efficacy  341
McDuff, D., & Kaliouby, R. E. (2016). Applications of automated facial coding in media 
measurement. IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, 99, published online, doi: 
10.1109/TAFFC.2016.2571284.
McDuff, D., Kaliouby, R. E., Cohn, J. F., & Picard, R. W. (2015). Predicting ad liking and 
purchase intent: Large-scale analysis of facial responses to ad. IEEE Transactions on Affec-
tive Computing, 6(3), 223–235.
McDuff, D., Kaliouby, R. E., & Picard, R. W. (2012). Crowdsourcing facial responses to 
online videos. IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, 3(4), 456–468.
McDuff, D., Kaliouby, R. E., Kodra, E., & Larguinet, L. (2013). Do emotions in advertising 
drive sales? Use of facial coding to understand the relationship between ads and sales 
effectiveness. In ESOMAR Marketing Research Congress.
McDuff, D., Kaliouby, R. E., Kodra, E., & Picard, R. (2013). Measuring voter’s candidate 
preference based on affective responses to election debates. In Affective Computing and 
Intelligent Interaction (ACII), 2013 Humaine Association Conference on (pp. 369–374). IEEE.
Mehta, A., & Purvis, S. C. (2006). Reconsidering recall and emotion in advertising. Journal 
of Advertising Research, 46(1), 49.
Micu, A. C., & Plummer, J. T. (2010). Measurable emotions: How television ads really work. 
Journal of Advertising Research, 50(2), 137–153.
Morris, J. D., Woo, C., Geason, J. A., & Kim, J. (2002). The power of affect: Predicting inten-
tion. Journal of Advertising Research, 42(3), 7–18.
Pawle, J., & Cooper, P. (2006). Measuring emotion-lovemarks, the future beyond brands. 
Journal of Advertising Research, 46(1), 38–48.
Poels, K., & Dewitte, S. (2006). How to capture the heart? Reviewing 20 years of emotion 
measurement in advertising. Journal of Advertising Research, 46(1), 18–37.
Poh, M. Z., McDuff, D. J., & Picard, R. W. (2011). Advancements in noncontact, multipa-
rameter physiological measurements using a webcam. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical 
Engineering, 58(1), 7–11.
Ravaja, N., Kallinen, K., Saari, T., & Keltikangas-Jarvinen, L. (2004). Suboptimal exposure 
to facial expressions when viewing video messages from a small screen: Effects on emo-
tion, attention, and memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 10(2), 120–131.
Roberts, K. (2005). Lovemarks: The future beyond brands. New York, NY: PowerHouse Books.
Russell, C. A. (2002). Investigating the effectiveness of product placements in television 
shows: The role of modality and plot connection congruence on brand memory and 
attitude. Journal of Consumer Research, 29(3), 306–318.
Teixeira, T. S., Picard, R., & el Kaliouby, R. (2014). Why, when, and how much to entertain 
consumers in advertisements? A web-based facial tracking field study. Marketing Science, 
33(6), 809–827.
Teixeira, T. S., Wedel, M., & Pieters, R. (2010). Moment-to-moment optimal branding in 
TV commercials: Preventing avoidance by pulsing. Marketing Science, 29(5), 783–804.
Teixeira, T. S., Wedel, M., & Pieters, R. (2012). Emotion-induced engagement in internet 
video advertisements. Journal of Marketing Research, 49(2), 144–159.
Wedel, M., & Pieters, R. (2008). A review of eye-tracking research in marketing. Review of 
Marketing Research, 4, 123–147.
Wilhelm, F., & Grossman, P. (2010). Emotions beyond the laboratory: Theoretical funda-
ments, study design, and analytic strategies for advanced ambulatory assessment. Biologi-
cal Psychology, 84(3), 552–569.
Wood, O. (2012). How emotional tugs trump rational pushes. Journal of Advertising Research, 
52(1), 31–39.

342  McDuff
Yang, S., Kafai, M., An, L., & Bhanu, B. (2014). Zapping index: Using smile to meas-
ure advertisement zapping likelihood. IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, 5(4), 
432–444.
Zajonc, R. B. (1980). Feeling and thinking: Preferences need no inferences. American Psy-
chologist, 35(2), 151–175.

PART V
Evaluating Digital 
Advertising


Introduction
Digital advertising has become an increasingly important element of the market-
ing mix for firms across the globe. Experts estimate that by 2019, online advertis-
ing will become the biggest segment of advertising budgets worldwide, surpassing 
television advertising with a forecasted annual spend of nearly $240 billion (PWC, 
2015). The pivotal role of digital advertising in the marketing strategy of companies 
internationally is easy to take for granted today, but online advertising is still rela-
tively young. Companies began advertising on the internet in the early 1990s, and 
the early years of interactive advertising was often marked with attempts to apply 
principles from other advertising domains (e.g., outdoor advertising, direct mail) 
with little success (Taylor, 2009). Even in the United States, digital technologies 
did not become a major medium until 2005. While researchers and managers have 
learned a great deal about digital advertising in the past few decades, the dynamic 
nature of the technologies used and the growth of online access worldwide reflects 
the need for continued exploration of digital marketing internationally.
In this chapter, we, first, briefly discuss some factors that have led to the rise 
of digital advertising across the globe. Next, we will discuss innovative research 
pertinent to international digital advertising from three perspectives. We organize 
the research and discuss international digital advertising related to 1) consumer 
considerations, 2) executional factors related to ads, and 3) general philosophy/
goals behind advertising in building the brand in the long term. Within these sec-
tions, we propose general principles related to digital advertising internationally, 
based on the Taylor (2009) framework (see Figure 20.1) and the recent research 
in the international digital advertising literature. We conclude each section by 
summarizing major findings and outlining future areas of international digital 
advertising research.
20
INTERNATIONAL DIGITAL 
ADVERTISING
Lessons from Around the World
Charles R. Taylor and John P. Costello

346  Taylor and Costello
•Marketers must be sensitive to consumer 
concerns about privacy and spam.
•Consumers are more likely to be receptive 
to digital ads from marketers they trust. 
•Consumers are more likely to be receptive 
to respond to digital ads for products that 
are relevant to them.                               
(Cultural factors may impact consumer 
consideration principles.) 
Consumer
Considerations 
•Digital approaches that incorporate 
interactivity are more likely to be 
effective.
•Advertising messages that are 
entertaining have a higher chance of 
success in the digital context.
Executional
Factors 
•In the long run, new media messages need 
to build the brand to be effective.
General
Philosophy-
Brand Building 
FIGURE 20.1  Principles of Digital Advertising
Adapted from Taylor, 2009
Factors Leading to the Growth of Digital  
Advertising Worldwide
Companies operating internationally can now reach more consumers online than 
ever before, making digital advertising viable when marketing to a diverse set 
of global markets. A number of issues have contributed to the success of digital 
advertising worldwide; however, none is more essential than growth in the num-
ber of people with access to the internet. This growth in access has taken place 
fairly rapidly both in the United States and many other nations across the world. 
According to the Pew Research Center, between 1995 and 2014, the percentage 

International Digital Advertising  347
of U.S. adults with access to the internet grew from 14 percent to 87 percent 
(Pew Internet and American Life Project, 2014). This percentage is even higher 
among younger people, with 97 percent of U.S. adults ages 18–29 and 93 percent 
of adults ages 30–49 reporting having access to the internet in 2014 (Pew Internet 
and American Life Project, 2014).
This phenomenon is not unique to the United States alone. The International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU), a United Nations body, estimates that 3.2 bil-
lion out of the world’s 7.2 billion people are now online, including 2 billion in the 
developing world (BBC News, 2015). In the year 2015, 80 percent of households 
in developed nations and 34 percent of households in developing nations will 
have access to the internet (BBC News, 2015). This growth has been fairly rapid 
in the past 10+ years, with more than eight times as many people online in the 
world today as in the year 2000 (BBC News, 2015).
Within the developing world, there is significant variance in terms of internet 
access. In the wealthiest emerging nations, such as China, Russia, and Chile, more 
than seven in 10 adults have access to the internet, but access is much lower in 
less wealthy countries such as India (20%), Uganda (15%), and Pakistan (8%) (Pew 
Global Attitudes and Trends, 2016). As in the United States, younger and more 
educated people across nations tend to have higher rates of access to the internet 
compared to their older and less educated counterparts (Pew Global Attitudes and 
Trends, 2016). For example, in Thailand, 83 percent of the 18–34 year old popula-
tion is online versus only 27 percent of the population over 35 years of age (Pew 
Global Attitudes and Trends, 2016).
Another important factor in the growth of digital advertising internationally 
is increased access to broadband worldwide. Broadband allows for richer media 
in online advertising, which allows firms more options to create effective adver-
tising (Taylor, 2009). This situation is also largely driven through mobile broad-
band access, as more consumers are accessing broadband through their phones. In 
the United States and Europe, 78 percent of people use mobile broadband and 
69 percent of the world has 3G coverage—although this figure is only 17 percent 
in Africa (BBC News, 2015). Similar to internet access, ownership of a smart-
phone in many emerging nations is largely dependent on age. For example, in 
Malaysia, 72 percent of the population ages 18–34 has a smartphone, while the 
figure is 27 percent for those 35 and older (Pew Global Attitudes and Trends, 
2015). This pattern is less prevalent in other countries like China, Thailand, and 
Vietnam (Pew Global Attitudes and Trends, 2016).
Other important factors in the growth of digital advertising include the emer-
gence of social media and user generated content (UGC) sites (e.g., Facebook, 
Twitter, Wikipedia, blogs) and the realization that search engines can be effective 
advertising vehicles, leading to the sale of media space on sites such as Google and 
Yahoo. Paid search is the most established and understood advertising medium 
on the internet representing $54 billion worth of ad spending annually (PWC, 
2015). This medium is forecasted to grow to $85 billion worldwide by 2019 and 

348  Taylor and Costello
will represent about 35 percent of all online advertising worldwide (PWC, 2015). 
Social media remain an important area for advertisers across the globe as well, 
including nations that are fairly new to accessing the web. In a study of consum-
ers across 32 developing nations, the Pew Research Center found that socializing 
with family and friends was the most popular activity online, with 86 percent of 
respondents using the internet to contact a relative or friend (Pew Global Atti-
tudes and Trends, 2015).
The past decade has witnessed a shift from online access in only the most 
developed countries, to more and more nations gaining internet access across the 
globe. This opens the market for digital advertising and presents a number of chal-
lenges to digital advertisers internationally. For instance, international expansion 
of digital advertising makes it increasingly important for firms to understand what 
principles apply across borders and what must be localized to fit the particular 
targeted culture. Understanding what is important to consumers of digital adver-
tising is paramount. Some of the most important considerations related to these 
consumers will be discussed in the following section. The analysis builds on Tay-
lor’s (2009) assertion that the primary principles of digital advertising are related 
to either consumer-related factors (i.e., consumer considerations) or executional 
factors. Additionally, we discuss some issues related to general philosophy toward 
digital advertising.
Consumer Considerations in International Digital Advertising
Taylor (2009) found that it is good practice in digital advertising to 1) under-
stand and respond to consumer concerns about privacy, 2) build trust with the 
consumer, and 3) deliver messages that are relevant to the customer. To create 
and execute successful digital advertising campaigns internationally, firms must 
understand consumers’ preferences. As a relatively new medium, it is understand-
able that consumers may be concerned about issues related to their own privacy 
and may vary in the level of trust they have in the firm’s digital advertising tar-
geting them. Additionally, given the importance of segmentation and targeting 
in marketing, it seems natural that the relevance of digital advertising content 
would largely impact the efficacy of an advertisement in the eye of the con-
sumer. Research on consumers of digital advertising addresses these issues and has 
uncovered many of the ways in which consumer privacy, trust of the marketer, 
and relevance of advertisements impact advertising effectiveness. Also, a smaller 
stream of research has addressed how cultural differences between consumers may 
impact how they react to digital advertisements. Findings related to each of these 
issues are discussed in the following sections.
Consumer Privacy
As discussed, the proliferation of smartphones, globally, has given greater access 
online to a larger number of individuals, including individuals in developing 

International Digital Advertising  349
nations. While this affords smartphone owners vast opportunities in the digital 
world, it also creates an “always on” culture. Compared to traditional media like 
television or radio, which are characterized by distinct blocks of consumption, 
users of smartphones tend to be constantly checking their devices and surfing the 
web throughout the day. Consumers also tend to view their mobile devices as a 
part of their personal space (Hart, 2008) and, as a result, are especially sensitive 
to digital advertisements that violate their privacy or risk being viewed as spam. 
Digital advertising that does not respect consumer privacy will likely result in low 
levels of success and may also create backlash toward the company.
A study by Barwise and Strong (2002) surveyed 1,000 mobile phone users 
from the greater London area and found that explicit permission for SMS adver-
tising messages was essential for getting favorable responses from consumers. The 
authors found that this type of service was especially effective for selling lower 
ticket items to younger consumers (Barwise & Strong, 2002). In a multi-method 
study in New Zealand on mobile SMS advertising, Carroll, Barnes, Scornavacca, 
and Fletcher (2007) found that obtaining user trust and permission were neces-
sities and suggested that privacy remains the biggest challenge facing digital mar-
keting (see Chapter 17).
Unni and Harmon (2007) investigated the topic of location-based advertising 
in an effort to understand how this may impact consumers’ feelings of privacy. 
Location-based advertising (LBA) is described as “targeted advertising initiatives 
delivered to a mobile device from an identified sponsor that is specific to the 
location of the consumer” (Unni & Harmon, 2007, p. 28). The authors used an 
experiment with a U.S. college student sample and found that LBA associated 
privacy concerns were high, and perceived benefits and value of LBA was low 
(Unni & Harmon, 2007). Further, the study found that LBA became more effec-
tive when the consumer granted permission to the marketer (Unni & Harmon, 
2007). In a qualitative study of French consumers, Truong and Simmons (2010) 
found that consumers viewed a great deal of mobile advertising as intrusive. These 
consumers also expressed the desire for companies to ask permission before they 
began sending advertisements to consumers’ mobile phones (Truong & Simmons, 
2010). Another source of concern was a general mistrust of mobile operators, 
which created doubts that these advertisers were adhering to government regula-
tions related to consumer privacy (Truong & Simmons, 2010).
Tucker (2014) investigated how social media users’ perception over control 
of private information impacted their likelihood to click on targeted advertise-
ments on social media sites. The study used a field experiment conducted by a 
U.S.-based nonprofit firm trying to optimize its advertising campaigns on Face-
book. The nonprofit firm randomized whether or not users saw advertisements 
explicitly personalized to match information from their profiles; however, halfway 
through the study, Facebook introduced updates to its privacy policy that would 
simplify and improve privacy controls for users. Tucker (2014) found that after the 
addition of these policies, which provided users with an increased perception of 
privacy, consumers indicated they were twice as likely to click on personalized 

350  Taylor and Costello
ads. This finding suggests that giving social media users control over their privacy 
could benefit advertisers on social media sites and increase consumer engagement 
with digital ads.
Trust
In addition to sensitivity to consumer privacy, research also suggests that trust 
of the marketer is important in the creation of effective digital advertising. The 
previously mentioned Carroll et al. (2007) study of SMS advertising found that 
consumers in New Zealand preferred to have their mobile service provider screen 
advertisers to ensure that advertising messages came from a trusted source. In a 
study of a Japanese mobile advertising campaign, Okazaki, Katsukura, and Nishiy-
ama (2007) found that trust played a pivotal role in both message recall and adver-
tising toward the ad. Choi, Hwang, and McMillan (2008) investigated mobile 
phone advertising and the potential cross-cultural differences between U.S. and 
Korean consumers. The study found that although a number of differences existed 
between the two cultures, advertising that was both fun and trustworthy prompted 
positive attitudes and purchase intentions for both Koreans and Americans (Choi 
et al., 2008).
In the previously mentioned Truong and Simmons (2010) study, the authors 
found that third parties can play a key role in developing trust of brands that 
advertise online. This study found that when brands had positive reviews from 
online experts and comparable sites, like Hotels.com or TripAdvisor.com, con-
sumers tended to put greater trust in the legitimacy of those brands (Truong & 
Simmons, 2010). Another trust issue that emerged from this study was a concern 
that personal data would be misused, a consumer consideration closely tied to 
privacy. These findings have important implications for brands that want to be 
more trusted in the eyes of consumers and create successful digital advertising.
Past research has shown that trust in a mass medium impacts how consum-
ers view the credibility of the information provided and can influence whether 
consumers pay attention to advertising on that medium ( Johnson & Kaye, 1998; 
Moore & Rodgers, 2005). As social media has grown as an increasingly important 
medium for advertising, it is important to understand how much consumers trust 
content on social media websites. In a qualitative study of Australian teenage social 
media users, Kelly, Kerr, and Drennan (2010) found a general distrust of advertis-
ers on social media sites. Subjects cited a lack of credibility in the medium and 
the lack of regulation on social media advertising as reasons for their lack of trust 
(Kelly et al., 2010). In a study of U.S. college students, Chu and Kim (2011) found 
that trust of a social networking site could enhance the chances that the consumer 
engaged in WOM on social media sites. Taken together, these studies show a gen-
eral lack of trust from consumers, but social media has become more mainstream 
in recent years so future studies may need to account for this factor. For instance, 

International Digital Advertising  351
the results of the Tucker (2014) study suggest that when credible social media sites 
(like Facebook) announce privacy improvements, consumers find these improve-
ments to be credible and are more trusting of advertising on these sites as a result.
Relevance
Research on digital advertising has found that consumers are more likely to 
respond to products and services that are relevant to them. In research on the 
adoption of MMS advertising, Pagani (2004) conducted a pilot study featuring a 
sample of consumers from Italy and the United States consisting of a qualitative 
study conducted by Nokia with 24 focus groups across six nations (Brazil, Ger-
many, Italy, Singapore, United Kingdom, United States), and a quantitative study 
conducted in Italy. The pilot study found that usefulness and relevance of mes-
sages were essential in acceptance of MMS messages by consumers (Pagani, 2004). 
Nasco and Bruner (2008) found that when using mobile devices, relevancy of 
content drove recall, perceived importance of the content, and behavioral inten-
tion to access content on a mobile device in the future. Carroll et al. (2007) also 
found that relevancy of mobile advertising was important in gaining the accept-
ance of consumers in New Zealand. Merisavo et al. (2007) studied SMS advertis-
ing on a sample of over 4,000 Finnish mobile phone users. The authors suggest, 
based on the results of the study, that effective mobile advertising should pro-
vide utility and have relevance to the targeted consumer (Merisavo et al., 2007). 
Truong and Simmons (2010) also found that French consumers were more likely 
to be accepting of digital advertisements they did not grant permission to receive 
if the advertisement presented a relevant value proposition.
Bart, Stephen, and Savary (2014) investigated mobile display advertising 
(MDA), which includes banner ads on mobile web pages and applications. This 
form of digital advertising is one of the fastest growing, from a $16.7 billion 
annual spend globally in 2013 to a forecasted spend of $62.8 billion by 2017 (Bart 
et al., 2014). In this study, the authors conducted a field experiment that spanned 
three years and 54 U.S. MDA campaigns, and included a sample of nearly 40,000 
consumers (Bart et al., 2014). The results of this study suggest that advertisements 
for products that are higher involvement and utilitarian-oriented tended to result 
in more favorable attitudes and purchase intentions (Bart et al., 2014).
In a study of social media communities in China, Zeng, Huang, and Dou 
(2009) found that social media users’ perceptions of advertising on the sites was 
dependent on the relevance and value of the advertising. The authors also found 
that the relevance and value of social media advertising was influenced by group 
identity and group norms related to social networking communities (Zeng, 
Huang, & Dou, 2009). The authors suggested that to increase advertising revenue, 
social media sites should foster a strong sense of community that promotes a 
strong identity among members (Zeng, Huang, & Dou, 2009).

352  Taylor and Costello
Culture’s Impact on Consumer Response
While privacy, trust, and relevance are presumed to be important when evaluat-
ing digital advertising in a number of national contexts, some research has also 
investigated how cultural differences may impact consumer response to ads. The 
Taylor (2009) framework does not specifically address the role that culture plays 
in consumer response to digital advertising; however, this is an important consid-
eration for global marketers and an emerging area of research (see Chapter 24). 
Brettel and Spilker-Attig (2010) use a real data set from a bookseller operating 
in the United States and France with over 1.2 million transactions. The authors 
examined four online advertising channels: search advertising, affiliate price com-
parisons, affiliate coupon/loyalty, and newsletter/email and found that customers 
in each country should be targeted in different ways based on cultural differences 
(Brettel & Spilker-Attig, 2010). Study results showed that consumers from the 
United States, which is characterized as a masculine and individualistic culture, 
focused on advertising based on price, while French customers, who are char-
acterized by high uncertainty avoidance, preferred advertisements that stressed 
brand familiarity (Brettel & Spilker-Attig, 2010). Results also showed that while 
search advertising has a limited impact on United States customers, it has a sig-
nificant positive effect on French customers, which is explained by the French 
consumers’ affinity to brand names. Additionally, the authors found that digital 
coupons and loyalty programs drove U.S. customers to the advertising, which is 
presumably explained by a culture of individual optimization (Brettel & Spilker-
Attig, 2010).
Möller and Eisend (2010) studied the impact that national level culture 
has on banner advertising effectiveness, analyzing survey data from over 7,000 
respondents in 34 countries as well as click-through rates of over 2,000 users 
in 26 countries. The authors found that banner advertising effectiveness varied 
based on Hofstede’s cultural dimensions of individualism, uncertainty avoidance, 
power distance, and masculinity (Möller & Eisend, 2010). Specifically, consumers 
that came from individualistic countries were less accepting of banner advertise-
ments, as measured by click behavior, as compared to consumers from collectiv-
ist cultures (Möller & Eisend, 2010). Together, these studies show that responses 
to digital advertising, at least in the form of banner ads, can be impacted by 
culture.
Although the previous section states that relevance improves digital advertis-
ing effectiveness for consumers, emerging research also suggests that cultural 
factors may impact whether a consumer perceives a particular digital advertise-
ment as relevant. Maslowska, Smit, and van den Putte (2013) studied tailored 
advertising in the Netherlands, which has a long history with advertising, and 
Poland, which does not. Tailored advertising employs an individualized mes-
sage with unique information about the recipient (Maslowska et al., 2013). 
Using a sample of online Dutch and Polish respondents, the authors used an 

International Digital Advertising  353
experimental design with face cream advertisements as the stimuli that were 
either generic or tailored to the consumer. The authors found that Polish con-
sumers perceived the tailored advertising as more relevant and subsequently 
“became more involved and were less skeptical toward the messages, which 
led them to have more positive attitudes” (Maslowska et al., 2013, p. 504). The 
authors suggest that, due to a lack of experience with advertising as a culture, 
level of persuasion knowledge for Polish consumers is lower than in a country 
like the Netherlands, and as a result, their level of susceptibility to advertising is 
higher (Maslowska et al., 2013).
Consumer Considerations: Conclusion and Future Research
In total, the existing literature from a number of international contexts found 
that consumers worldwide value their privacy thereby suggesting that advertising 
tends to be more effective when marketers respect consumers’ privacy. Research 
also suggests that consumers tend to react more positively to advertising from 
marketers they trust. Also, advertising is more likely to be effective when it is 
relevant to the targeted user. These streams of research provide some guiding prin-
ciples to better understand how digital consumers on a global scale may evaluate 
and respond to digital advertising.
As a relatively young area of research, there is still much to be studied related 
to how consumers react to digital advertising, including how national cultures 
may shape consumer response. Digital advertising is a global phenomenon, so it is 
important to understand the important role being part of different cultures may 
play in the evaluation of online advertising by consumers. Although research in 
this area has been conducted using samples from various nations such as Europe, 
North America, Asia, and Australasia, more research incorporating a diverse set of 
national cultures is needed. As the developing world is gaining increased access to 
the internet, it will be essential for researchers to investigate and understand the 
“new” consumer of digital advertising.
Executional Variables and International Digital Advertising
In addition to understanding how international consumers react to digital adver-
tising, it is important to understand what elements of the advertisement itself 
influence success of the ad. The capabilities of digital advertising differ from more 
traditional forms of advertising in a variety of ways and, as a result, strategies that 
may have proven effective in other promotional contexts may not succeed online. 
Since marketers need to reach consumers in a variety of cultural contexts, it is 
important to understand which types of variables related to the advertisement 
translate across borders and which will not. Two variables that have emerged as 
especially important for effective international digital advertising in markets across 
the globe are interactivity and entertainment value.

354  Taylor and Costello
Interactivity
Based on the advanced capabilities of the medium, digital advertisements are able 
to achieve levels of interactivity with the consumer that are generally not possi-
ble in traditional forms of advertising, such as television or radio (see Chapter 1). 
Research has shown that across the globe, digital advertisements that promote 
interactivity attempt to engage consumers and improve the effectiveness of digital 
advertisements. In a study that focused on website advertising, McMillan, Hwang, 
and Lee (2003) used a field study that included a sample of consumers that had 
recently used one of several hotel websites. The authors found that perceived level 
of interactivity was the best predictor of consumer attitudes (McMillan et al., 2003). 
Dickinger, Haghirian, Murphy, and Scharl (2004) conducted a qualitative study of 
SMS advertising on European mobile marketing experts from industry and aca-
demia to understand success factors for digital advertising. The authors found that 
interactivity was related to more effective SMS advertisements (Dickinger et al., 
2004). Jelassi and Enders (2005) also found that when digital marketers incorpo-
rated interactivity into their advertisements, they achieved greater levels of success.
Interactivity also seemed to be important for social media advertising. Social 
media’s inherent interactivity perhaps makes it well suited for one-on-one inter-
actions with customers and may allow brands to provide highly personalized tar-
geting in their advertisements (Okazaki & Taylor, 2013). Although this area of 
inquiry is still relatively new, there exists some preliminary research that suggests 
that interactive social media marketing can lead to positive outcomes for the 
marketer. For example, in a survey study of fashion brand consumers in Korea, 
Kim, and Ko (2010) found that interaction of social media marketing had a posi-
tive effect on purchase intentions for the product. In a follow up study that also 
employed a Korean sample, Kim and Ko (2012) again found that interactivity was 
an important variable for digital marketing and suggested that social media mar-
keting is pivotal for companies attempting to build brand equity.
Although the personalized and interactive nature of social media advertising 
has likely contributed to its success as a marketing tool, it may also have stifled 
research in global contexts. Okazaki and Taylor (2013) note there is a relative 
dearth of global research on social media and argue that this may be the case, in 
part, because “the combination of global and social media may have been viewed 
as mismatched since social media is often considered as a very personalized, rather 
than global, medium” (p. 58). The authors argue that this must be overcome, and 
that issues such as similarities and differences in the effectiveness of social media 
across cultures needs to be addressed (Okazaki & Taylor, 2013).
Entertainment
Entertainment is another variable that has proven to be important in digital 
advertising globally. Digital advertisements that can entertain the consumer are 

International Digital Advertising  355
more likely to be successful in achieving engagement and improving purchase 
intent. Raney, Arpan, Pashupati, and Brill (2003) studied the role of entertain-
ment on websites of four automotive brands. Using an experimental design and 
a U.S.-based sample, the authors found that the website that was high in enter-
tainment value and included a mini-movie had the most positive evaluations, 
greatest intent to return to the site, highest levels of arousal, and resulted in the 
highest levels of purchase intent (Raney et al., 2003). In a study that employed lab 
experiments with subjects in Thailand and Taiwan, Chen, Ross, Yen, and Akhapon 
(2009) investigated how type of banner ad, web localization, and involvement 
impacted the evaluation of a website. The authors found that both national sam-
ples preferred ads with animated and entertaining content as well as websites that 
had localized language (Chen et al., 2009).
In addition to advertising on websites, research suggests that consumers pre-
ferred mobile ads that are entertaining. In a study of Japanese teenagers, Oka-
zaki and Taylor (2008) found that entertainment value in SMS messages tended 
to increase the chance consumers would respond to a promotion. Truong and 
Simmons (2010) also found in a French context that entertaining mobile ads 
tended to be preferred and were even expected by consumers. In a cross-cultural 
study of U.S. and Korean consumer responses to mobile advertising, Choi et al. 
(2008) found that entertaining ads led to positive attitudes toward the ad and pur-
chase intention in both national contexts. The authors suggested that one way to 
increase entertainment in a mobile ad was to deliver the message in the context 
of an “advergame” (Choi et al., 2008). This suggestion gets further support from 
the research of Yeu, Yoon, Taylor, and Lee (2013), who found in an experiment 
using a Korean sample that banner ads shown in advergames had a higher chance 
of being remembered both implicitly and explicitly.
Cheng, Blankson, Wang, & Chen (2009) conducted a field study of four sub-
types of digital advertising in Taiwan: SMS mobile, MMS mobile, email-based, 
and internet-based (e-advertising). They found that entertainment was impor-
tant in digital advertising and that not all forms of digital advertising had the 
same potential for entertaining the consumer. Specifically, the authors found that 
Taiwanese consumers found e-advertising and MMS advertising more entertain-
ing, and viewed email-based and SMS advertising less positively on this attribute 
(Cheng et al., 2009). The authors suggested, based on the results, that consum-
ers preferred multiple rich media to text-only advertising (Cheng et al., 2009). 
This suggestion is consistent with research on banner ads that found that ads that 
employed visual cues tended to be more easily processed than ads that used only 
verbal or visual/verbal cues (Wang, Shih, & Peracchio, 2013).
Entertainment has also been identified as an important factor in social media 
marketing. In the previously mentioned Kim and Ko (2010, 2012) studies, enter-
tainment was identified as an important element of any successful social media 
marketing strategy. Entertainment was found to positively influence purchase 
intention, strengthened customer relationships with the brand (Kim & Ko, 2010), 

356  Taylor and Costello
and drove customer equity (Kim & Ko, 2012). This is an area in need of additional 
study, but early research seems to indicate that effective social media marketing has 
the potential to offer consumers novel and entertaining content that helps build 
the brand and increase purchase intent.
Executional Variables: Conclusion and Future Research
Research in a number of national contexts has continued to reinforce the impor-
tance of interactivity and entertainment value in effective digital advertising. How-
ever, a great deal still remains unknown in our understanding of what variables work 
best in digital advertising. While entertainment and interactivity have emerged as 
important factors, digital advertising can come in a number of forms and may 
enjoy greater flexibility in executional strategy than other forms of advertising 
because of technological capabilities. Future research should address the potential 
effectiveness of the different executional variables available at a firm’s disposal.
Additionally, more cross-cultural work in this area is needed. Although some 
challenges certainly exist (see Okazaki & Taylor, 2013 for a discussion of the chal-
lenges related to international social media research), it is incredibly important 
for firms to better understand how different tactics may be more or less effective 
depending on the culture of the market in which the ad is placed.
General International Digital Advertising Principle: Build 
the Brand
Thus far we have discussed what factors have led to the growth of digital advertis-
ing worldwide, we identified important considerations that may lead to successful 
consumer responses to ads, and we provided findings related to which executional 
variables have been shown effective in international digital advertising. This final 
section suggests a general philosophical principle that the authors believe should 
apply to all digital advertising, and we discuss research that supports and relates 
to this principle.
The general principle is this: most digital advertising, no matter the national 
context, must build the brand in the long run to be effective. In an early concep-
tual piece, Chiagouris and Wansley (2000) identified the ability for marketers to 
create intense bonds with consumers over the internet to build the brand. The 
authors argue that “When it comes to building a brand on the internet, never have 
so many talked so little of what may be the internet’s most stunning capability— 
strengthening the bond with customers and prospects” (Chiagouris &Wansley, 
2000, p. 35). Although much has changed in the world of digital advertising since 
this article was published, the principle still holds true. No matter what technol-
ogy is employed to reach consumers, the ultimate goal must be to build the brand. 
Research has supported the brand-building and sale-generating abilities of digital 
advertising in a variety of forms in markets around the world.

International Digital Advertising  357
In a survey of marketing managers of multinational companies operating in 
Europe and based out of the United States, Japan, and Europe, Okazaki and Taylor 
(2008) investigated the factors associated with implementation of SMS advertis-
ing. The results of this study supported the idea that managers from the European 
Union, the United States, and Japan would be more likely to adopt SMS advertis-
ing as a strategy if it would help to build their company’s brand (Okazaki & Taylor, 
2008). The study suggests that managers seem to believe that through encourag-
ing action and excitement that SMS advertising may help to build brand equity 
(Okazaki & Taylor, 2008).
In a study of banner advertising, Manchanda, Dubé, Goh, and Chintagunta 
(2006) used a general consumer data set of an online-only firm that sold health-
care and beauty products to consumers. The study established that exposure to 
banner ads did increase purchase probabilities, especially for current consumers of 
the brand (Manchanda et al., 2006). The authors also found that managers should 
expect effect sizes in banner advertising on the same order of magnitude for tra-
ditional advertising (Manchanda et al., 2006). Understanding how traditional and 
digital advertising work together to build brands is an essential issue for managers 
worldwide.
In a study that aimed to explore the connection between online and brick and 
mortar channels as well as digital and traditional advertising, Dinner, Van Heerde, 
and Neslin (2014) used data from a high-end clothing retailer in the United 
States. The authors found that the impact of advertising did not apply to just one 
purchase channel (i.e., online or brick and mortar) but rather applied across mul-
tiple channels (Dinner et al., 2014). They also found that online display and search 
advertising were more effective than traditional advertising due to cross channel 
effects on the offline channel (Dinner et al., 2014). The authors argued that firms 
may be underestimating the return on investment of online advertising because 
they are neglecting the impact it has on brick and mortar sales (Dinner et al., 
2014). This is important, as studies of managers have reported frustration with the 
measurement tools and models available to assess the success of digital marketing 
campaigns in building a brand (Cheong, De Gregorio, & Kim, 2010).
Research has also found that social media has the potential to build brands. 
Kim and Ko (2012) found in a study of fashion brands with a Korean sample that 
social media marketing that incorporated entertainment, interaction, trendiness, 
customization, and word-of-mouth (WOM) was more likely to be effective. They 
also found that social media marketing had the potential to increase value equity, 
relationship equity, and brand equity (Kim & Ko, 2012). Both relationship equity 
and brand equity had the ability to drive purchase intention, making effective 
social media a good tactic to increase sales of a brand (Kim & Ko, 2012). In a 
survey that used a German-speaking subject sample from companies across three 
industries, Bruhn, Schoenmueller, and Schäfer (2012) found that social media 
communications had a stronger positive influence on brand image than traditional 
forms of advertising. In another survey that used a sample of Polish social media 

358  Taylor and Costello
users, Schivinski and Dabrowski (2015) examined the role that both firm-created 
and user-created social media communications played in brand equity measures. 
The authors found that both firm- and user-generated social media brand com-
munications positively impacted brand awareness and associations (Schivinski & 
Dabrowski, 2015). They also found that user-generated social media brand com-
munications had a positive influence on brand loyalty and perceived brand quality 
(Schivinski & Dabrowski, 2015).
Conclusion and Future Research Directions
Digital advertising has become an essential promotional tool for firms operating 
in markets worldwide. As more individuals around the globe gain access to the 
internet and broadband connection through their computers and smartphones it 
is more important than ever to understand what matters most to consumers of 
digital advertising. Research suggests that consumers are concerned about their 
privacy, prefer marketers that they trust, and respond more positively to ads that 
are relevant to them. There is also evidence that national culture can influence 
responses to and preference for various forms of digital advertising. Consumers 
internationally also seem to have a preference for digital advertisements that are 
interactive and provide entertainment value. Most importantly, however, success-
ful international digital advertising must work to build the brand in the long term.
As a fairly new area of inquiry, there is a need for additional research in the area 
of international digital advertising in general. There have been a number of studies 
on digital advertising using samples from different nations; however, most of these 
studies are from highly developed countries. As more of the developing world 
gains access to the internet, new studies should focus on these consumers and 
the challenges of applying digital advertising principles in these global markets. 
Additionally, more cross-cultural research is needed to better understand the role 
culture plays in the success of digital advertising internationally. A limited number 
of studies have employed samples from nations with differing national cultures but 
more work is needed in this area.
Digital advertising is in many ways driven by technological innovation, so 
the ways in which marketers reach consumers online is constantly changing. 
Early researchers primarily considered a firm’s website when talking about digital 
advertising, but today and as noted in Chapter 2, the firm’s digital strategy may 
include search advertising, a mobile strategy, and social media marketing, among 
others. Digital advertising now can take place on a mobile phone or on a com-
puter, and consumers in markets that would have been unreachable through digi-
tal advertising not long ago are online and engaged. The dynamic nature of this 
topic makes it both exciting and challenging. New technologies must be investi-
gated; researchers and managers cannot simply assume that new forms of digital 
advertising will work in exactly the same ways as previous methods in different 
cultures. However, while we must understand that each form of digital advertising 

International Digital Advertising  359
has its own set of considerations, it is also important to look for unifying princi-
ples that hold true across different forms of digital media. These principles will 
allow for greater cohesion between the various forms of digital advertising that 
exist to marketers and for the creation of a unifying digital advertising theory that 
can be useful in a variety of markets across the globe.
References
Bart, Y., Stephen, A. T., & Sarvary, M. (2014). Which products are best suited to mobile 
advertising? A field study of mobile display advertising effects on consumer attitudes and 
intentions. Journal of Marketing Research, 51(3), 270–285. http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/
jmr.13.0503.
Barwise, P., & Strong, C. (2002). Permission-based mobile advertising. Journal of Interactive 
Marketing, 16(1), 14–24. doi: 10.1002/dir.10000
BBC News. (2015). Internet used by 3.2 billion people in 2015. Retrieved from http://
www.bbc.com/news/technology-32884867.
Brettel, M., & Spilker-Attig, A. (2010). Online advertising effectiveness: A cross-cultural 
comparison. Journal of Research in Interactive Marketing, 4(3), 176–196. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1108/17505931011070569.
Bruhn, M., Schoenmueller, V., & Schäfer, D. B. (2012). Are Social Media replacing tradi-
tional media in terms of brand equity creation? Management Research Review, 35(9), 
770–790. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/01409171211255948.
Carroll, A., Barnes, S. J., Scornavacca, E., & Fletcher, K. (2007). Consumer perceptions and 
attitudes towards SMS advertising: Recent evidence from New Zealand. International 
Journal of Advertising, 26(1), 79–98. doi: 10.1080/02650487.2007.11072997.
Chen, J. V., Ross, W. H., Yen, D. C., & Akhapon, L. (2009). The effect of types of banner ad, 
web localization, and customer involvement on Internet users’ attitudes. CyberPsychol-
ogy & Behavior, 12(1), 71–73. doi: 10.1089/cpb.2008.0199.
Cheng, J. M. S., Blankson, C., Wang, E. S. T., & Chen, L. S. L. (2009). Consumer attitudes 
and interactive digital advertising. International Journal of Advertising, 28(3), 501–525. doi: 
10.2501/S0265048709200710.
Cheong, Y., De Gregorio, F., & Kim, K. (2010). The power of reach and frequency in the 
age of digital advertising: Offline and online media demand different metrics. Journal of 
Advertising Research, 50(4), 403–415. doi: 10.2501/S0021849910091555.
Chiagouris, L., & Wansley, B. (2000). Branding on the internet. Marketing Management, 9(2), 
34–38.
Choi, Y. K., Hwang, J. S., & McMillan, S. J. (2008). Gearing up for mobile advertising: 
A cross-cultural examination of key factors that drive mobile messages home to con-
sumers. Psychology & Marketing, 25(8), 756–768. doi: 10.1002/mar.20237
Chu, S. C., & Kim, Y. (2011). Determinants of consumer engagement in electronic word-
of-mouth (eWOM) in social networking sites. International Journal of Advertising, 30(1), 
47–75. doi: 10.2501/IJA-30–1–047–075.
Dickinger, A., Haghirian, P., Murphy, J., & Scharl, A. (2004). An investigation and concep-
tual model of SMS marketing. In Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference 
on System Sciences. IEEE. doi: 10.1109/HICSS.2004.1265096.
Dinner, I. M., Van Heerde, H. J., & Neslin, S. A. (2014). Driving online and offline sales: The 
cross-channel effects of traditional, online display, and paid search advertising. Journal of 
Marketing Research, 51(5), 527–545. http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/jmr.11.0466.

360  Taylor and Costello
Hart, K. (2008, March 10). Advertising sent to cellphones opens new front in war on spam. 
Washington Post (p. A1).
Jelassi, T., & Enders, A. (2005). Strategies for e-business: Creating value through electronic and 
mobile commerce. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Johnson, T. J., & Kaye, B. K. (1998). Cruising is believing? Comparing Internet and tradi-
tional sources on media credibility measures. Journalism & Mass Communication Quar-
terly, 75(2), 325–340. doi: 10.1177/107769909807500208.
Kelly, L., Kerr, G.,  & Drennan, J. (2010). Avoidance of advertising in social network-
ing sites: The teenage perspective. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 10(2), 16–27. doi: 
10.1080/15252019.2010.10722167.
Kim, A. J., & Ko, E. (2010). Impacts of luxury fashion brand’s social media marketing on 
customer relationships and purchase intentions. Journal of Global Fashion Marketing, 1(3), 
164–171. doi: 10.1080/20932685.2010.10593068.
Kim, A. J., & Ko, E. (2012). Do social media marketing activities enhance consumer equity? 
An empirical study of luxury fashion brand. Journal of Business Research, 65(10), 1480–
1486. doi: 10.1016/j.jbusres.2011.10.014.
Manchanda, P., Dubé, J. P., Goh, K. Y., & Chintagunta, P. K. (2006). The effect of banner 
advertising on internet purchasing. Journal of Marketing Research, 43(1), 98–108. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1509/jmkr.43.1.98.
Maslowska, E., Smit, E. G., & van den Putte, B. (2013). Assessing the cross-cultural applica-
bility of tailored advertising: A comparative study between the Netherlands and Poland. 
International Journal of Advertising, 32(4), 487–511. doi: 10.2501/IJA-32–4–487–511.
McMillan, S. J., Hwang, J.-S., & Lee, G. (2003). Effects of structural and perceptual factors 
on attitudes toward the website. Journal of Advertising Research, 43(4), 400–409. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0021849903030393.
Merisavo, M., Kajalo, S., Karjaluoto, H., Virtanen, V., Salmenkivi, S., Raulas, M., & Leppäniemi, 
M. (2007). An empirical study of the drivers of consumer acceptance of mobile advertis-
ing. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 7(2), 41–50. doi: 10.1080/15252019.2007.10722130.
Möller, J., & Eisend, M. (2010). A global investigation into the cultural and individual 
antecedents of banner advertising effectiveness. Journal of International Marketing, 18(2), 
80–98. http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/jimk.18.2.80.
Moore, J. J., & Rodgers, S. L. (2005, January). An examination of advertising credibility and 
skepticism in five different media using the persuasion knowledge model. In American 
Academy of Advertising Conference Proceedings (p. 10). American Academy of Advertising.
Nasco, S. A., & Bruner, G. C. (2008). Comparing consumer responses to advertising and 
non-advertising mobile communications. Psychology & Marketing, 25(8), 821–837. doi: 
10.1002/mar.20241.
Okazaki, S., & Taylor, C. R. (2008). What is SMS advertising and why do multination-
als adopt it? Answers from an empirical study in European markets. Journal of Business 
Research, 61(1), 4–12. doi: 10.1016/j.jbusres.2006.05.003.
Okazaki, S., & Taylor, C. R. (2013). Social media and international advertising: Theoretical 
challenges and future directions. International Marketing Review, 30(1), 56–71. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1108/02651331311298573.
Okazaki, S., Katsukura, A., & Nishiyama, M. (2007). How mobile advertising works: The 
role of trust in improving attitudes and recall. Journal of Advertising Research, 47(2), 165–
178. doi: 10.2501/S0021849907070195.
Pagani, M. (2004). Determinants of adoption of third generation mobile multimedia ser-
vices. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 18(3), 46–59. doi: 10.1002/dir.20011.

International Digital Advertising  361
Pew Global Attitudes and Trends. (2016). Smartphone ownership and internet usage 
continues to climb in emerging economies. Retrieved from http://www.pewglobal.
org/2016/02/22/smartphone-ownership-and-internet-usage-continues-to-climb-in-
emerging-economies/
Pew Internet & American Life Project. (2014). Internet use over time. Retrieved from http://
www.pewinternet.org/Shared-Content/Data-Sets/2000/April-2000-Survey-Data.
aspx, http://www.pewinternet.org/data-trend/internet-use/internet-use-over-time/
PWC. (2015). Global entertainment and media outlook 2015–2019. Retrieved from 
http://www.pwc.com/gx/en/industries/entertainment-media/outlook/segment-
insights/internet-advertising.html.
Raney, A. A., Arpan, L. M., Pashupati, K., & Brill, D. A. (2003). At the movies, on the web: 
An investigation of the effects of entertaining and interactive web content on site and 
brand evaluations. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 17(4), 38–53. doi: 10.1002/dir.10064.
Schivinski, B., & Dabrowski, D. (2015). The impact of brand communication on brand 
equity through Facebook. Journal of Research in Interactive Marketing, 9(1), 31–53. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1108/JRIM-02–2014–0007.
Taylor, C. R. (2009). Editorial: The six principles of digital advertising. International Journal 
of Advertising, 28(3), 411–418. doi: 10.2501/S0265048709200679.
Truong, Y., & Simmons, G. (2010). Perceived intrusiveness in digital advertising: Strategic 
marketing implications. Journal of Strategic Marketing, 18(3), 239–256. doi: 10.1080/ 
09652540903511308.
Tucker, C. E. (2014). Social networks, personalized advertising, and privacy controls. Journal 
of Marketing Research, 51(5), 546–562. http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/jmr.10.0355.
Unni, R., & Harmon, R. (2007). Perceived effectiveness of push vs. pull mobile loca-
tion based advertising. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 7(2), 28–40. doi: 10.1080/ 
15252019.2007.10722129.
Wang, K. Y., Shih, E., & Peracchio, L. A. (2013). How banner ads can be effective: Investigat-
ing the influences of exposure duration and banner ad complexity. International Journal 
of Advertising, 32(1), 121–141. doi: 10.2501/IJA-32–1–121–141.
Yeu, M., Yoon, H. S., Taylor, C. R.,  & Lee, D. H. (2013). Are banner advertisements  
in online games effective? Journal of Advertising, 42(2–3), 241–250. doi: 10.1080/0091 
3367.2013.774604.
Zeng, F., Huang, L., & Dou, W. (2009). Social factors in user perceptions and responses to 
advertising in online social networking communities. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 
10(1), 1–13. doi: 10.1080/15252019.2009.10722159

Introduction
In this day and age, large sums of money are dedicated to commercial com-
munication on a global level. This budget tends to be divided into conventional 
media and nonconventional media. Very recently, nonconventional media used 
in communication has assumed large importance as far as its share of business 
budgets are concerned. Among the most-used advertising media during the last 
few decades, the internet is especially noteworthy. The analysis done by advertisers 
and marketers of the behavior and time dedicated by internet users is a testament 
to the level of the internet’s pervasiveness, as well as the number of hours, which 
are continually increasing, that are dedicated to surfing the web, to the detriment 
of time dedicated to other means of communication. The main contribution of 
this paper is to offer a description of the theoretical framework of the subject of 
online advertising effectiveness, looking specifically at a variety of digital advertis-
ing formats.
Additionally, special attention is paid to the specific case of social network 
sites (SNSs), examining the main aspects of advertising effectiveness in this set-
ting that have been studied in academic literature. We ought to be conscious of 
the fact that, in terms of the time spent by individuals connected to the internet, 
SNSs are the online platforms to which they dedicate the most time (Raacke & 
Bonds-Raacke, 2008; Hughes, Rowe, Batey, & Lee, 2012). Therefore, SNSs have 
become important places of high strategic value for placing advertisements. One 
analysis of time dedicated to the main social networks (Facebook, LinkedIn, etc.) 
shows elevated numbers of active user traffic. When faced with this situation, the 
SNSs must consider how to monetize their mass of users (e.g., Facebook has 
over one billion users already), as the main revenue source of SNSs is the sale of 
21
A REVIEW OF INTERNET AND 
SOCIAL NETWORK ADVERTISING 
FORMATS1
Francisco Rejón-Guardia and Francisco  
J. Martínez-López

Internet and Social Network Ad Formats  363
advertising space for publicity (Lipsman, Mud, Rich, & Bruich, 2012). This ten-
dency is related to the exponential increase of online advertising investment that 
has occurred in recent years (Nielsen, 2012).
Companies are aware of the importance of running campaigns on SNSs that 
prove relevant for the users. To this end, advertisers must concentrate on improv-
ing advertising efficacy. With this backdrop, this review addresses specific questions 
in relation to this topic, such as: What is understood about advertising efficacy on 
SNSs? Is advertising on SNSs more effective than advertising in conventional 
media? What are the perceptions, beliefs, and attitudes of the consumer toward 
SNS advertisements? Are they more favorable than in other advertising-saturated 
media? Nevertheless, analysis of the literature indicates that many questions about 
advertising on SNSs remain unanswered. The popularity of social networks and 
their recognition as a potential medium of advertising have grown so quickly that 
research studies have not been able to keep up with the pace of industry. With 
this work, we are also endeavoring to offer an integrated revision of the topic of 
advertising on SNSs.
This chapter further aims to update the main works on online advertising in an 
environment as volatile as the internet, with a specific focus on the study of online 
and social network advertising formats. This chapter provides the reader with an 
understanding of the position of paid social tools that can contribute to a brand-
spreadable media model. This study also assesses the efficacy of digital advertising 
on social networks, thus contributing to the creation of a theoretical framework 
for understanding effective brand campaigns. Finally, we make some theoretical 
conclusions and comment on noteworthy practices that are valid for practitioners, 
marketers, and researchers.
The remainder of the chapter is as follows: First, a starting approach to the 
online advertising framework is made, introducing a spectrum of advertising for-
mats used on the internet, with specific descriptions of formats used by out-
standing SNSs such as Facebook. Next, the topic of advertising effectiveness in 
the specific context of SNSs is addressed. Finally, some theoretical and practical 
concluding remarks about online advertising effectiveness are discussed, and inter-
esting future lines of research are pointed out as well.
Literature Review of Online Advertising
In order to establish a starting point for the study of efficacy of advertising on the 
internet, and more specifically, on SNSs, an analysis of the main articles of adver-
tising research has been performed. As a starting point, we examine the biblio-
metric study of advertising research on the internet by Kim and McMillan (2008), 
as well as the revision done by Ha and McCann (2008). Then we expand said 
analysis, incorporating recent studies that have emerged on the topic of online 
advertising messages published on the internet. We pay special attention to the 
analysis of the research focused on the topic of advertising on SNSs.

364  Rejón-Guardia and Martínez-López
Like McMillan, we also analyze the main works related to the study of internet 
advertising. To this end, a selection of specialized journals was chosen, highlight-
ing four main journals in the academic sphere related to advertising, marketing, 
and the internet. Journals were classified based on number of citations and impact 
factor, according to the Journal of Citations Report ( JCR), from which Journal 
of Advertising, Journal of Advertising Research, Journal of Current Issues and Advertising 
Research, and Journal of Interactive Advertising were selected. The authors, by means 
of a statistical analysis of the citations that appear throughout these publications, 
discovered that the main topics dealing with advertising on the internet were cat-
egorized into six themes: 1) effectiveness of internet advertising, 2) interactivity, 
3) electronic commerce, 4) advertising processes, 5) attitude toward the site/ad/
brand, and 6) comparisons to traditional media.
With the objective of updating the analysis performed by Kim and McMillan 
(2008), we did a revision of main contributions published on the subject of adver-
tising research. We selected, first, the most cited magazines in the area of marketing 
and advertising according to JCR (2011 edition), ranked by impact factor on its 
JCR’s subject. After the revision, articles were selected whose keywords included 
the terms advertising, internet, and social networks. Going forward from these 
works, a detailed classification of the apparent themes was elaborated and organ-
ized by year. The most relevant works were classified by themes based on their 
keywords and content, which most notably included advertising effectiveness, 
consumer behavior studies, effectiveness studies for different online advertising 
formats, internet and SNSs, electronic word of mouth (eWOM), user-generated 
content (UGC), and a neuroscience approach. The analysis period ranged from 
2003 to 2016. The main trends and topics related to internet-based advertising 
include:
•	
The growth of social communication platforms on the internet. Here, the anal-
ysis of eWOM (electronic word of mouth) on the web is especially interesting. 
A number of important studies evaluate eWOM produced in social networks 
(Riegner, 2007; Smith, Coyle, Lightfoot, & Scott, 2007; Lee & Youn, 2009; Oka-
zaki, 2009; Prendergast, Ko, & Yuen, 2010; Amblee & Bui, 2011; Chen, Wang, & 
Xie, 2011; Vázquez-Casielles, Suárez-Álvarez, & del Río-Lanza, 2013; Jin & 
Phua, 2014; López & Sicilia, 2014; Moran, Muzellec, & Nolan, 2014; Wallace, 
Buil, Chernotony, & Hogan, 2014; Kareklas, Muehling, & Weber, 2015; Shan & 
King, 2015; Wang, Cunningham, & Eastin, 2015). Special attention is paid to 
user-generated content (UGC) (Christodoulides, Jevons, & Bonhomme, 2012; 
Morrison, Cheong, & McMillan, 2013; Dickinson-Delaporte & Kerr, 2014) 
and the earned media (Nelson-Field, Riebe, & Sharp, 2012; Harrison, 2013; 
Spotts, Purvis, & Patnaik, 2014) on SNSs.
•	
The ease with which messages are propagated in the network and their 
bond with viral marketing. Specifically, it is proposed that the propagation 

Internet and Social Network Ad Formats  365
of messages is related to users’ need to construct and express their identity 
(Taylor, 2012; Ewing, 2013; Chen & Lee, 2014; Hayes & King, 2014; Grant, 
Botha, & Kietzmann, 2015; Shan & King, 2015).
•	
The existence of a long line of studies focused on the different advertis-
ing formats employed on the internet. From amongst these works, the most 
studied format is the banner. The evaluation of measures of behavioral effi-
cacy through CTR (click-through rate) stand out as noteworthy (Moore, 
Stammerjohan, & Coulter, 2005; Manchanda, Dubé, Goh, & Chintagunta, 
2006; Fourquet-Courbet, Courbet, & Vanhuele, 2007; Robinson, Wysocka, & 
Hand, 2007; Yaveroglu & Donthu, 2008). Studies of the factors that affect the 
click-through keyword search ads are also important (Yoo, 2012). The next 
most-studied format was video (Cha, 2013; Chen & Lee, 2014; Goodrich, 
Schiller, & Galletta, 2015; Grant et al., 2015; Li & Lo, 2015), and the advertis-
ing formats used on mobile platforms, including the use of apps as advertising 
spaces (Kim, Lin, & Sung, 2013; Fulgoni & Lipsman, 2014; Limpf & Voorveld, 
2015).
•	
Among the global SNSs, Facebook is the most dominant—and fastest growing— 
social medium, with more than 1.44  billion monthly active users as of 
March 2015. For marketers, Facebook’s platform offers a different kind of 
mechanism for communicating with their potential audiences, which gives it 
a very important role in companies’ IMC policies (LaPointe, 2012; Lipsman et 
al., 2012; Nelson-Field et al., 2012) and marketing strategies (LaPointe, 2012; 
Nelson-Field, Riebe, & Sharp, 2013; Logan, 2014; Wallace et al., 2014; Brettel, 
Reich, Gavilanes, & Flatten, 2015). Second comes Twitter, with 560 million 
active users in 2014 (Logan, 2014; Kinney & Ireland, 2015).
•	
The study of advertising efficacy through web-user behavior also emerged. 
Here, the focus of interest is on negative beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors 
that might arise when receiving and processing online advertising (Cho & 
Cheon, 2005; Taylor, Lewin,  & Strutton, 2011; Wise, Alhabash,  & Eckler, 
2013; Goodrich, 2014; Grant et al., 2015).
•	
The study of emotions caused by advertisements allows for a more accurate 
prediction of its efficacy than evaluative measures of information processing 
such as persuasion, brand linkage, cut-through measures, and even message 
delivery (Wood, 2012). Here, we see the recent interest in neuro-scientific 
approaches (Bakalash & Riemer, 2013; Steele et al., 2013; Precourt, 2015).
•	
Of the actions that improve the efficacy of messages in a given social net-
work, correctly predicting the criteria used to segment our target population 
proves crucial to increasing purchasing intent or product use in social net-
works (Dominic Yeo, 2012; Tucker, 2014).
Next, a description of high-relevancy advertising formats on the internet and 
SNSs is offered.

366  Rejón-Guardia and Martínez-López
Advertising Formats on the Internet
In the beginning, internet advertising employed simple formats that achieved a 
strong response from users (Rae & Brennan, 1998). As bandwidth connections 
have increased, the possibilities to create online ads have grown exponentially, 
since greater bandwidth allows the user to download a greater amount of infor-
mation. Furthermore, the technological development of programming languages 
and software has paved the way for a wide variety of internet advertising formats. 
This has led to current campaigns being composed of audio-visual and multime-
dia material. Therefore, advertisers are faced with the decision of which format 
best fits their creative content and advertising strategy needs.
In this day and age, one can find millions of websites that feature new adver-
tising formats with integrated multimedia elements, such as on-demand audio 
or video streaming. These formats were called rich media by the IAB (2011, p. 
16). As seen in Table 21.1, the principal advertising formats on the internet can 
be classified into four categories: integrated formats, floating formats, transitional 
formats, and the main mobile creative formats.
Among the integrated formats, the most important is undoubtedly the ban-
ner ad that, with more than 18 years of use, continues to be one of the most 
commonly used advertising formats on the internet. The first known banner on 
the internet appeared on the HotWired.com website in 1994 (Cho & Leckenby, 
2003). Since then, it has become the most frequently used advertising format on 
the internet and has also consistently sustained the interest of researchers. The 
banner is essentially a form of display advertising within a website, similar to what 
it has historically been in print media. Its primary objective is to attract traffic to 
the page of the advertiser, who pays for the ad’s inclusion on certain pages. Gen-
erally, banner ads are created with images (formats: GIF, JPEG, or PNG) or with 
animation developed through technologies such as Java, Adobe Shockwave and, 
most commonly, Flash. They are designed with the intention to grab attention 
and communicate the desired message. Therefore, banners do not necessarily need 
to conform to the graphics of their containing website. This explains the design-
ers’ effort to create attractive (or eye-catching) banners by combining different 
designs with high quality images, in 3D and with animation or movement.
Among the floating formats, the most studied are pop-ups and pop-unders. 
Pop-unders, in comparison with pop-ups, are less interruptive since they appear 
behind the main page that is being visited. However, for this same reason, they 
are not seen until the user closes the windows that they are using, making it more 
difficult for the navigator to determine which page activated the opening of the 
pop-under (Moe, 2006). Sometimes emerging formats of pop-ups activate new 
windows, occasionally creating an infinite loop, which, intentional or not, is nor-
mally very upsetting (Edwards, Li, & Lee, 2002; Quinones et al., 2008). Due to 
this, techniques and programs that block the appearance of this type of emerging 
window continually appear under the common names pop-up killers or pop-up 
blockers. In 2004, some of the most important websites (e.g., msn.com) began to 

TABLE 21.1 The Most Used Advertising Formats on the Internet and Mobile Advertising
Advertising formats
Types
•  Sponsored links
•  Ad sense
•  Banner
•  Expandable Banner
•  Leaderboard & Super Leaderboard—Provisional unit—970X 90
•  Medium Banner
•  Medium rectangle—300x250
•  Rectangle—180 x 150
•  Mega Banner
•  Skyscrapers—Wide Skyscrapers—160 x 600
•  Half page—300X600
•  Button 2—120X60
•  Micro Bar—88X31
•  Buttons
•  Full page-ads
•  Sponsored sections
•  Billboard—970x250 (Rising Start 2016)
•  Filmstrip—300X600 (Rising Start 2016)
•  Portrait—300X1050 (Rising Start 2016)
•  Pushdown—970X90 (Rising Start 2016)
•  Sidekick—300X250–300X600–970X250 (Rising Start 2016)
•  Slider—970X90 (Rising Start 2016)
Floating formats
•  Interstitials
•  Pop-up & Pop-up 
Large
•  Pop-under
•  Layers
Transitional formats
•  Interstitials
•  Superstitials
•  Preloaders
Advergaming
•  Product or brand placement
Email Marketing— 
Direct Marketing
Rich Media 
•  In-Banner Video file-loaded—300x250 180x150 160x600 
728x90 300x600
•  In-Banner Video Streaming
•  Expandable/Retractable
Electronic Bulletins
Mini-sites
Viral Marketing
Sponsorship
Mobile Marketing
Image Ads
•  Smartphone Static Banner—300x50
•  Smartphone Static Wide Banner—
320x50
•  Smartphone Interstitial—300x250
•  Feature phone Small Banner—
120x20
•  Feature phone Medium Banner—
168x28
•  Feature phone Large Banner—
216x36
Mobile Rich 
Media Ads
•  Smartphone Rich Interstitial—
300x250
(Continued )

368  Rejón-Guardia and Martínez-López
Advertising formats
Types
•  Smartphone Rich Banner 
Expandable—300x50
•  Smartphone Rich Wide Banner 
Expandable—320x50
Rising 
Starts
•  Adhesion Banner—320x50
•  Pull—320x50
•  Slider—320x50
•  Filmstrip (Tablet)—300x600
•  Filmstrip Full Screen—320x50
•  Full Page Flex (Interstitial or 
Inline)—320x50
Source: Elaborated from Rejón-Guardia & Martínez-López (2014) and IAB (2016)
TABLE 21.1  (Continued)
limit the use of emerging windows, considering them overly intrusive for users. 
The pop-up format has fallen out of use recently, as users consider it to be one of 
the most irritating and undesired features on the internet, according to IAB (2015).
Other commonly used formats on the internet fall into the category of transi-
tional formats, in which the formats known as interstitials and superstitials are found. 
This type of ad bears great resemblance to television advertising. The fundamental 
difference is that interstitials appear between two web pages of content. They are 
therefore referred to as transitional advertisements; in other words, the user sees the ad 
while they navigate between web page “a” and page “b.” Superstitials correspond to an 
interactive advertising format similar to a television spot, developed for sending a mes-
sage from a single sender to a single receiver. Next, the formats employed by the main 
SNSs are highlighted due to the businesses’ increasing investment in these new media.
Advertising Formats on SNSs
SNSs provide advertisers with a large amount of information from its millions of 
users (Hughes et al., 2012). When the quantity of users and the time dedicated to 
participation is high, SNS spaces begin to be attractive to companies, as they are 
able to use them to introduce their products or services through advertisement. 
The social networks’ interactive features also facilitate management of relations 
between brand and client by means of likeable experiences (Gensler, Völckner, 
Liu-Thompkins, & Wiertz, 2013).
Text, video, audio, and other multimedia-based content on the web (rich 
media) can be included in SNSs’ structure. The aim of businesses is to increase the 
number of followers a brand has, promote a network, share a promotion, generate 
notoriety, introduce a new product, etc. This makes SNSs especially interesting to 
advertisers, since they are in possession of larger space and greater flexibility than 
conventional advertising media, expressed in terms of interactivity, personaliza-
tion, and feedback (Benevenuto, Rodrigues, Almeida, Almeida, & Ross, 2009). In 

Internet and Social Network Ad Formats  369
TABLE 21.2  Social Network Sites—Advertising Objectives and Best Ad Formats
Social Network Site
Objectives and Goals
Social Network
Formats
Branding and 
dissemination
Twitter 
Promoted tweets
Promoted trends
Facebook
Promoted posts and content ads
Logout experience
LinkedIn
Promoted posts
Targeted display
YouTube
Masthead standard or expandable or lite
Spotify
Leaderboard ads
Homepage takeover
Audio
Video takeover
Brand app
Branded experiences
Google+
+Post ads
Engagement ads
Audience creation
Facebook
Like ads and sponsored stories
Twitter
Promoted accounts
YouTube
Promoted channel ads
Link
Facebook
App ads and app sponsored stories
Event ads
YouTube
TrueView in search and TrueView in stream
Sales or downloads
Facebook
Facebook exchange (retargeting and 
remarketing)
Facebook offers
Apps download
Register and database 
improvement
Facebook
Registration plugin
Lead generation
Lead manager
Share content ads
Twitter
Twitter cards
LinkedIn
LinkedIn ads
LinkedIn slide
LinkedIn Inmail
Source: Own elaboration
traditional channels, users maintain a reactive attitude, meaning they are passive 
and open to suggestions; this includes advertising. In contrast, in social media, 
users participate with a proactive attitude, providing content, photographs, and 
opinions. Because of these unique characteristics of social media and its users, 
conventional advertising actions normally obtain inferior results when compared 
to those that are launched on SNSs. Advertising becomes a fundamental axis on 
which the main SNSs base their strategies for monetizing their activity; they 
possess space, audience, and information about their users, through which com-
munication campaigns can articulate effectively and, most importantly, efficiently.
Table 21.2 presents some of the advertising formats employed by the most 
important social networks worldwide based on marketing campaign objectives.

370  Rejón-Guardia and Martínez-López
Facebook, considered to be the world’s largest social network (Darvell, 
Walsh, & White, 2011; Lipsman et al., 2012), presents the following advertising 
formats as part of its business strategy: sponsored pages, sponsored ads, sponsored 
stories, and the use of complementary material that can be incorporated into any 
web page and that can bring content and social features to any network. Amongst 
these, we find examples of “premium” advertising such as a like ad, poll ad, event 
ad, and comment ad. The advertising formats used by Facebook are fundamentally 
based in the use of promoted links with text and images, which can be located 
anywhere on the pages seen by the user, even the profile page. Advertisers are able 
to promote their own network and obtain registers/records of users through a 
landing page. Furthermore, these advertising formats allow detailed segmentation 
by sex, age, geographic location, job type, company, even by the users’ behavior 
in the social network.
Twitter, the number one microblogging social network in the world, has also 
developed unique advertising formats. It makes use of promoted tweets, which 
are comprised of advertising messages in the format of “tweets” (short messages 
of 140 or fewer characters) that appear in the search results for certain key words. 
These messages are labelled “promoted” to indicate that they are advertisements, 
although the properties of a classic “tweet,” such as the ability to retweet (i.e., a 
message that is duplicated or mentioned by another user), are preserved. Another 
of the unique formats employed by Twitter is known as “promoted trends,” i.e., 
promoted topics that subscribers use to spread information of interest, daily, 
weekly, or monthly. Known as “spreadability” (see Chapter 2), what is “spread” 
as a trend would be an advertising message pre-established by Twitter as a trend. 
When users search for current trends, they find the promoted trend displayed 
among the search results. However, Twitter does not accept all types of content to 
be promoted, and it solely permits those tweets that, at the time, are already enjoy-
ing certain popularity on the network. The most recent advertising innovation 
that has been incorporated into the network is known as a promoted account and 
consists of recommending an account or profile in the “who to follow” section. 
These accounts must have a relationship with someone whom the user already 
follows. In this way, the odds that a user of a social network will follow a promoted 
account are increased. This allows advertisers to become familiar with the infor-
mation shared on the social network that, from a communications standpoint, 
could prove interesting/useful. For example, a business like Coca-Cola would 
have a vested interest in its profile being visible in the zones of social networks 
that are dedicated to suggesting who to follow.
LinkedIn is a social network for businesses and professionals whose mem-
bers can create and develop a list of contacts with information on people and 
companies with whom they have formed a link or work connection. The main 
advertising formats used here are promoted posts and targeted displays, both of 
which allow the company to reach potential clients based on the orientation of 
the advertising content, which in turn is adapted to the recipient’s profile on that 

Internet and Social Network Ad Formats  371
social network. The variables that tailor the product to the potential client are the 
type of work the client does, the industry in which they work, education, skills, 
etc.
YouTube is the most widely used social network for video sharing, with mil-
lions of subscribers who upload millions of videos per minute to the site. You-
Tube offers various formats, the most important being the YouTube homepage 
masthead, with three variations: 1) standard masthead, 2) expandable masthead, 
and 3) masthead lite. These executable formats are located beneath the tool bar on 
the main page. YouTube deploys TruView technology to direct advertising only 
to the audience with most potential interest in the product, thus increasing cost 
efficacy. The formats that use this advert orientation include TruView in-display, 
which presents the advertisement simultaneously with YouTube videos, as well as 
on search pages or on Google’s display network, so that the advertiser only pays 
when the viewer decides to watch the video and clicks on the ad.
Spotify is a music streaming service whose business model is based on sub-
scriptions and freemiums; the latter offers a free service to customers in return 
for exposure to advertising. The most widely used advertising formats are leader-
board, homepage takeover, audio (spot, cover art, and clickable campaign name), 
and video takeover.
Finally, Google+ is an interest-based social network owned and managed by 
Google. Its most popular advertising formats include +Post Ads and engagements. 
Next, we delve deeper into the efficacy of online advertising, in particular the 
banner format, due to its being the most commonly employed advertisement 
strategy on the internet.
Effectiveness of Advertising in Social Networks
As mentioned, businesses use social networks to promote their products, improve 
communication with customers, and gain knowledge about the market. Accord-
ing to what has been observed, from the use of SNSs as an advertising medium, 
the following noteworthy phenomena occur: 1) an action-focused communica-
tion strategy unique to the business, which materializes in the exhibition of prod-
ucts or services and the creation of events and activities and 2) a communication 
distribution strategy, which provides and spreads content that is relevant for web 
users, but that is not exclusively produced by the company. The latter is more 
interesting to users that consult businesses’ profiles on social networks because the 
business makes content available that is not exclusively related to its own products 
or events, but is about news related to the sector or information relevant to the 
consumer.
Therefore, businesses, regardless of the strategy they decide to follow, must 
always concern themselves with spreading attractive and “impactful” content to 
the consumer. To do this, they make use of audio-visual content, promotions, 
discounts, updates, gifts, contests, etc. These tactics must be adapted to the unique 

372  Rejón-Guardia and Martínez-López
possibilities offered by each of the social networks to allow businesses to project 
themselves publicly. Regardless of the business’s intended use of the social net-
work, the true asset of these media lies in the number of users interacting with 
them. Precisely for the scope of their social reach, social networks are increasingly 
catching the attention of researchers in online advertising.
Likewise, the rapid growth of SNSs fuels advertisers’ search for new advertise-
ment options (Hart, 2007). This growing industry finds itself in a difficult position, 
as it has to find a balance between its need to generate profits through publicity 
and the users’ need to have uninterrupted experiences (Nutley, 2007). However, 
there are still few studies that deal with the unique characteristics of advertising 
on social networks. Specifically, advertisements on social networks possess certain 
features that differ from other media due to the responses that are not considered 
strictly as personal actions, but rather as actions shaped by the characteristics of 
the community (Zeng, Huang, & Dou, 2009). In this sense, there are several fac-
tors that influence individuals’ responses to the advertisement. For example, the 
influence the social and group norms have on the attitudes of its members and, 
therefore, on how the individuals of the group express themselves. The identity of 
members in relation to the group and its social norms will moderate the inten-
tion to accept advertising within the group. Thus, in groups where the members 
have a strong sense of identity, social norms will have a positive effect on the users’ 
intentions. The greater the sense of self held by the group members of an online 
community, the more likely the group will be to form an opinion about the 
advertisement (Zeng et al., 2009). Therefore, if businesses want to receive positive 
responses to their advertisements within SNSs, they must consider two factors 
that are key to the responses and behavior of the individuals who belong to the 
SNS: the ad’s relevance and value within the community. Specifically, when users 
perceive the advertising message as relevant to the theme of the community as 
well as aligned with the representation of their social identities, the ad’s presence 
will be seen as positive. This will garner more positive results (Fue et al., 2009).
In line with earlier considerations, studies like Nielsen’s (2010) have examined 
the value of advertising in communities on SNSs. To do this, an important distinc-
tion between formats was made to look at ads that were intended for the social 
network Facebook. This is the case with the ad on the landing page, composed of 
a creative graphic combined with an ad in text form. Nielsen (2010) also studied 
the use of ads on the home page that include social content allowing information 
about members of the social network to be added. Additionally, a format known 
as organic impression was used, which presents some claim or information about 
some of the members of the social network’s preferences regarding the advertis-
ing campaign. These last two advertising formats are based on what is known as 
earned media or publicity, a concept that has been used in the evaluation of public 
relations for years. Historically, publicity has corresponded with the number of 
times that a brand or brand-related image appeared in the nightly news, the front 
page of a newspaper, a movie, or a television program. Publicity’s key lies in the 

Internet and Social Network Ad Formats  373
brand not having paid for the exposure in any way. This means that the communi-
cation has been sufficiently interesting, entertaining, and has sufficient journalistic 
interest for the media to continue repeating the ad voluntarily. Therefore, in social 
media with social content, like SNSs, the consumer is invited to broadcast or sanc-
tion the brand to their online contacts through actions such as becoming a fan or 
by showing their approval of an action by liking, retweeting, or favoriting—a pro-
cess Chapter 2 refers to as “spreadability.” This tendency of spreadability makes the 
brands resort to advertising tools that come from means of social communication 
known as organic impressions. With this in mind, hybrid-advertising formats are 
being developed between paid and earned media communication (Nielsen, 2010).
The results obtained by Nielsen (2010) indicate that, in terms of advertis-
ing efficacy, when paid ads contain some form of social content, they produce 
a higher rate of recall, awareness, and purchase intentions. Furthermore, it has 
been observed that users exposed consecutively to a paid ad and an ad containing 
organic content show a three-fold increase in remembering the ad in addition to 
elevated purchase intent. Additionally, the extent of advertising efficacy was evalu-
ated exclusively in terms of the organic formats, based on the number of expo-
sures (frequency) necessary to produce a response from the user. It was found that 
knowledge and purchase intention continue to grow after 10 or more exposures 
to the message. Specifically, there is a gap in brand familiarity between consum-
ers exposed to the message three to nine times compared to those exposed 10 
times or more, with positive significant differences showing in this last category. 
This reflects the strong impact that organic impressions have on users, increasing 
the users’ disposition to continue processing the messages during long periods of 
time. Therefore, the takeaway from this study is that, in order to maximize profit 
and potential positive responses from earned media, it is necessary to invest in 
advertising on social networks. After investment, one must pursue positive actions 
on the part of users of the social network, as this adds social value. Moreover, there 
is a strong relationship between the users of a social networks’ rate of participa-
tion in a campaign and the number of organic impressions that said users make 
(Nielsen, 2010).
Additionally, to generate a reaction of some kind to the advertising message 
in any of its formats, it is essential to capture the social network user’s attention, 
keeping in mind the limitations of their attention. Specifically, some studies indi-
cate that social network users do not notice advertising in the conventional forms 
that are used in other media (Soares, Pinho, & Nobre, 2012). Up until now, users 
accepted a symbiotic relationship with conventional media (radio, television, or 
press), in which the presence of advertisements in the medium was the price or 
remuneration for receiving content either free or at a reduced cost (Taylor et al., 
2011). However, in SNSs, this remuneration does not exist. This relationship has 
been modified because the advertisement intrusively interrupts the flow of the 
consumer’s activity. This explains why a high degree of trust is given to advertise-
ments that arrive via word-of-mouth (WOM) between users (Steyn, Wallström, & 

374  Rejón-Guardia and Martínez-López
Pitt, 2010). Subsequently, the options provided by social networks such as Face-
book include promoting ads or suggesting ads to friends (Murdough, 2009). The 
benefits of positive WOM are important. It is estimated that each client who 
gets involved in the chain of WOM doubles the value of investment allocated 
to promoting a product or brand in comparison to ads sponsored by the brand. 
This behavior is able to convince twice as many clients to try or purchase the 
product. Nonetheless, businesses must be aware that negative WOM will have an 
inverse impact, potentially even more powerful than positive WOM. It is therefore 
imperative to avoid negative WOM (Trusov, Bodapati, & Bucklin, 2010).
Recent research on advertising efficacy has focused on advertisements in social 
networks. Specifically, Wood (2012) notes that perceived emotions through the 
advertisements are predictive of the message’s efficacy, in terms of outperformed 
persuasion, brand linkage, and cut-through measures. And Brettel et al. (2015) 
analyzed which Facebook advertising formats determine short-term and long-
term impact on sales.
Concluding Remarks
Advertising online assumes a strategic role for many businesses that use the inter-
net. In advertising, the approach to the evaluation of objectives is fundamental. 
Objectives should not solely be approached in terms of sales, as the effect of 
advertising on individuals is not always reflected in direct sales. Other variables, 
such as the improvement of attitudes or future preferences toward the brand, are 
worth outlining and obtaining. This chapter points out the importance digital 
advertising has taken on in the academic sphere, with the evaluation of certain 
online advertising formats (e.g., banner) being especially prolific. Moreover, sev-
eral lines of research have been highlighted for their relevancy and interest. Next, 
theoretical conclusions and noteworthy practices are provided.
First, as far as specific advertising formats go, the banner and its variants are the 
most commonly used on the internet today. Based on the literature review that 
we have performed, some recommendations can be made to practitioners so that 
they may properly use banner ads:
•	
Moderate use of banner animation. Excessive animation of the banner’s con-
tent can awaken negative attitudes toward the ad that, in turn, unleash unde-
sirable behaviors, such as advertising avoidance.
•	
Banners must be located in the most visible zones of the web page. The 
eye-tracking technique has proven to be revealing on this idea. In occidental 
cultures, where the people read from left to right, the most-seen zones are 
located in the right margin. Moreover, the first pages of the navigation menu 
are preferable to the pages that require deeper navigation within a website.
•	
The banner’s content must be relevant to the user and should, therefore, be 
chosen based on their interests. Furthermore, the banner must be designed 
with the right kind of creativity.

Internet and Social Network Ad Formats  375
•	
Forced exposure to the banner should be reduced. It is recommended to 
encourage voluntary exposure to the banner. The literature shows that vol-
untary exposure produces a greater probability of the message being pro-
cessed in a conscious and favorable form by the user. This increases other 
behaviors, such as the level of attention paid to the message; the likelihood of 
clicking, recognizing, and remembering the brand; and generally improving 
the attitudes and behaviors of the users in relation to the banner and brand. 
This allows the navigator to obtain more information about a product or 
service, thereby increasing the possibilities of a future purchase.
As for advertisement on SNSs, the key for businesses resides in exposure time and 
in the information offered by users. Currently, advertisements on SNSs are also 
essential for the execution of integrated-marketing communication campaigns. 
Below, we present some practical suggestions:
•	
Using SNSs as a means to grab the client’s attention or to house and cen-
tralize FAQ is crucial. It is advisable to develop a climate that promotes the 
participation of consumers in the recommendation of products or services.
•	
SNSs prove to be especially interesting as a tool for exploring the market. 
They are valid for product testing, launching new products or services, and 
analyzing options.
•	
Social networks can provide information on the direction and tendencies of 
the market based on the changes observed in consumers’ likes.
•	
Due to the strategic value of these relationships, management and control 
of the SNSs should be assumed by professionals; hence, the importance of the 
community manager (see Garrigos-Simon, Lapiedra Alcamí, & Barberá Ribera, 
2012). In this respect, businesses should engage with consumers once they 
have initiated activities in this setting. In other words, their strategies and 
actions must be planned and constant (Murdough, 2009).
•	
Relevance and strength in relations is key. One of the social networks’ main 
advantages is that the development of personal connections with consum-
ers leads to an increase in the number of revisits and time dedicated to the 
social networks. For consumers, the creation of connections and content is 
very important, which indicates that sellers are making good use of targeted 
advertising to raise the communicative efficacy of social advertising by using 
user profile data.
From the standpoint of greater monetization of SNSs through advertisements, the 
key is offering messages based on content that is both interesting and relevant to 
the user. The advertising innovation and creativity on SNSs can lead to voluntary 
and viral propagation of the advertiser’s messages, increasing the impact on the 
business’ target population. It is also important that SNSs make innovations in the 
use of metrics, allowing for better evaluation and control by businesses of their 
campaigns on social networks.

376  Rejón-Guardia and Martínez-López
With respect to the academic sphere and advertising research, there is a definite 
gap between what is being investigated and the real problems faced by businesses 
in the world of internet advertising. This gap is being increased by the current 
staggering proliferation of SNSs, which makes advertising research in SNSs espe-
cially interesting. In relation to these practical suggestions, we point out some 
possible research suggestions:
•	
Establishing differences with regard to which categories of products are 
especially suited to be promoted via social networks must be done. Another 
approach would be to establish if there are types of products or services not 
particularly fit for or not easily promoted through social networks.
•	
Determining what the key is to creating a message that will go viral and 
being spread in the interest of the advertiser is essential. Advertising clut-
ter in conventional media is one of the main causes for lack of advertising 
efficacy since it increases the probability that users will not process the mes-
sage. In this vein, it is fundamental to identify if the user perceives social 
networks as a medium with excessive advertising clutter and, if that is the 
case, to what extent this excessiveness affects the processing and efficacy of 
the advertisement.
•	
Evaluating the beliefs and attitudes generated by internet and SNS advertis-
ing is necessary. There is a wide variety of advertising formats available on 
the internet and in SNSs. It would be useful to identify which of them could 
help achieve the proposed advertising goals, as well as which are more fitting 
for each proposed objective.
Companies must note the users’ type of access to the internet and to SNSs. Soon, 
mobile devices and mobile-adapted environments are going to become crucial 
for reaching consumers. For example, there is a clear tendency toward access-
ing SNSs on the go, through brief connections by means of mobile devices (i.e., 
smartphones and tablets). It is therefore of interest to analyze the efficacy of the 
advertisement in a mobile setting. Through mobile devices, the advertiser can 
obtain precise information about the user’s location by using technologies like 
geolocalization. Information about the user’s whereabouts can provide an advan-
tage to contextual advertising. In the same way, the noticeably smaller screen size 
of mobile devices constitutes a limitation that should be studied, keeping various 
aspects in mind with regard to the message’s perceived intrusiveness, the possibil-
ity of message evasion, the improvement of advertising creativity, as well as the 
possible limitations of advantages that mobile technology can offer.
Note
	1	 This article is a shorter updated version of: Rejón-Guardia, F., and Martínez-López, 
F. J. (2014), “An Integrated Review of the Efficacy of Internet Advertising Concrete 

Internet and Social Network Ad Formats  377
Approaches to the Banner Ad Format and the Context of Social Networks,” in F.J. 
Martínez-López (Ed.) Handbook of Strategic e-Business Management, Springer, pp. 523–
564. Springer has kindly given permission to publish the article in this book.
References
Amblee, N., & Bui, T. (2011). Harnessing the influence of social roof in online shopping: 
The effect of electronic word of mouth on sales of digital microproducts. International 
Journal of Electronic Commerce, 16(2), 91–114. doi: 10.2753/JEC1086–4415160205.
Bakalash, T., & Riemer, H. (2013). Exploring ad-elicited emotional arousal and memory 
for the ad using fMRI. Journal of Advertising, 42(4), 275–291. http://doi.org/10.1080/
00913367.2013.768065.
Benevenuto, F., Rodrigues, T., Almeida, V., Almeida, J., & Ross, K. (2009). Video interactions 
in online video social networks. ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communica-
tions, and Applications, 5(4), 30:1–30:25.
Brettel, M., Reich, J. C., Gavilanes, J. M., & Flatten, T. C. (2015). What drives advertising 
success on Facebook? An advertising-effectiveness model: Measuring the effects on 
sales of “likes” and other social-network stimuli. Journal of Advertising Research, 55(2), 
162–175. http://doi.org/10.2501/JAR-55–2–162–175.
Cha, J. (2013). Do online video platforms cannibalize television? How viewers are moving 
from old screens to new ones. Journal of Advertising Research, 53(1), 71–82. http://doi.
org/10.2501/JAR-53–1–071–082.
Chen, T., & Lee, H.-M. (2014). Why do we share? The impact of viral videos dramatized 
to sell: How microfilm advertising works. Journal of Advertising Research, 54(3), 292–303. 
http://doi.org/10.2501/JAR-54–3–292–303.
Chen, Y., Wang, Q.,  & Xie, J. (2011). Online social interactions: A  natural experiment 
on word of mouth versus observational learning. Journal of Marketing Research, 48(2), 
238–254.
Cho, C. H., & Cheon, H. J. (2005). Cross-cultural comparisons of interactivity on corpo-
rate web sites: The United States, the United Kingdom, Japan, and South Korea. Journal 
of Advertising, 34(2), 99–115. http://doi.org/10.1080/00913367.2005.10639195.
Cho, C. H., & Leckenby, J. (2003). The effectiveness of banner advertisements: Involvement 
and click-through. Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly, 80(3), 623–645.
Christodoulides, G., Jevons, C., & Bonhomme, J. (2012). Memo to marketers: Quantitative 
evidence for change. How user-generated content really affects brands. Journal of Adver-
tising Research, 52(1), 53–64. doi: 10.2501/JAR-52–1–053–064.
Darvell, M. J., Walsh, S. P., & White, K. M. (2011). Facebook tells me so: Applying the 
theory of planned behavior to understand partner-monitoring behavior on Face-
book. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 14(12), 717–722. doi: 10.1089/
cyber.2011.0035.
Dickinson-Delaporte, S., & Kerr, G. (2014). Agency-generated research of consumer-generated  
content: The risks, best practices, and ethics. Journal of Advertising Research, 54(4), 469–
478. doi: 10.2501/JAR-54–4–469–478.
Dominic Yeo, T. E. (2012). Social-media early adopters don’t count. Journal of Advertising 
Research, 52(3), 297–308. doi: 10.2501/JAR-52–3–297–308.
Edwards, S. M., Li, H., & Lee, J. H. (2002). Forced exposure and psychological reactance: 
Antecedents and consequences of the perceived intrusiveness of pop-up ads. Journal of 
Advertising, 31(3), 83–95. doi: 10.1080/00913367.2002.10673678.

378  Rejón-Guardia and Martínez-López
Ewing, M. T. (2013). The good news about television: Attitudes aren’t getting worse. Track-
ing public attitudes toward TV advertising. Journal of Advertising Research, 53(1), 83–89. 
http://doi.org/10.2501/JAR-53–1–083–089.
Fourquet-Courbet, M. P., Courbet, D., & Vanhuele, M. (2007). How web banner design-
ers work: The role of internal dialogues, self-evaluations, and implicit communica-
tion theories. Journal of Advertising Research, 47(2), 183–192. http://doi.org/10.2501/
S0021849907070213.
Fulgoni, G., & Lipsman, A. (2014). Numbers, please: Digital game changers: How social 
media will help usher in the era of mobile and multi-platform campaign-effectiveness 
measurement. Journal of Advertising Research, 54(1), 11–16.
Garrigos-Simon, F. J., Lapiedra Alcamí, R., & Barberá Ribera, T. (2012). Social networks 
and Web 3.0: Their impact on the management and marketing of organizations. Man-
agement Decision, 50(10), 1880–1890. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/00251741211279657.
Gensler, S., Völckner, F., Liu-Thompkins, Y., & Wiertz, C. (2013). Managing brands in the 
social media environment. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 27(4), 242–256. http://doi.
org/10.1016/j.intmar.2013.09.004.
Goodrich, K. (2014). The gender gap: Brain-processing differences between the sexes 
shape attitudes about online advertising. Journal of Advertising Research, 54(1), 32–43. doi: 
10.2501/JAR-54–1–032–043.
Goodrich, K., Schiller, S. Z., & Galletta, D. (2015). Consumer reactions to intrusiveness 
of online-video advertisements do length, informativeness, and humor help (or hin-
der) marketing outcomes? Journal of Advertising Research, 55(1), 37–50. http://doi.
org/10.2501/JAR-55–1–037–050.
Grant, P., Botha, E., & Kietzmann, J. (2015). Branded flash mobs: Moving toward a deeper 
understanding of consumers’ responses to video advertising. Journal of Interactive Advertis-
ing, 15(1), 28–42. http://doi.org/10.1080/15252019.2015.1013229.
Ha, L.,  & McCann, K. (2008). An integrated model of advertising clutter in offline 
and online media. International Journal of Advertising, 27(4), 569–592. doi: 10.2501/
S0265048708080153.
Harrison, F. (2013). Digging deeper down into the empirical generalization of brand recall: 
Adding owned and earned media to paid-media touchpoints. Journal of Advertising 
Research, 53(2), 181–185. doi: 10.2501/JAR-53–2–181–185.
Hart, K. (2007). Online networking goes small, and sponsors follow. The Washington Post. 
Retrieved from http://search.proquest.com/docview/410179234.
Hayes, J. L., & King, K. W. (2014). The social exchange of viral ads: Referral and coreferral 
of ads among college students. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 14(2), 98–109. http://doi.
org/10.1080/15252019.2014.942473.
Hughes, D. J., Rowe, M., Batey, M., & Lee, A. (2012). A tale of two sites: Twitter vs. Face-
book and the personality predictors of social media usage. Computers in Human Behavior, 
28(2), 561–569. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2011.11.001.
IAB. (2011). IAB internet advertising revenue report. Retrieved from http://www.iab.
com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/IAB_Internet_Advertising_Revenue_Report_
FY_2011.pdf.
IAB. (2015). Rising stars ads and brand equity. Retrieved from http://www.iab.com/
insights/rising-stars-ads-and-brand-equity/
IAB. (2016). IAB display advertising guidelines. Retrieved from http://www.iab.com/
guidelines/iab-display-advertising-guidelines/
Jin, S. A. A., & Phua, J. (2014). Following celebrities’ tweets about brands: The impact of 
Twitter-based electronic word-of-mouth on consumers’ source credibility perception, 

Internet and Social Network Ad Formats  379
buying intention, and social identification with celebrities. Journal of Advertising, 43(2), 
181–195. http://doi.org/10.1080/00913367.2013.827606.
Kareklas, I., Muehling, D. D., & Weber, T. J. (2015). Reexamining health messages in the 
digital age: A fresh look at source credibility effects. Journal of Advertising, 44(2), 88–104. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/00913367.2015.1018461.
Kim, E., Lin, J. S., & Sung, Y. (2013). To app or not to app: Engaging consumers via branded 
mobile apps. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 13(1), 53–65. http://doi.org/10.1080/152
52019.2013.782780.
Kim, J., & McMillan, S. J. (2008). Evaluation of internet advertising research: A bibliometric 
analysis of citations from key sources. Journal of Advertising, 37(1), 99–112. doi: 10.2753/
JOA0091–3367370108.
Kinney, L., & Ireland, J. (2015). Brand spokes-characters as Twitter marketing tools. Journal of 
Interactive Advertising, 15(2), 135–150. http://doi.org/10.1080/15252019.2015.1101357.
LaPointe, P. (2012). Measuring Facebook’s impact on marketing. Journal of Advertising 
Research, 52(3), 286–287. doi: 10.2501/JAR-52–3–286–287.
Lee, M., & Youn, S. (2009). Electronic word of mouth (eWOM): How eWOM platforms 
influence consumer product judgment. International Journal of Advertising, 28(3), 473–
499. doi: 10.2501/S0265048709200709.
Li, H., & Lo, H. Y. (2015). Do you recognize its brand? The effectiveness of online in-stream 
video advertisements. Journal of Advertising, 44(3), 208–218. http://doi.org/10.1080/00
913367.2014.956376.
Limpf, N., & Voorveld, H. A. M. (2015). Mobile location-based advertising: How informa-
tion privacy concerns influence consumers’ attitude and acceptance. Journal of Interactive 
Advertising, 15(2), 111–123. http://doi.org/10.1080/15252019.2015.1064795.
Lipsman, A., Mud, G., Rich, M., & Bruich, S. (2012). The power of “like”: How brands 
reach (and influence) fans through social-media marketing. Journal of Advertising Research, 
52(1), 40–52. doi: 10.2501/JAR-52–1–040–052.
Logan, K. (2014). Why isn’t everyone doing it? A comparison of antecedents to following 
brands on Twitter and Facebook. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 14(2), 60–72. http://
doi.org/10.1080/15252019.2014.935536.
López, M., & Sicilia, M. (2014). eWOM as source of influence: The impact of participation 
in eWOM and perceived source trustworthiness on decision making. Journal of Interac-
tive Advertising, 14(2), 86–97. http://doi.org/10.1080/15252019.2014.944288.
Manchanda, P., Dubé, J. P., Goh, K. Y., & Chintagunta, P. K. (2006). The effect of banner 
advertising on Internet purchasing. Journal of Marketing Research, 43(1), 98–108. http://
doi.org/10.1509/jmkr.43.1.98.
Moe, W. W. (2006). A field experiment to assess the interruption effect of pop-up promo-
tions. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 20(1), 34–44. doi: 10.1002/dir.20054.
Moore, R. S., Stammerjohan, C. A., & Coulter, R. A. (2005). Banner advertiser-web site 
context congruity and color effects on attention and attitudes. Journal of Advertising, 
34(2), 71–84. doi: 10.1080/00913367.2005.10639189.
Moran, G., Muzellec, L., & Nolan, E. (2014). Consumer moments of truth in the digital con-
text: How “search” and “E-word of mouth” can fuel consumer decision making. Journal 
of Advertising Research, 54(2), 200–204. http://doi.org/10.2501/JAR-54–2–200–204.
Morrison, M. A., Cheong, H. J., & McMillan, S. J. (2013). Posting, lurking, and networking: 
Behaviors and characteristics of consumers in the context of user-generated content. Jour-
nal of Interactive Advertising, 13(2), 97–108. http://doi.org/10.1080/15252019.2013.826552.
Murdough, C. (2009). Social media measurement: It’s not impossible. Journal of Interactive 
Advertising, 10(1), 94–99. doi: 10.1080/15252019.2009.10722165.

380  Rejón-Guardia and Martínez-López
Nelson-Field, K., Riebe, E., & Sharp, B. (2012). What’s not to “like?” Journal of Advertising 
Research, 52(2), 262–269. doi: 10.2501/JAR-52–2–262–269.
Nelson-Field, K., Riebe, E., & Sharp, B. (2013). More mutter about clutter: Extending 
empirical generalizations to Facebook. Journal of Advertising Research, 53(2), 186–191. 
doi: 10.2501/JAR-53–2–186–191.
Nielsen. (2010). Advertising effectiveness: Understanding the value of social media ad 
impressions. Retrieved from http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/news/2010/
nielsenfacebook-ad-report.html.
Nielsen. (2012). The social media report 2012. Retrieved from http://www.nielsen.com/
us/en/insights/reports/2012/state-of-the-media-the-social-media-report-2012.html.
Nutley, M. (2007). It’s the influencers, not the social media, that brands need to target. 
Retrieved from http://www.marketingweek.co.uk/its-the-influencers-not-the-social-
media-that-brands-need-to-target/2056151.article.
Okazaki, S. (2009). Social influence model and electronic word of mouth. International 
Journal of Advertising, 28(3), 439–472. doi: 10.2501/S0265048709200692.
Precourt, G. (2015). How does neuroscience work in advertising? Journal of Advertising 
Research, 55(2), 112–113. http://doi.org/10.2501/JAR-55–2–112–113.
Prendergast, G., Ko, D.,  & Yuen, S. Y. V. (2010). Online word of mouth and consumer 
purchase intentions. International Journal of Advertising, 29(5), 687–708. 10.2501/
S0265048710201427.
Quinones, P-A., Vora, J., Steinfeld, A., Smailagic, A., Hansen, J., Siewiorek, D. P., Phadhana-
Anake, P., & Shah, A. (2008). The effects of highlighting and pop-up interruptions on 
task performance. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 
52(3), 177–181. doi: 10.1177/154193120805200306.
Raacke, J., & Bonds-Raacke, J. (2008). MySpace and Facebook: Applying the uses and 
gratifications theory to exploring friend-networking sites. Cyberpsychology and Behavior, 
11(2), 169–174. doi: 10.1089/cpb.2007.0056.
Rae, N., & Brennan, M. (1998). The relative effectiveness of sound and animation in web 
banner advertisements. Marketing Bulletin, 9, 76–82.
Rejón-Guardia, F.,  & Martínez-López, F. J. (2014). An integrated review of the effi-
cacy of internet advertising: Concrete approaches to the banner ad format and 
the context of social networks. In Handbook of strategic e-business management (pp. 
523–564). Berlin Heidelberg: Springer. Retrieved from http://link.springer.com/
chapter/10.1007/978–3–642–39747–9_22.
Riegner, C. (2007). Word of mouth on the web: The impact of web 2.0 on consumer 
purchase decisions. Journal of Advertising Research, 47(4), 436–447. doi: 10.2501/
S0021849907070456.
Robinson, H., Wysocka, A.,  & Hand, C. (2007). Internet advertising effectiveness: The 
effect of design on click-through rates for banner ads. International Journal of Advertising, 
26(4), 527–541. doi: 10.1080/02650487.2007.11073031.
Shan, Y., & King, K. W. (2015). The effects of interpersonal tie strength and subjective 
norms on consumers’ brand-related eWOM referral intentions. Journal of Interactive 
Advertising, 15(1), 16–27. http://doi.org/10.1080/15252019.2015.1016636.
Smith, T., Coyle, J. R., Lightfoot, E., & Scott, A. (2007). Reconsidering models of influence: 
The relationship between consumer social networks and word-of-mouth effectiveness. 
Journal of Advertising Research, 47(4), 387–397. doi: 10.2501/S0021849907070407.
Soares, A. M., Pinho, J. C., & Nobre, H. (2012). From social to marketing interactions: 
The role of social networks. Journal of Transnational Management, 17(1), 45–62. doi: 
10.1080/15475778.2012.650085.

Internet and Social Network Ad Formats  381
Spotts, H. E., Purvis, S. C., & Patnaik, S. (2014). How digital conversations reinforce super 
bowl advertising: The power of earned media drives television engagement. Journal of 
Advertising Research, 54(4), 454–478. http://doi.org/10.2501/JAR-54–4–448–453.
Steele, A., Jacobs, D., Siefert, C., Rule, R., Levine, B., & Marci, C. D. (2013). Leverag-
ing synergy and emotion in a multi-platform world: A  neuroscience-informed 
model of engagement. Journal of Advertising Research, 53(4), 417–430. doi: 10.2501/
JAR-53–4–417–430.
Steyn, P., Wallström, Å., & Pitt, L. (2010). Consumer-generated content and source effects 
in financial services advertising: An experimental study. Journal of Financial Services Mar-
keting, 15(1), 49–61. doi: 10.1057/fsm.2010.3.
Taylor, D. G. (2012). Self-enhancement as a motivation for sharing online advertising. Jour-
nal of Interactive Advertising, 12(2), 13–28. doi: 10.1080/15252019.2012.10722193.
Taylor, D. G., Lewin, J., & Strutton, D. (2011). Friends, fans, and followers: Do ads work 
on social networks? Journal of Advertising Research, 51(1), 258–275. doi: 10.2501/
JAR-51–1–258–275.
Trusov, M., Bodapati, A. V.,  & Bucklin, R. E. (2010). Determining influential users in 
internet social networks. Journal of Marketing Research, 47(4), 643–658. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1509/jmkr.47.4.643.
Tucker, C. (2014). Social networks, personalized advertising, and privacy controls. Journal of 
Marketing Research, 51(5), 546–562. http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/jmr.10.0355.
Vázquez-Casielles, R., Suárez-Álvarez, L., & del Río-Lanza, A. B. (2013). The word of 
mouth dynamic: How positive (and negative) WOM drives purchase probability: An 
analysis of interpersonal and non-interpersonal factors. Journal of Advertising Research, 
53(1), 43–60. http://doi.org/10.2501/JAR-53–1–043–060.
Wallace, E., Buil, I., De Chernotony, L., & Hogan, M. (2014). Who “likes” you . . . and 
why? A  typology of Facebook fans: From “fan”-atics and self-expressives to utili-
tarians and authentics. Journal of Advertising Research, 54(1), 92–109. doi: 10.2501/
JAR-54–1–092–109.
Wang, S., Cunningham, N. R., & Eastin, M. S. (2015). The impact of eWOM message 
characteristics on the perceived effectiveness of online consumer reviews. Journal of 
Interactive Advertising, 15(2), 151–159. doi: 10.1080/15252019.2015.1091755.
Wise, K., Alhabash, S., & Eckler, P. (2013). “Window” shopping online: Cognitive pro-
cessing of general and specific product windows. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 13(2), 
88–96. http://doi.org/10.1080/15252019.2013.826550.
Wood, O. (2012). How emotional tugs trump rational pushes: The time has come to aban-
don a 100-year-old advertising model. Journal of Advertising Research, 52(1), 31–39. doi: 
10.2501/JAR-52–1–031–039.
Yaveroglu, I., & Donthu, N. (2008). Advertising repetition and placement issues in on-
line environments. Journal of Advertising, 37(2), 31–44. http://doi.org/10.2753/
JOA0091–3367370203.
Yoo, C. Y. (2012). An experimental examination of factors affecting click-through of key-
word search ads. Journal of Current Issues & Research in Advertising, 33(1), 56–78. doi: 
10.1080/10641734.2012.675559.
Zeng, F., Huang, L., & Dou, W. (2009). Social factors in user perceptions and responses to 
advertising in online social networking communities. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 
10(1), 1–13. doi: 10.1080/15252019.2009.10722159.

Introduction: Digital Advertising, Empowerment, and 
the Continuous Impetus for Efficiency
The rise of digital advertising is no surprise since it offers advertisers more precise 
targeting, (Edelman, 2009) and consumers get more personalized messages. In an 
era of constantly increasing clutter and competition for the audience’s attention, 
better targeting is especially important for advertisers because it means increased 
cost effectiveness (achieving the goal for less or achieving more under the same 
level of input). Better targeting is arguably important for the increasingly more 
empowered consumer. Armed with information and knowledge, consumers can 
now be co-creators or even sole creators of messages—instead of recipients—and 
appreciate (or so advertisers hope) tailored and more personalized communica-
tion (De Keyzer, Dens, & De Pelsmacker, 2015). While research has suggested that 
online advertising can, indeed, help advertisers by increasing the overall advertis-
ing efficiency (e.g., Pergelova, Prior, & Rialp, 2010), there is also research indi-
cating that we should be careful when assessing the effects of digital advertising. 
Even though personalization decreases ad avoidance (Baek & Morimoto, 2012), 
online ads could lead to negative brand attitudes if they are perceived as distrac-
tors (e.g., Duff & Faber, 2011). Digital advertising campaigns typically employ 
multiple sources and can lead to multiple outcomes (both positive and negative, 
such as negative eWOM, negative brand attitudes, etc.); therefore, the methods for 
assessing the effectiveness and efficiency of advertising should ideally be able to 
reflect this reality and incorporate the multitude of potential results.
Rodgers and Thorson (2000), in their Interactive Advertising Model (IAM), 
directed the attention of researchers to the consumer-controlled and advertiser- 
controlled elements of the model. The importance of thinking about both 
22
MEASURING THE EFFICIENCY OF 
DIGITAL ADVERTISING
Albena Pergelova and Fernando Angulo-Ruiz

Measuring Digital Advertising Efficiency  383
aspects—and carefully considering the new multiplicity of consumer-controlled 
aspects—has only increased since the publication of the original IAM in 2000. 
Consumer-controlled aspects are increasingly not only at the level of outcomes 
(e.g., click on ad, form attitude), but at the level of input into the communica-
tion through, for example, consumer-generated advertising, consumer-generated 
advertising parodies, and even consumer-generated websites designed to praise 
a brand or spread negative eWOM about a brand. While interactive media have 
presented advertisers with opportunities for more precise targeting and com-
munication, they have also made them cede control over messages about their 
brands (Campbell, Pitt, Parent, & Berthon, 2011) through consumer-generated 
advertising, eWOM, and brand communities, among others. Conceptual devel-
opments in communications, advertising, and marketing literatures suggest that 
we are moving toward greater appreciation and preference for more participative, 
dialogue-based communication between companies/brands and consumers that 
are mutually controllable and responsive (Yadav & Varadarajan, 2005; Deighton & 
Kornfeld, 2009; Jenkins, Ford, & Green, 2013). While such a view is intuitively 
appealing given the shift of power to former consumer-audiences (which are 
now co-creators), the challenges of measuring digital advertising effectiveness and 
efficiency are only compounded. Against this backdrop, this chapter’s objective is 
to synthesize the digital advertising effectiveness/efficiency literature, propose a 
model that incorporates a broader set of metrics, including consumer empower-
ment, and outline a methodological measurement approach that can capture the 
diversity of inputs and outputs (both consumer and advertiser-controlled) gener-
ated as a result of digital advertising campaigns.
Current Ways to Measure Digital Advertising Effects
In this section, we provide a review of the digital advertising effectiveness litera-
ture, organizing it around two themes: advertiser-controlled inputs into the ad 
campaign and consumer-controlled inputs (Rodgers & Thorson, 2000), with the 
caveat that the distinction is fluid because of the consumer-advertiser interaction 
and interdependence in the process (Stewart & Pavlou, 2002). The review is not 
meant to be exhaustive, but rather is to illustrate the types of inputs into and out-
comes from digital advertising campaigns.
Digital Advertising Effectiveness Metrics from the  
Perspective of Advertiser-Controlled Elements
The ad type, ad format, and ad features are all advertiser-controlled elements of 
digital communication campaigns (Rodgers & Thorson, 2000). Looking at the 
digital advertising effectiveness literature from this perspective generates a picture 
of the diversity of ad formats/features and their (relative) effectiveness. Studies 
within this stream of literature have examined display (e.g., banner) ads, paid 

384  Pergelova and Angulo-Ruiz
search, social media advertising, mobile advertising, etc., either in isolation or in 
combination, including comparing digital and traditional advertising. The varia-
bles, considered as outcomes (i.e., variables measuring how effective ads are), tend 
to be slightly different depending on whether the study takes a broader marketing 
perspective or focuses on advertising-specific theoretical approaches. From an 
advertising point of view, the effectiveness variables used typically fall within the 
cognition (e.g., recall), affection (e.g., attitude toward the ad or brand), or behav-
ior (e.g., purchase intention) (CAB) model in advertising. Given that marketing’s 
key contribution to the organization is to stimulate demand for organizational 
products or services (Clark, Key, Hodis, & Rajaratnam, 2014), current literature 
on digital advertising effectiveness from this perspective studies the impact of firm 
controlled digital advertising inputs on consumers’ mindset metrics (e.g., brand 
awareness, liking) and on firm top-line performance (e.g., sales).
In the topic about the relative effectiveness of digital advertising, literature 
studies the impact of digital and traditional advertising on sales, brand recall, and 
customer spending and cross-buying behavior. Danaher and Dagger (2013) stud-
ied the impact of advertisements in television, newspapers, radio, magazines, cata-
logs, mail, search, and email on sales of an Australian upscale department store and 
found that television ads, catalogs, and mail had higher sales elasticity than search 
and email. In a similar study, Dinner, Van Heerde, and Neslin (2014) examined the 
impact of traditional advertisements, online display ads, and paid search ads on 
sales in a high-end clothing retailer in the United States, but the authors disentan-
gled sales into offline and online as well as the cross-effects of digital advertising 
on offline sales. Interestingly, Dinner et al. (2014) found that paid search had larger 
elasticity compared to traditional advertising when both direct and cross-effects 
were taken into consideration. Draganska, Hartmann, and Stanglein (2014) stud-
ied the impact of television ads, banner ads, rich media, and video on brand recall. 
The authors’ findings indicate that digital advertising showed the same effects as 
television advertisements if pre-existing knowledge of a brand was taken into 
consideration. Kumar, Bezawada, Rishika, Janakiraman, & Kannan (2016) studied 
the impact of social media on customer spending and cross-buying behavior of 
a wine and spirit specialty retailer. They found that the positive effect of social 
media was moderated by television ads and emails. However, current literature is 
not yet conclusive with regard to the advantage of digital advertising.
For example, literature on paid search assesses digital advertising’s impact on 
click-through rates, brand evaluations, and conversion. Agarwal, Hosanagar, and 
Smith (2011), for instance, studied the impact of paid search position in pure 
online retailers and found that although top positions increased click-through 
rates, bottom positions tended to increase conversions, revenues, and profits. On 
the contrary, Rutz, Bucklin, and Sonnier (2012) found that top position of paid 
search advertising positively impacted conversion in the case of a lodging chain. 
Yoo (2014) found that top-ranked keyword search ads for unknown brands gen-
erated greater recognition and more favorable brand evaluations along the primed 

Measuring Digital Advertising Efficiency  385
attribute than those ranked lower than well-known brands. Jerath, Ma, and Park 
(2014) studied the impact of keyword popularity on click behavior and found 
that more popular keywords increased the click behavior in organic search, while 
less popular keywords were associated with more clicks in paid search. Rutz and 
Bucklin (2011) found that generic keywords led to branded keywords, which in 
turn led to click conversions, and posited that research needs to focus on the chain 
of effects of generic and branded keywords.
Online display advertising seems to create awareness and recognition. Hoban 
and Bucklin (2015) examined the impact of online display advertising on impres-
sions of an online financial tools provider and found that these ads impact impres-
sions of new visitors (serving as an awareness tool) and of authenticated and 
converted users (serving as a reminder tool). Li and Kannan (2014) found that 
display ads and emails impacted conversion in the short-term while paid search 
and emails impacted conversions in the long-term. Chun, Song, Hollenbeck, and 
Lee (2014) examined contextual banner ads (in which marketers strive to develop 
customized images or texts more relevant to customers based on the content 
of web pages) on brand memory and attitudes toward the advertisement and 
brand, and demonstrated that contextual advertisements enhanced brand recog-
nition and induced favorable attitudes toward the ad. Li and Lo (2015) studied 
the effects of ad length, ad position, and ad-context congruity on brand name 
recognition in an online in-stream video advertising context. Baron, Brouwer, 
and Garbayo (2014) compared the effectiveness of large-canvas display formats, 
full-screen interactive “takeover” formats, and “skin” or wrap formats, and found 
that consumers exposed to large-canvas display and full-screen takeover formats 
were more likely to exhibit shopping behaviors, such as going to the brand’s site 
to learn more or looking for the product in stores.
Social media advertising has attracted a lot of research attention because of the 
high personalization possibilities of advertising on social networking sites (SNSs). 
For instance, De Keyzer, Dens, and De Pelsmacker (2015) demonstrated that per-
sonalized advertising on SNSs led to more positive consumer responses than non-
personalized advertising, mainly because personalized ads were perceived as more 
relevant. Thus, when an ad was perceived as personally relevant, attitude toward 
the brand and click intention improved (De Keyzer, Dens,  & De Pelsmacker, 
2015).
The mobile advertising literature focuses on the impact of mobile advertising 
on attitude, intention, coupon redemption, and on locational targeting. For exam-
ple, Bart, Stephen, and Sarvary (2014) found that mobile display ads positively 
affected attitudes and intentions but only for utilitarian and high involvement 
products. Danaher, Smith, Ranasinghe, and Danaher (2015) assessed the impact of 
mobile phone coupon characteristics on redemption and found that location—in 
addition to face value, expiry length, and timeliness—affected coupon redemp-
tion of snack foods. Mobile phones can also be used for location-based marketing. 
Fong, Fang, and Luo (2015) studied the impact of locational targeting for a movie 

386  Pergelova and Angulo-Ruiz
theater and found that, in the case of mobile discounts, competitive locational 
targeting (placing mobile ads near competitors’ locations) was more effective than 
own-location targeting (near a firm’s own location).
One important emerging stream of literature focuses on the potential negative 
effects of firm-controlled aspects of digital ad campaigns. For instance, Duff and 
Faber (2011) examined the effect of banner ads on affective evaluation rating for 
brands (e.g., like/dislike), and found that when ad viewers were engaged in a task 
unrelated to the ad, and ads were actively ignored, a negative impact occurred, 
even in the absence of any explicit memory of having been exposed to the brand. 
Goldstein, Suri, Macfee, Ekstrand-Abueg, and Diaz (2014) studied the role of 
annoying ads and found that these ads increased the tendency of consumers to 
abandon the website. Baek and Morimoto (2012) focused on the potential deter-
minants of advertising avoidance in the context of personalized advertising media, 
including unsolicited commercial email, postal direct mail, telemarketing, and text 
messaging. The authors found that privacy concerns and ad irritation had a direct 
positive effect on ad avoidance, while perceived personalization led to decreased 
ad avoidance. Goodrich, Schiller, and Galletta (2015) investigated intrusive online 
video advertisements and found that they negatively affected attitudes and inten-
tions toward both the advertised brand and the host website. Higher intrusiveness 
in their study was associated with greater abandonment of the advertisement, 
less favorable brand attitudes, and reduced purchase intention for the advertiser, 
as well as negative website attitudes and reduced revisit intentions for the web-
site, and informative or humorous advertisements were perceived as less intrusive 
(Goodrich, Schiller, & Galletta, 2015). Cho, Huh, and Faber (2014) included both 
potential positive (perceived informativeness, entertainment) and negative (per-
ceived risk, irritation) effects of viral advertising in their study, and found that 
advertiser trust influenced perceived informativeness and perceived risk.
Thus, the inclusion of both potential positive and negative effects in meas-
urement models is important because, as Duff and Faber (2011) postulate, the 
majority of advertising studies assume that ads that are not fully processed will 
either result in no impact or may have a positive effect on the consumer due to 
mere exposure. Yet, this view does not reflect the reality of many consumers that 
are annoyed by ads online and actively try to avoid them. To understand this, 
we review the literature on digital advertising metrics from the perspective of 
consumer-controlled inputs.
Digital Advertising Effectiveness Metrics from the 
Perspective of Consumer-Controlled Inputs
Consumer engagement has been suggested as an antidote to consumers that are 
empowered and connected in digital spaces, and that—by and large—want to 
avoid digital ads. Studies suggest that two-thirds of U.S. adults reject behavio-
ral targeting based on their prior search and browsing behavior (Turow, King, 

Measuring Digital Advertising Efficiency  387
Hoofnagle, Bleakley, & Hennessy, 2009). Thus, many authors have emphasized 
that to succeed in the new digital world, brands must relinquish control (e.g., 
Fournier & Avery, 2011). An implicit recognition of the need for more participa-
tive, mutually controllable, and responsive view toward digital advertising would 
inform studies that focus on consumers’ inputs into the communication process. 
Such studies typically investigate consumer-generated ads and eWOM/forward-
ing messages (viral advertising) that sometimes consist of ad parodies/spoofs and/
or online consumer reviews.
Consumer-Generated Ads (CGA)
Motivated by the contention that consumer-generated ads (CGA) may be more 
effective than traditional company ads and the scant empirical evidence on the 
topic, Lawrence, Fournier, and Brunel (2013) studied whether there is a perfor-
mance advantage for CGAs across a set of accepted measures of ad persuasion: 
attitude toward the ad, attitude toward the brand, brand interest, and purchase 
intent. The authors found that it is the fact that CGAs were made by people, 
not companies, that drove responses to them. Lawrence et al. (2013) posited that 
CGAs engaged viewers more on cognitive, personal, emotional, and behavioral 
grounds because of the presence of credible, authentic, and non-corporate con-
sumer source. Orazi, Bove, and Lei (2016) showed that the disclosure of consumer 
participation in the ad creation process resulted in positive ad evaluations. In addi-
tion to CGA, scholars have examined ad parodies. For instance, Bergh, Lee, Quil-
liam, and Hove (2011) investigated key dimensions of ad parodies (humor, truth, 
mockery, and offensiveness) and examined how they influence brand attitudes, 
attitudes toward the parodies, and intention to pass along the parodies. In their 
study, humor and truth were positively related to attitudes toward the parodies 
and intention to pass them along, while offensiveness was negatively related to 
attitudes toward the parodies; brand attitudes, however, were not impacted.
Viral Advertising and Electronic Word-of-Mouth (eWOM)
Viral advertising and electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM) have also received a 
good deal of research attention. Although viral advertising initiates with a marketer- 
designed ad, it is consumers’ decisions to pass along the ad and spread eWOM that 
is the essence of virality. Alhabash and McAlister (2015) define virality through 
1) viral reach (volume of message sharing and forwarding by internet users, e.g., 
shares), 2) affective evaluation (internet users’ explicit affective responses to online 
messages, e.g., likes and dislikes), and 3) message deliberation (internet users’ active 
and public deliberation of online messages, e.g., comments).
Cho, Huh, and Faber (2014) examined the influence of sender trust and 
advertiser trust on four stages of viral advertising effects, and demonstrated that 
sender trust influenced a wider range of viral advertising effects as compared to 

388  Pergelova and Angulo-Ruiz
advertiser trust. Kareklas, Muehling, and Weber (2015) investigated the influence 
of perceived source credibility on the effectiveness of health-related public service 
announcements (PSAs) and eWOM communications. Their results suggest it is 
not the advertising message alone that influences consumers’ responses but rather 
the commenters’ reactions to the claims presented in the PSA that also indepen-
dently contribute to consumers’ attitudes and behavioral intentions. Thus, Karek-
las et al. (2015) demonstrated that online comments impacted effectiveness in a 
similar way as other user-generated opinions, such as product reviews. Hennig- 
Thurau, Wiertz, and Feldhaus (2015) studied the impact of Twitter reviews on 
revenues in the case of an instant success product: movies. They found that nega-
tive Twitter reviews on Fridays reduced movie revenues of Saturday and Sundays 
by 15 percent. Alhabash, McAlister, Lou, and Hagerstrom (2015) reported a medi-
ating effect of viral behavioral intentions (e.g., likes, shares, comments) on the 
relationship between attitudes toward the message and offline behavioral inten-
tions. Schulze, Schöler, and Skiera (2014) studied the effectiveness of viral market-
ing and found that sharing mechanisms that used direct messages from friends and 
broadcast messages from strangers were significantly more effective for utilitarian 
products. Stephen and Galak (2012) studied the effect of traditional and social 
earned media on sales and found that although both traditional and social earned 
media impact sales, the elasticity of community rating—social earned media—
were higher than those of traditional.
In addition to consumer-generated content (CGC) and eWOM, studies have 
examined the effects of consumers choosing to self-disclose information in inter-
active advertising campaigns. According to van Noort, Antheunis, and Verlegh 
(2014), consumers’ self-disclosure to the brand stimulates favorable attitudinal 
(campaign and brand attitude) and behavioral (purchase and forwarding inten-
tions) consumer responses, especially for individuals who had relatively low online 
privacy concerns in the social network sites context.
Toward a More Inclusive Model of Effectiveness: 
Consumer Empowerment, Long-Term Company 
Performance, and Cost-Effectiveness of Digital 
Advertising
The common tie among studies cited above is that they look at digital advertis-
ing through the “stickiness” lens, i.e., they apply a traditional marketing “fun-
nel” approach in which companies produce marketing communications content, 
deliver it to consumers, and use the marketing tools with the higher probability 
of making consumers “stick” with the ad and consequently make a purchase deci-
sion. Even when researchers look at consumer-initiated and consumer-controlled 
aspects of the communication, such as eWOM, the research question is typically 
concerned with the issue of how to increase such behavior for the benefits of 
the marketer, instead of how to maximize positive outcomes for both/all parties 

Measuring Digital Advertising Efficiency  389
involved. This is surprising given the advancement in conceptual developments 
focused on participative, dialogue-based, co-creation approaches in both com-
munications and marketing (Deighton & Kornfeld, 2009; Jenkins et al., 2013).
For instance, Yadav and Varadarajan (2005) suggested that interactivity should 
be defined as the degree to which computer-mediated communication is per-
ceived by each of the parties involved to be bidirectional, timely, mutually con-
trollable, and responsive. This definition recognizes the need for a dialogue stance 
and takes a more dynamic and balanced approach where both the firm and the 
consumer exercise an influence on the process. Stewart and Pavlou (2002) suggest 
a focus on continuous interaction among actors where consumers and marketers 
are interdependent and influence each other’s development and evolution.
Empirical literature has provided an indication of consumers’ motivation to 
engage in social media from a uses and gratifications (U&G) approach, to explain 
why and how people use certain media to gratify their needs. As Kwon, Kim, 
Sung, and Yoo (2014) summarize, consumers are motivated by needs for social 
support, reinforcement of self through social interactions, and psychological well 
being, which includes self-esteem and life satisfaction. Yet, digital advertising 
effectiveness studies only approach these issues as motivations, and do not take 
into consideration those measures as outputs for the consumer (i.e., does a par-
ticipant’s self-esteem increase as a result of the interaction online?). Some studies 
have included consumers’ perceptions of interactivity (the degree to which the 
consumer perceives the website to be controllable, responsive, and synchronic), 
suggesting that if consumers perceive more control over their online purchase 
decision, more communication with the online store and other consumers, this 
would lead to favorable attitudes toward the site (Cui, Wang, & Xu, 2010).
Tucker (2014) studied the impact of online targeted ads (or more personalized 
ads) on clicks and found that—in the case of a not-for-profit organization— 
targeted ads were more effective when more privacy control was given to users. 
Additionally, Schumann, von Wangenheim, and Groene (2014) indicated that tar-
geted online ads may increase the willingness of users to disclose personal infor-
mation in free websites if normative reciprocity appeals were used (e.g., “Your 
support is required! Our service is free of charge for you—targeted ads help us 
fund it”).
These studies suggest that consumers appreciate openness, transparency, and 
the opportunity to have more control over the communication process. Con-
sumers’ appreciation for companies that engage in digital advertising from this 
stance will likely result in better and longer-term relationships and support (e.g., 
loyalty) to the organization. Thus, we advocate the use of metrics that reflect not 
only effectiveness for the advertiser but also desirable effects for consumers such 
as consumer-perceived value (Dao, Le, Cheng, & Chen, 2014), firm-consumer 
relationships that are beneficial to both parties (Kwon et al., 2014), and measures 
that empower consumers to make decisions and participate on their own terms, 
e.g., privacy control features.

390  Pergelova and Angulo-Ruiz
On a broader level, empowerment requires mechanisms for individuals to gain 
control over issues that concern them (Pires, Stanton, & Rita, 2006). For instance, 
Leung (2009) uses a three dimensional model of psychological empowerment 
in the context of civic engagement and user-generated content (UGC) with 
items reflecting self-efficacy and desire for control over one’s life and decisions, 
in addition to perceived competence (knowledge). Such measures can be usefully 
imported and used as a supplement to traditional company-centered effectiveness 
measures.
We postulate that if organizations are effective in generating outputs that 
empower consumers, this will lead to increased cost-effectiveness (efficiency) of 
advertising campaigns because of earned (not paid) media and increased willing-
ness of consumers to engage with and respond favorably to companies that vol-
untarily cede control and provide avenues for openness and dialogue. Only a few 
studies have looked at efficiency of digital advertising compared to other media 
(e.g., Pergelova et al., 2010; Cheong, de Gregorio, & Kim, 2014). Yet, it is impor-
tant to keep the relationship in mind, as well as the difference between effective-
ness and efficiency. While effectiveness measures the achievement of objectives, 
efficiency looks at the inputs (e.g., advertising dollars spent) in relation to the 
outputs/objectives achieved. Cheong et al. (2014) studied advertising spending 
efficiency among top U.S. advertisers from 1985 to 2012 and found that the more 
recent 2008–2012 period (the period during which the internet has become core 
advertising medium) has seen a distinct increase in inefficiency. Thus, the authors 
argue that despite the internet’s lower overall cost and greater audience tracking 
capabilities, online spending must be carefully tracked and managed for gains in 
efficiency coupled with achievement of objectives in relation to the efficiency 
levels.
Proposed Measurement Approach: How DEA Matches 
Developments in Theory and Offers an Assessment of 
Digital Advertising Efficiency
The new reality (message movement across platforms, UGC, and empowerment 
of participants, i.e., formerly the “audience”) necessitates a new way of measuring 
the effect of digital advertising that can capture the diversity of inputs and outputs 
generated as a result of digital advertising campaigns. Figure 22.1 presents an inte-
grative model incorporating both advertiser-controlled and consumer-controlled 
inputs, intermediate outputs (including those related to consumer empowerment), 
and long-term company performance. While one can envision different meth-
odological approaches for empirically testing this model (e.g., structural equation 
modeling), we present data envelopment analysis (DEA) as a method that easily 
incorporates multiple inputs and outputs and offers efficiency estimation.
The challenge of assessing the effectiveness of diverse digital advertising meas-
ures comes from the fact that such measures usually have multiple objectives, 

Measuring Digital Advertising Efficiency  391
Advertiser-
controlled 
inputs
e.g., 
display, 
search, 
social media 
ads ($)
Consumer-
controlled 
inputs
e.g., number 
of online 
comments 
(positive / 
negative)
Intermediate outputs
Consumer 
mind-set metrics
e.g., brand recall, 
recognition, 
brand attitude, 
click-through, 
purchase 
intention
Consumer 
empowerment
e.g., perceived 
control, self-
esteem, self-
efficacy 
Advertiser 
Outputs
e.g., long-term 
company 
competitiveness 
and performance 
metrics
FIGURE 22.1  Integrative Model of Digital Advertising Efficiency
related not only to build awareness, consideration, and preference, but also to 
enhance performance. We argue that this chain of effects should be addressed as 
a whole: digital advertising performance (advertiser-controlled and consumer-
controlled elements), mind-set metrics, and consumer empowerment.
One limitation of the techniques typically used in extant literature (e.g., 
regression analysis) is the restriction of the number of dependent variables pos-
sible to evaluate. In that sense, as we are working with constructs composed by 
multiple variables, we suggest DEA. This method is able to identify a specific best-
performing decision-making unit (e.g., a firm or a firm-time unit), and it is able 
to assist those units in setting goals in specific aspects considered in the analysis. 
In the DEA literature the term “decision-making unit” (DMU) refers to a pro-
ductive entity, which can be a firm, a business unit within the firm, a non-profit 
organization, a region, a country, or all entities that use inputs to produce certain 
outputs. Moreover, DEA is also relevant because it provides a single measure of 
overall efficiency computed for every unit under analysis and compared with the 
other units under analysis.
DEA was first proposed by Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes (1978) as an evalu-
ation tool for measuring and comparing productivity of DMUs. DEA has been 
extensively used in operations management (Banker, Charners, & Cooper, 1984), 
and has also been applied to advertising (e.g., Pergelova et al., 2010). DEA is a 
non-parametric, linear programming-based technique designed to measure the 
relative performance of DMUs, where the presence of multiple inputs and out-
puts poses difficulties for comparisons. DEA uses the ratio of weighted inputs and 
outputs to produce a single measure of productivity (relative efficiency). Efficient 

392  Pergelova and Angulo-Ruiz
DMUs are those for which no other DMU generates as much as—or more of—
every output (with a given level of inputs) or uses as little or less of each input 
(with a given level of outputs).
In designing DEA, it is essential to choose an appropriate orientation of the 
model. An input-oriented model would look for efficiency by proportionately 
reducing inputs, while an output-oriented model would focus on increasing out-
puts given a certain level of inputs. The efficient DMUs have an efficiency score 
of one (or 100 percent), while the inefficient DMUs have efficiency scores of 
less than one but greater than zero in an input-oriented DEA model, and more 
than one (or more than 100 percent) in the output-oriented DEA model. The 
efficiency of each unit, therefore, is measured in comparison to all other units. The 
model we suggest is an output-oriented DEA. The rationale is that we intend to 
maximize mind-set metrics and their performance consequences (intermediate 
and final output in our model) given a level of digital advertising initiatives. The 
model is provided below:
Model 1:
Max
s t
y
y
i 1
I
x
x
t
k
k
K
ikt
t
it
o
k
k
K
jkt
j
.
,
. . :
,
,..., ,
β
λ
β
λ
⋅
≥
⋅
=
⋅
≤
=
=
∑
∑
1
1
t
o
k
k
K
k
j 1
J
1
,
,..., ,
,
.
=
=
≥
=∑λ
λ
1
0
Where βt is the efficiency coefficient for the unit under analysis in period t 
(βt = 1 indicates that the unit under analysis is efficient and βt > 1 that this unit is 
inefficient. βt-1 determines the output growth rate required to reach the frontier), 
yit
o  is the observed outputs vector of the unit under analysis in period t, x jt
o  is the 
observed inputs vector of the unit under analysis in period t, yikt and xjkt refer to 
outputs and inputs vectors for the k (k=1, . . ., K) units forming the total sample, 
and λ stands for the activity vector.
Our model for capturing digital advertising cost effectiveness is different from 
basic DEA models because the generation of performance is the result of two 
consecutive and interdependent stages. Basic DEA methods treat the organiza-
tion under assessment as a black box, meaning just taking into account the inputs 
consumption and the output created. In the case of the proposed model, a more 
complex problem is defined, and the basic DEA may be insufficient. Indeed, as 
a relationship between the intermediate output (customer mind-set metrics) and 

Measuring Digital Advertising Efficiency  393
the final (long-term) output (competitiveness, sustainability) has to be established, 
network DEA is necessary. Therefore, a good approach of DEA for the proposed 
model can be based on network DEA. During stage one, digital advertising efforts 
(expended in t), are oriented toward the fulfillment of customer mind-set met-
rics or consumer empowerment maximization (in t). In stage two, the optimal 
level of customer mind-set metrics or consumer empowerment is added to the 
previous resources (marketing resources, expended in t) to optimize the level of 
long-term performance (in t). A firm oriented toward the optimization of long-
term performance should manage efficiently both stages in order to guarantee 
the achievement of the final goal. More details on network DEA can be found in 
Sexton and Lewis (2003), Lewis and Sexton (2004), and Angulo-Ruiz, Donthu, 
Prior, and Rialp (2014).
Another aspect that needs consideration is the role of undesirable outputs. 
Examples of such outputs can be negative reviews, negative word-of-mouth, and 
others. Directional distance function (DDF) based on DEA can help measuring 
efficiency of digital advertising taking into consideration desirable and undesir-
able outputs. Literature employs DDF in the cases of firms in industries that 
face environmental regulations (Diaz, 2009), since the “costs of abatement capital 
would typically be included on the input side, but no account would be made 
of the reduction in effluents on the output side” (Chung et al., 1997, p. 229). 
DDF aims to increase the desirable outputs while simultaneously decreasing the 
undesirable outputs. Chung et al. (1997) model the Malmquist–Luenberger pro-
ductivity index, which can be helpful to measure efficiency of digital advertising, 
including desirable and undesirable outputs.
To summarize, advancements in the DEA method make it especially suitable 
for assessing digital advertising: the method can accommodate multiple inputs and 
outputs, including undesirable ones, it can provide a measure of efficiency, and it 
is able to work with complex multi-stage models.
Conclusion
The quest to find the next best digital advertising tool and the newest metric to 
measure advertising’s short-term impact (e.g., Did yesterday’s Twitter campaign 
bring enough participants to our online contest?) could leave advertisers with 
little time to stop and think about the big picture and consider the strategic con-
siderations and the broader implications of their work. Yet, such implications are 
crucial for the long-term sustainability of any organization. The model presented 
here takes as a conceptual basis the idea of interactivity as mutually controllable, 
responsive, and open to dialogue environment, in which consumers will reward 
openness, transparency, and relinquishing of control on behalf of organizations. 
From a strategic, long-term perspective, we suggest that such a stance toward digi-
tal advertising will bring competitive advantage and enhanced performance out-
comes for companies, as it brings about greater levels of consumer empowerment.

394  Pergelova and Angulo-Ruiz
With the advancement of technology, interactions are no longer limited to 
face-to-face encounters. “Interactiveness” includes technology and infrastructure 
that permits two-way communication and ongoing dialogue between firms and 
consumers, but it goes far beyond this technical aspect. Interactiveness implies a 
change in the managerial mindset, moving away from one-way marketing and 
control and toward collaboration and value co-creation. Interactiveness, thus, can 
be seen as a dialogue of equals for joint problem solving, taking into consideration 
the interests of all involved parties. Looking at interactiveness from this perspec-
tive, it is neither a tactical solution nor a technological solution to help or comple-
ment traditional push/pull marketing activities. It is a philosophy, a culture, and as 
such, it should be built throughout the organization. A truly interactive approach, 
then, explicitly considers the different actors involved in market exchanges in 
their settings—as parts of the whole—as active participants in the system and in 
the value creation. Such an approach recognizes that the effectiveness of the inter-
active communication “hinges not only on how the marketer’s message influences 
the consumer but also on how the consumer shapes the interaction” (Stewart & 
Pavlou, 2002, p. 380). We, therefore, propose that a digital advertising measure-
ment approach from this perspective should incorporate both consumers’ and 
advertisers’ efforts (inputs) and consequences (outputs). It is our hope that the 
model and the measurement approach presented here will stimulate debate and 
advance research in digital advertising.
References
Agarwal, A., Hosanagar, K., & Smith, M. D. (2011). Location, location, location: An analysis 
of profitability of position in online advertising markets. Journal of Marketing Research, 
48(6), 1057–1073. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/jmr.08.0468.
Alhabash, S., & McAlister, A. (2015). Redefining virality in less broad strokes: Predicting 
viral behavioral intentions from motivations and uses of Facebook and Twitter. New 
Media and Society, 17(8), 1317–1339. doi: 10.1177/1461444814523726.
Alhabash, S., McAlister, A., Lou, C., & Hagerstrom, A. (2015). From clicks to behaviors: The 
mediating effect of intentions to like, share, and comment on the relationship between 
message evaluations and offline behavioral intentions. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 
15(2), 82–96. doi: 10.1080/15252019.2015.1071677.
Angulo-Ruiz, F., Donthu, N., Prior, D., & Rialp, J. (2014). The financial contribution of 
customer-oriented marketing capability. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 42, 
380–399. doi: 10.1007/s11747–013–0353–6.
Baek, T. H., & Morimoto, M. (2012). Stay away from me. Journal of Advertising, 41(1), 59–76. 
doi: 10.2753/JOA0091–3367410105.
Banker, R., Charnes, A., & Cooper, W. (1984). Some models for estimating technical and 
scale inefficiencies in data envelopment analysis. Management Science, 30, 1078–1092. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.30.9.1078.
Baron, S., Brouwer, C.,  & Garbayo, A. (2014). A  model for delivering branding value 
through high-impact digital advertising. Journal of Advertising Research, 54(3), 286–291. 
doi: 10.2501/JAR-54–3–286–291.
Bart, Y., Stephen, A. T., & Sarvary, M. (2014). Which products are best suited to mobile 
advertising? A field study of mobile display advertising effects on consumer attitudes and 

Measuring Digital Advertising Efficiency  395
intentions. Journal of Marketing Research, 51(3), 270–285. http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/
jmr.13.0503.
Bergh, B., Lee, M., Quilliam, E., & Hove, T. (2011). The multidimensional nature and brand 
impact of user-generated ad parodies in social media. International Journal of Advertising, 
30(1), 103–131. doi: 10.2501/IJA-30–1–103–131.
Campbell, C., Pitt, L., Parent, M., & Berthon, P. (2011). Understanding consumer conversa-
tions around ads in a web 2.0 world. Journal of Advertising, 40(1), 87–102. doi: 10.2753/
JOA0091–3367400106.
Charnes, A., Cooper, W., & Rhodes, E. (1978). Measuring the efficiency of decision making  
units. European Journal of Operational Research, 3, 429–444. doi: 10.1016/0377– 
2217(78)90138–8.
Cheong, Y., de Gregorio, F., & Kim, K. (2014). Advertising spending efficiency among top 
U.S. advertisers from 1985 to 2012: Overspending or smart managing? Journal of Adver-
tising, 43(4), 344–358. doi: 10.1080/00913367.2014.884955.
Cho, S., Huh, J., & Faber, R. (2014). The influence of sender trust and advertiser trust 
on multistage effects of viral advertising. Journal of Advertising, 43(1), 100–114. doi: 
10.1080/00913367.2013.811707.
Chun, K. Y., Song, J. H., Hollenbeck, C., & Lee, J. H. (2014). Are contextual advertisements 
effective? The moderating role of complexity in banner advertising. International Journal 
of Advertising, 33(2), 351–371. doi: 10.2501/IJA-33–2–351–371.
Chung, Y. H., Fare, R.,  & Grosskopf, S. (1997). Productivity and undesirable outputs: 
A directional distance function approach. Journal of Environmental Management, 51, 229–
240. doi: 10.1006/jema.1997.0146.
Clark, T., Key, T. M., Hodis, M., & Rajaratnam, D. (2014). The intellectual ecology of main-
stream marketing research: An inquiry into the place of marketing in the family of busi-
ness disciplines. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 42, 223–241. doi: 10.1007/
s11747–013–0362–5.
Cui, N., Wang, T., & Xu, S. (2010). The influence of social presence on consumers’ percep-
tions of the interactivity of web sites. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 11(1), 36–49. doi: 
10.1080/15252019.2010.10722176.
Danaher, P. J., & Dagger, T. S. (2013). Comparing the relative effectiveness of advertising 
channels: A case study of a multimedia blitz campaign. Journal of Marketing Research, 
50(4), 517–534. http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/jmr.12.0241.
Danaher, P. J., Smith, M. S., Ranasinghe, K., & Danaher, T. S. (2015). Where, when, and 
how long: Factors that influence the redemption of mobile phone coupons. Journal of 
Marketing Research, 52(2), 710–725. http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/jmr.13.0341.
Dao, W., Le, A., Cheng, J., & Chen, D. (2014). Social media advertising value: The case 
of transitional economies in Southeast Asia. International Journal of Advertising, 33(2), 
271–294. doi: 10.2501/IJA-33–2–271–294.
Deighton, J.,  & Kornfeld, L. (2009). Interactivity’s unanticipated consequences for 
marketers and marketing. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 23, 4–10. doi: 10.1016/j.
intmar.2008.10.001.
De Keyzer, F., Dens, N.,  & De Pelsmacker, P. (2015). Is this for me? How consumers 
respond to personalized advertising on social network sites. Journal of Interactive Advertis-
ing, 15(2), 124–134. doi: 10.1080/15252019.2015.1082450.
Diaz, G. (2009). Determinant factors of urban waste eco-efficiency in Catalunya: An institutional  
approach. Doctoral Dissertation. Retrieved from http://tdx.cesca.cat/handle/10803/1491.
Dinner, I. M., Van Heerde, H. J., & Neslin, S. A. (2014). Driving online and offline sales: The 
cross-channel effects of traditional, online display, and paid search advertising. Journal of 
Marketing Research, 51(5), 527–545. http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/jmr.11.0466.

396  Pergelova and Angulo-Ruiz
Draganska, M., Hartmann, W. R., & Stanglein, G. (2014). Internet versus television adver-
tising: A  brand-building comparison. Journal of Marketing Research, 51(5), 578–590. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/jmr.13.0124.
Duff, B., & Faber, R. (2011). Missing the mark. Journal of Advertising, 40(2), 51–62. doi: 
10.2753/JOA0091–3367400204.
Edelman, B. (2009). Who owns metrics? Building a bill of rights for online advertisers. 
Journal of Advertising Research, 49(4), 401–403. doi: 10.2501/S0021849909091028.
Fong, N. M., Fang, Z., & Luo, X. (2015). Geo-conquesting: Competitive locational target-
ing of mobile promotions. Journal of Marketing Research, 52(5), 726–735. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1509/jmr.14.0229.
Fournier, S., & Avery, J. (2011). The uninvited brand. Business Horizons, 54, 193–207. doi: 
10.1016/j.bushor.2011.01.001.
Goldstein, D. G., Suri, S., Mcafee, R. P., Ekstrand-Abueg, M., & Diaz, F. (2014). The eco-
nomic and cognitive costs of annoying display advertisements. Journal of Marketing 
Research, 51(6), 742–752. http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/jmr.13.0439.
Goodrich, K., Schiller, S., & Galletta, D. (2015). Consumer reactions to intrusiveness of 
online-video advertisements. Journal of Advertising Research, 55(1), 37–50. doi: 10.2501/
JAR-55–1–037–050.
Hennig-Thurau, T., Wiertz, C., & Feldhaus, F. (2015). Does Twitter matter? The impact of 
microblogging word of mouth on consumers’ adoption of new movies. Journal of the 
Academy of Marketing Science, 43, 375–394. doi: 10.1007/s11747–014–0388–3.
Hoban, P. R., & Bucklin, R. E. (2015). Effects of internet display advertising in the purchase 
funnel: Model-based insights from a randomized field experiment. Journal of Marketing 
Research, 52(3), 375–393. http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/jmr.13.0277.
Jenkins, H., Ford, S., & Green, J. (2013). Spreadable media: Creating value and meaning in a 
networked culture. New York, NY: New York University Press.
Jerath, K., Ma, L., & Park, Y. H. (2014). Consumer click behavior at a search engine: The 
role of keyword popularity. Journal of Marketing Research, 51(4), 480–486. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1509/jmr.13.0099.
Kareklas, I., Muehling, D., & Weber, T. J. (2015). Reexamining health messages in the digital 
age: A fresh look at source credibility effects. Journal of Advertising, 44(2), 88–104. doi: 
10.1080/00913367.2015.1018461.
Kumar, A., Bezawada, R., Rishika, R. Janakiraman, R., & Kannan, P. K. (2016). From social 
to sale: The effects of firm-generated content in social media on customer behavior. 
Journal of Marketing, 80(1), 7–25. http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/jm.14.0249.
Kwon, E. S., Kim, E., Sung, Y., & Yoo, C. Y. (2014). Brand followers: Consumer motivation 
and attitude towards brand communications on Twitter. International Journal of Advertis-
ing, 33(4), 657–680. doi: 10.2501/IJA-33–4–657–680.
Lawrence, B., Fournier, S., & Brunel, F. (2013). When companies don’t make the ad: A mul-
timethod inquiry into the differential effectiveness of consumer-generated advertising. 
Journal of Advertising, 42(4), 292–307. doi: 10.1080/00913367.2013.795120.
Leung, L. (2009). User-generated content on the internet: An examination of gratifica-
tions, civic engagement and psychological empowerment. New Media and Society, 11, 
1327–1347. doi: 10.1177/1461444809341264.
Lewis, H. F., & Sexton, T. R. (2004). Network DEA: Efficiency analysis of organizations 
with complex internal structure. Computers & Operations Research, 31(9), 1365–1410. 
doi: 10.1016/S0305–0548(03)00095–9.
Li, H., & Kannan, P. (2014). Attributing conversions in a multichannel online marketing 
environment: An empirical model and a field experiment. Journal of Marketing Research, 
51(1), 40–56. http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/jmr.13.0050.

Measuring Digital Advertising Efficiency  397
Li, H., & Lo, H. Y. (2015). Do you recognize its brand? The effectiveness of online in-
stream video advertisements. Journal of Advertising, 44(3), 208–218. doi: 10.1080/ 
00913367.2014.956376.
Orazi, D., Bove, L., & Lei, J. (2016). Empowering social change through advertising co-creation:  
The roles of source disclosure, sympathy and personal involvement. International Journal 
of Advertising, 35(1), 149–166. doi: 10.1080/02650487.2015.1096101.
Pergelova, A., Prior, D., & Rialp, J. (2010). Assessing advertising efficiency. Journal of Advertis-
ing, 39(3), 39–54. doi: 10.2753/JOA0091–3367390303.
Pires, G. D., Stanton, J.,  & Rita, P. (2006). The internet, consumer empowerment and 
marketing strategies. European Journal of Marketing, 40(9/10), 936–949. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1108/03090560610680943.
Rodgers, S.,  & Thorson, E. (2000). The interactive advertising model: How users per-
ceive and process online ads. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 1(1), 42–61. doi: 
10.1080/15252019.2000.10722043.
Rutz, O. J., & Bucklin, R. E. (2011). From generic to branded: A model of spillover in 
paid search advertising. Journal of Marketing Research, 48(1), 87–102. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1509/jmkr.48.1.87.
Rutz, O. J., Bucklin, R. E., & Sonnier, G. P. (2012). A latent instrumental variables approach 
to modeling keyword conversion in paid search advertising. Journal of Marketing Research, 
49(3), 306–319. http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/jmr.10.0354.
Schulze, C., Schöler, L., & Skiera, B. (2014). Not all fun and games: Viral marketing for 
utilitarian products. Journal of Marketing, 78(1), 1–19. http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/
jm.11.0528.
Schumann, J. H., von Wangenheim, F., & Groene, N. (2014). Targeted online advertising: 
Using reciprocity appeals to increase acceptance among users of free web services. Jour-
nal of Marketing, 78(1), 59–75. http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/jm.11.0316.
Sexton, T. R., & Lewis, H. F. (2003). Two-stage DEA: An application to major league base-
ball. Journal of Productivity Analysis, 19(2–3), 227–249. doi: 10.1023/A:1022861618317.
Stephen, A. T., & Galak, J. (2012). The effects of traditional and social earned media on sales: 
A study of a microlending marketplace. Journal of Marketing Research, 49(5), 624–639. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/jmr.09.0401.
Stewart, D., & Pavlou, P. (2002). From consumer response to active consumer: Measuring 
the effectiveness of interactive media. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 30(4), 
376–396. doi: 10.1177/009207002236912.
Tucker, C. E. (2014). Social networks, personalized advertising, and privacy controls. Journal 
of Marketing Research, 51(5), 546–562. http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/jmr.10.0355.
Turow, J., King, J., Hoofnagle, C. J., Bleakley, A., & Hennessy, M. (2009). Americans reject 
tailored advertising and three activities that enable it. Retrieved from http://repository.
upenn.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1138&context=asc_papers.
Van Noort, G., Antheunis, M. L., & Verlegh, P. W. (2014). Enhancing the effects of social 
network site marketing campaigns: If you want consumers to like you, ask them about 
themselves. International Journal of Advertising, 33(2), 235–252. doi: 10.2501/IJA-33– 
2–235–252.
Yadav, M., & Varadarajan, R. (2005). Interactivity in the electronic marketplace: An exposi-
tion of the concept and implications for research. Journal of the Academy of Marketing 
Science, 33(4), 585–603. doi: 10.1177/0092070305278487.
Yoo, C. Y. (2014). Branding potentials of keyword search ads: The effects of ad rankings on 
brand recognition and evaluations. Journal of Advertising, 43(1), 85–99. doi: 10.1080/ 
00913367.2013.845541.

Introduction
Over the past 15 years, use of information and communication technologies has 
grown exponentially. This includes a rapid increase in global internet users, who 
made up a mere 6.5 percent of the world’s population in 2000, but in 2015 repre-
sent an unprecedented 43 percent of the entire global populace (ITU, 2015). This 
nearly seven-fold increase equates to some 3.2 billion people now online, accord-
ing to the International Telecommunication Union, a United Nations’ specialized 
agency (ITU, 2015). All these individuals are potential consumers in a growing 
and diverse globalized digital marketplace. Accompanying this growth, opportu-
nities and challenges to harness the immense promise of digital advertising have 
proliferated, especially as information communication technologies have evolved 
from Web 1.0 (static websites and “readable” content) to Web 2.0 (interaction 
between web users and websites and “writable” content) to Web 3.0 (a.k.a., “the 
intelligent Web” emphasizing machine-facilitated understanding of information) 
and now to a ubiquitous presence of the mobile web (i.e., internet connected 
mobile devices).
Within this rapid rise of “all things digital,” pharmaceutical and health mar-
keting has emerged as a key industry segment in digital media. This growth is 
driven by a simple fact: More internet users means more people searching for, 
interacting with, and consuming health information online. In fact, according to 
the Pew Research Center’s Pew Internet Project, 72 percent of U.S. adult inter-
net users have searched for health information online within the past year. The 
most common searches sought information about specific diseases or conditions, 
explored available treatments and/or procedures, and queried for information 
about healthcare professionals (Pew Internet, 2014).
23
HEALTH ADVERTISING IN THE 
DIGITAL AGE
Future Trends and Challenges
Tim K. Mackey and Bryan A. Liang

Health Advertising in the Digital Age  399
For example, many internet users turn to “Dr. Google” in order to look up 
health information for others (including caregivers who commonly use technol-
ogy to aid with decisions regarding a wide-range of health activities), use internet- 
obtained information to try to self-diagnose a medical condition, or attempt to 
learn about the experiences of other users as a potential guide for their own 
health concerns (a.k.a., peer-to-peer healthcare). Additionally, about one-quarter 
of internet users watch online videos about health or medical issues and have con-
sulted online reviews to gauge opinions about drugs or medical treatments (Fox, 
2011). Finally, another emerging trend is the phenomenon of tracking health 
indicators using mobile devices or other online tools, with surveys estimating that 
seven out of 10 people track at least one health indicator such as weight, exercise, 
blood pressure, or sleeping habits (Pew Internet, 2014).
Importantly, this growth in digital health offerings has required healthcare 
professionals, hospitals, and marketers to develop tools, strategies, and campaigns 
targeted toward a new and growing segment of “e-patients,” i.e., those health con-
sumers using e-communication tools to source information about medical issues 
impacting themselves or their families. This market has been estimated at some 
$1.8 billion in U.S. measured media according to a global marketing research firm 
(Rodriguez, 2014).
However, health is uniquely situated compared to other forms of commercial 
and consumer-based advertising. Thus, digital health marketing can have broad 
societal implications that go far beyond consumer product and service promotion, 
since it directly impacts the health of individuals, communities, and populations. 
Because of this heightened importance and its potential to both positively and 
negatively impact health and wellness, the evolution of digital health marketing 
has been marked (and marred) by unique challenges.
To understand these challenges and the opportunities they present to bet-
ter promote health, the broader network of marketers and message movements 
occurring across digital platforms must be assessed. This includes the complex 
process, touched on in Chapter 2, of “promotional radiating,” except in health 
marketing, this process includes changing existing dynamics between consumers, 
patients, healthcare professionals, institutional providers, pharmaceutical manufac-
turers, and health marketers themselves.
Hence, in this chapter we provide a review of e-marketing in health. We begin 
with a brief history of health and pharmaceutical marketing, a longstanding focus 
of global policymakers regarding the potential dangers of health marketing, and 
how challenges faced more than a century ago continue to reverberate in today’s 
continuously shifting digital media landscape. We then discuss some of the unique 
attributes of health and pharmaceutical marketing (including examining the cur-
rent debate over direct-to-consumer (DTC) advertising of prescription drugs), 
explore the evolving role of social networking in health promotion and services, 
and discuss the quality and policy implications of having a lack of reliable data on 
health marketing expenditures. We also explore emerging trends, strategies, and 

400  Mackey and Liang
future challenges for digital health marketing that loom on the horizon, includ-
ing an examination of patient engagement portals, prescription drug coupons, 
health internet domains, and the criminalization of illicit online health marketing. 
Finally, we conclude with a discussion of how rapid changes in the media land-
scape that are being fueled by digital technologies and media are also changing 
the dynamics between patients, healthcare providers, and drug manufacturers, and 
what this could mean for the future of health marketing.
Pulp to Digital: A Brief History of the Evolution of Health 
and Pharmaceutical Marketing
Health marketing is in no way a recent phenomenon. In fact, the history of health, 
and more specifically, pharmaceutical marketing, begins prior to the advent of the 
modern concept of prescription drugs. Early pharmaceutical marketing traces its 
origins back to the early 19th century when “Nostrum-mongers” (i.e., dealers or 
suppliers of quack remedies) pioneered questionable marketing practices for their 
“health products” through the use of traditional media formats including print adver-
tising, packaging, trademarks thereon, and even traveling medical shows (Applbaum, 
2006, p. e189). This early and unregulated form of consumer health marketing came 
at the direct expense of patients and can be viewed as an extension of fraudulent 
medical “quackery” practices that sprung up in the 17th and 18th century (Rodgers, 
1927, p. 1502). Promotion and sale of nonprescription “nostrums,” “patent medi-
cines,” “elixirs,” or “cures” were simply sales of amalgamated materials with no proof 
of efficacy, often containing dangerous ingredients (including cocaine and heroin, 
intentionally added, and antifreeze, unintentionally added). Such marketing exposed 
the public to harmful health effects, drug addiction, and death (Till, 2009).
It was not until the 1906 Pure Food and Drug Act by the U.S. Congress that 
policymakers recognized the health concerns with unfettered marketing. The Act 
mandated labeling of drug ingredients and monitoring of purity levels while also 
paving the way for the creation of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
to enforce these rules. This eventually led to the landmark U.S. Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act of 1938 (FDCA), which imbued the FDA with its current regula-
tory authority to approve and oversee the safety of new drugs and medical devices. 
Although earlier suspect marketing was a consideration, the legislative response 
was heavily influenced by the tragic deaths in 1937 of greater than one hundred 
patients due to poisoning from adulterated sulfanilamide elixir (a crude antibac-
terial) (Mackey & Liang, 2012). This policy set the ground for decades of rapid 
growth in new prescription drug approvals and products introduced to the U.S. 
market. It also resulted in a concomitant shift in pharmaceutical marketing prac-
tices away from patient-directed promotion to a physician focus, since they now 
acted as gatekeepers for both sale and use of prescription drugs (Wazana, 2000).
As a result, physician-directed pharmaceutical marketing skyrocketed, hitting its 
peak in the mid-2000s, when drug company marketing expenditures experienced 
more than triple digit growth of $11.4 billion in 1996 to $29.9 billion in 2005 

Health Advertising in the Digital Age  401
(Mackey & Liang, 2013c). This growth was accompanied by a nearly 600 percent 
increase in U.S. prescription drug spending during a broader overlapping period: 
$40.3 billion in 1990 to $234.1 billion in 2008 (Mackey, Cuomo, & Liang, 2015).
Drug marketing aimed at physicians manifested itself through various promo-
tional strategies, including the deployment of many thousands of pharmaceutical 
sales representatives who engaged in “detailing” the virtues of their particular 
prescription drug products one-on-one with physicians. It also included financial 
inducements to physicians in the form of gifts, direct monetary payment (e.g., 
consulting arrangements, speaking fees, and excessive honorariums), compensa-
tion for continuing medical education, free meals (for physician and staff), travel 
expense reimbursement, and other forms of financial conflicts of interest (Mackey 
et al., 2015). The objective was simple: influence a physician to prescribe a com-
pany’s drug and, thus, generate sales and profits.
However, in the late 2000s, record-breaking billion-dollar civil and criminal 
penalties were levied against some of the largest multinational pharmaceutical 
firms for illegal drug marketing practices. This also led to increased public scrutiny 
over physician-directed promotion and the conflicts of interest these activities 
generated (Liang & Mackey, 2010). From a policy perspective, physician-directed 
promotion was criticized as leading to more expensive drug prices and unneces-
sary healthcare spending. Indeed, aggressive marketing can lead to inappropri-
ate drug claims, uses, prescribing behavior, minimization of risks, shift to more 
expensive drugs, and lower utilization of generic prescription drugs (Wazana, 
2000; Brennan et al., 2006; Mackey & Liang, 2013c). Recognizing that physician-
directed health marketing could lead to suboptimal outcomes in patient care and 
contribute to increasing health expenditures, several states, and the (then) Fed-
eral government passed “sunshine laws” in an attempt to increase transparency 
to industry-physician relationships and ultimately curb this practice (see below).
As a result of this increased attention and policymaking, health marketing is 
undergoing a pendulum swing. A shift in focus is moving away from physicians 
and back to consumers, as in the days of the nostrums, occurring through the 
medium of direct-to-consumer advertising (DTCA) (Mackey & Liang, 2013c). 
Specifically, DTCA provides an opportunity for manufacturers and marketers to 
influence their consumer audiences directly (instead of marketing to a physician 
intermediary in hopes that he/she will prescribe the drug to the patient).
Most recently, pharmaceutical sector recognition of the changing marketing 
landscape in health has resulted in their entry into new media forms. Conse-
quently, it also provides fertile ground for exploring the advantages and technolo-
gies for health product promotion afforded by the new digital age of advertising.
Digital DTCA: Controversy, Trends, and a Case Study  
of Marketing Globalization
DTCA (direct to consumer advertising), loosely translated, is direct marketing and 
promotion of products and services straight to a patient/consumer. It may seem 

402  Mackey and Liang
like an obvious approach in mainstream promotion and advertising strategies. 
However, in the healthcare industry, DTCA of pharmaceutical drugs and other 
prescription healthcare products is a highly scrutinized and altogether unique 
phenomenon. In fact, of developed country markets, only two countries, the 
United States (the largest global spender on prescription drugs) and New Zealand 
legally permit prescription drug advertisements targeted toward the consumer 
(Liang & Mackey, 2011a).
There is a clear clinical and public policy rationale for what is nearly a world-
wide ban on prescription drug DTCA. Fundamentally, pharmaceuticals are not 
like other consumer products, as they are not available for direct purchase by 
consumers and require professional, licensed consultation before being dispensed 
using a valid prescription. This arguably renders DTCA incompatible with highly 
regulated healthcare systems focused on quality and patient safety, as prescribing 
healthcare professionals, not patients, are the individuals tasked with deciding if a 
prescription drug should be used.
Because of fundamental conflicts underlying DTCA in healthcare delivery, 
there has been much debate about the pros and cons of DTCA in the United 
States as well as other countries that have sought to legalize it. Though proponents 
may claim DTCA acts as a vehicle to educate consumers about treatment options, 
more recently, the vast majority of public health and medical professionals argue 
DTCA not only creates concerns about accurate portrayal of drug risks and inap-
propriate prescribing, but it also presents higher risk today since newer approved 
drugs that are often aggressively advertised using DTCA have been found to 
be unsafe. For example, the heavily DTCA advertised “blockbuster” painkiller 
Vioxx was ultimately banned from most global markets (Wolfe, 2002; Donohue, 
Cevasco, & Rosenthal, 2007; Frosch, Grande, Tarn, & Kravitz, 2010).
Despite ongoing debates and the fact that consumers cannot directly purchase 
prescription drugs like other consumer products, the DTCA business is booming. 
It has experienced significant increases in its share of promotional expenditures 
since the first U.S. print DTCA in 1981 (Palumbo & Mullins, 2002). In fact, since 
the FDA began liberalizing the practice of DTCA by issuing permissive guid-
ance in the late 1990s, growth in DTCA expenditures have far outpaced that 
of other forms of pharmaceutical marketing, though it continues to represent a 
smaller share of the overall total pharmaceutical promotional spending (Kornfield, 
Donohue, Berndt, & Alexander, 2013). Importantly, growth of DTCA has been 
estimated at a whopping 330 percent increase between 1996 and 2009, equating 
to an estimated $4.3 billion in expenditures in 2009, primarily used on traditional 
advertising mediums of television, print, and radio (Liang & Mackey, 2011b).
However, the rise in DTCA as an influential form of health marketing is also 
experiencing its own evolution, specifically in conjunction with the growth and 
proliferation of digital technologies and online channels to more broadly dis-
seminate DTCA. In fact, a recent study reviewing publicly available data from 
several marketing firms found that internet-based DTCA (“eDTCA”) increased 

Health Advertising in the Digital Age  403
120%
Total DTCA Expenditure (USD$) by Category vs. Percentage (%) (2005-2009)
90%
60%
30%
Percentage Change
0%
–30%
–60%
TV
Print
Radio
Outdoor
Sub-category of DTCA
Internet
4,000,000,000
8,000,000,000
Total Expenditure
12,000,000,000
16,000,000,000
109%
–12%
–31%
0
% Change
Total Expenditure
–13%
2%
FIGURE 23.1  Total DTCA Expenditures (2005–2009)
expenditure by 109 percent from 2005 to 2009 (Mackey et al., 2015). The study 
also found that other sub-categories of DTCA (including TV, radio, outdoor ads, 
and print) either experienced declines or single digit growth over the same period 
(see Figure 23.1) (Mackey et al., 2015).
This eDTCA growth should come as no surprise. The rapid increase of health-
information seekers online and the ability of digital health advertising to more 
broadly disseminate campaigns, messages, and paid advertisements across a full 
spectrum of online platforms (including websites, social media platforms and 
social sharing sites, mobile apps/devices, etc.) propagates message movement 
much more efficiently than traditional media. Hence, opportunities afforded by 
eDTCA have clear advantages over traditional DTCA message distribution and 
can also be more cost effective (Liang & Mackey, 2011c).
Indeed, the opportunity to actively engage directly with consumers and invest 
in eDTCA content was recognized early by pharmaceutical manufacturers, their 
consultants, and their marketing agencies. For example, a study conducted in 2011 
that examined the top 10 highest grossing pharmaceuticals found that 90 percent 
had dedicated website product pages that advertised the drug online (Liang & 
Mackey, 2011c). However, by migrating DTCA from traditional media that is, for 
the most part, geographically limited in placement to digital advertising distribu-
tion channels, DTCA through eDTCA is effectively globalized to areas outside 

404  Mackey and Liang
the United States. This is important given, again, that DTCA is only legally per-
mitted in the United States and New Zealand, but prohibited elsewhere. Yet 
digital advertising now allows unfettered transmission of this health marketing 
content across country borders (Liang & Mackey, 2011a). In this sense, the rise 
of eDTCA has not only vastly increased available marketing channels and venues 
for manufacturers to tap into, but has also allowed them to catalyze on a strategy 
of promotional radiation across different networks of internet users while also 
expanding the footprint of DTCA outside of the U.S. market.
Finally, from a policy perspective, unlike other countries that have historically 
banned the practice, DTCA as an advertising medium for prescription drug sales 
in the United States is likely here to stay. This is due to the fact that U.S. courts 
have granted significant protections for commercial free speech, of which DTCA 
qualifies (Liang & Mackey, 2011b). Though professional medical associations, such 
as the influential American Medical Association, as well as others, have called 
for a ban on DTCA, these efforts are likely to fail due to current U.S. constitu-
tional jurisprudence (Stange, 2007; “AMA Calls for Ban on Direct to Consumer 
Advertising of Prescription Drugs and Medical Devices,” 2015). Hence, DTCA 
and more importantly, its rising sub-category of eDTCA, are likely to experience 
continued growth and investment, and are poised to have a profound impact on 
the modern landscape of digital advertising.
Social Health? Challenges and Opportunities Associated 
with Social Media and Pharmaceutical Marketing
Social networking sites (such as the popular platforms Facebook, Twitter, Google+, 
YouTube, Pinterest, Instagram, LinkedIn, and Tumblr) have emerged as both inno-
vative and disruptive forces that now—as Chapter 2 notes—profoundly influence 
the way individual users create, share, interact, and process health information. 
Reflecting the growing importance of social media platforms on health behavior, 
surveys have found that 23 percent of social networking site users have followed 
a friends’ personal health updates or posts, 17 percent have used a social network 
site to remember or memorialize a person’s suffering from a health condition, 
14 percent have used a social network site to raise money or attention to a health-
related cause, 11 percent have posted comments, information, or queries regard-
ing health or medical matters, 9 percent have started or joined a health-related 
group on a social media platform, and 15 percent have used health information 
directly from a social networking site (Fox, 2011). Other studies have found that 
terminally-ill patients and their families aggressively use social media and online 
petitions in an attempt to gain access to experimental drugs (Mackey & Schoe-
nfeld, 2016).
Within the realm of digital health marketing, the environment of health infor-
mation seekers provides significant and, often, unique opportunities to engage 
in a more direct relationship with consumers via social media. Although of great 

Health Advertising in the Digital Age  405
potential, this arena is a matter of ongoing consternation for pharmaceutical 
manufacturers. Apprehension is largely due to the fact that the FDA has strug-
gled with developing meaningful industry guidance on acceptable pharmaceutical 
manufacturer marketing activities engaging consumers on social networking sites 
(SNSs) (Mackey, 2016).
Complexities and uncertainties abound, including concerns regarding how to 
ensure privacy of medical and health-related information generated/discussed on 
SNSs, appropriately correcting misinformation about drug safety issues (such as 
an adverse drug reaction) contained in user-generated content (UGC), dealing 
with user questions about unapproved drug uses (i.e., off-label drug use informa-
tion), and ensuring promotion appropriately balances the benefits and risks of a 
drug (Mackey, 2016). These substantive issues go beyond infrastructural limita-
tions (such as Twitter, with its 140 character message limit). These challenges are 
further complicated by the fact that social media technologies are in constant flux. 
New forms of interaction, modes of sharing information and media, and formal 
commercial channels available for sponsored advertising within these sites are in a 
process of continuous development and change.
Despite these uncertainties, pharmaceutical manufacturers have not waited for 
uncertain FDA guidance, given that potential customers now spend so much of 
their time on health issues and SNSs. A 2011 study found that 40 percent of the 
top 10 global pharmaceutical corporations had dedicated social media corporate 
websites (that centralized all corporate social media accounts and assets), 100 per-
cent had a corporate Facebook page, 100 percent had a sponsored blog/RSS feed, 
80 percent had a YouTube channel, and 80 percent had developed at least one 
healthcare-related mobile application (Liang & Mackey, 2011c). Similarly, when 
examining the social media presence of the top 10 grossing pharmaceutical drugs 
in 2009, 70 percent were detected as having product-specific Facebook pages 
and 80 percent had a DTCA TV broadcast advertisement uploaded for global 
viewing on YouTube (Liang & Mackey, 2011c). The main findings of this early 
study indicated that pharmaceutical firms were actively creating and using social 
media as a strategic part of their online marketing campaigns/presence (Liang & 
Mackey, 2011c).
An update and expansion to this study published in 2015 found increasing 
trends of pharmaceutical industry engagement on SNSs (Tyrawski & DeAndrea, 
2015). The study looked at two distinct social media content types: company-
specific content (measured by examining the social media accounts and content 
of the top 15 global pharmaceutical firms) and drug-specific content (measured 
by examining social media content by searching for the top 20 drugs from 2013 
on popular social media sites) (Tyrawski & DeAndrea, 2015). Unsurprisingly, it 
reported pharmaceutical companies were active on SNSs, with 93 percent operat-
ing a Twitter account, 66 percent using a Facebook page, 66 percent maintaining 
a YouTube Channel, 60 percent on LinkedIn, and lower levels of engagement (less 
than 26 percent) on platforms such as Pinterest, Instagram, Flickr, and Google+. 

406  Mackey and Liang
It also found that consumers were active in engaging with pharmaceutical social 
media content, with close to one-quarter (24 percent) of users commenting on 
posts generated by the industry (Tyrawski & DeAndrea, 2015). When examining 
company-specific content, “help-seeking” DTCA advertisements (i.e., remind-
ers to consumers to seek treatment by mentioning a particular disease but not 
a specific treatment) were far more common than product-specific claims (i.e., 
explicitly mentioning a drug by name). The authors concluded that this clearly 
indicated continued drug company trepidation about directly engaging in DTCA 
product promotion via social media (Lurie, 2009; Tyrawski & DeAndrea, 2015).
On the other hand, when examining drug-specific social media content, 
researchers found quite a different trend, with 69 percent of the Facebook posts, 
tweets, and YouTube videos reviewed, including DTCA with drug product claims 
(Tyrawski & DeAndrea, 2015). Mirroring previous concerns about the balance of 
information presentation in DTCA, eDTCA posts only mentioning benefits of 
a drug were far more common than posts discussing benefits and risks or posts 
mentioning only risk information (Tyrawski & DeAndrea, 2015). Interestingly, 
while the main posts reviewed often highlighted the benefits of a drug promoted 
DTCA, comments in user-generated responses to these posts often did not fol-
low the same pattern, with these comments often offering contrasting views or 
opinions (Tyrawski & DeAndrea, 2015).
Importantly, the process of promotional radiating was evident, as a combina-
tion of individuals and non-pharmaceutical organizations comprised more than 
99 percent of all drug-specific posts (only 0.6 percent of content was controlled 
by accounts of pharmaceutical companies.) This indicates that social media-based 
DTCA is often subject to large and complex message movements across differ-
ent user networks, and that message functionalities can often diverge from those 
intended by message creators (i.e., pharmaceutical companies).
Overall, there are only a handful of studies that have used empirical methods to 
examine the use of DTCA, eDTCA, and engagement processes by pharmaceuti-
cal firms on social networking sites. Initial findings indicate that much remains 
unknown about digital practices for marketing prescription drugs. The lack of 
transparency is unsurprising, given the paucity of information on how much the 
industry spends on pharmaceutical promotion. Guidance on this area would pro-
vide policymakers with a potential roadmap for assessment in designing recom-
mendations and best practices.
Health Marketing Expenditures: The Who,  
What, and Where
Globally, it is estimated that worldwide spending on pharmaceuticals will grow by 
double digits, reaching $1.4 trillion by 2020 (IMS, 2015a). Though much of this 
future growth will come from pharmemerging markets including India, China, and 
Brazil, the United States nevertheless continues to be the top worldwide spender 

Health Advertising in the Digital Age  407
on prescription drugs (IMS, 2015b). National prescription drug spending is driven 
by an astounding $3 trillion (equivalent to $9,523 per person) in U.S. healthcare 
spending in 2014 (the highest of any country), which also equates to an estimated 
$374 billion spent on prescription drugs in the same year (Mackey, 2016). Yet, 
despite the billions of dollars spent on healthcare in the United States, precise 
estimates on exact amounts, characterization, and distribution of health and phar-
maceutical marketing activities that drive much of this demand have been elusive.
Gagnon and Lexchin (2008) attempted to tease out how much is spent on 
drug marketing using data available from market research companies CAM and 
IMS to estimate pharmaceutical promotion expenditures in 2004. This study 
found major variations in reported aggregate amounts spent, methods of cal-
culating costs, and gaps in overall reporting (Gagnon & Lexchin, 2008). A more 
recent study published in 2013 used a similar approach, examining pharmaceuti-
cal promotion expenditures for DTCA, as reported by Kantar Media and IMS 
Health and SDI, for provider-targeted promotion for a much longer period from 
2001 to 2010 (Kornfield et al., 2013). This study found that total pharmaceutical 
promotion hit an all-time high in 2004 at $36.1 billion, but experienced declines 
thereafter, with similar trends of increases and declines for DTCA expenditures. 
These general trends are also supported by results from a 2015 study that found a 
similar slight decline (-8%) in aggregate DTCA expenditures from 2005 to 2009, 
largely attributable to the global recession and its impact on corporate marketing 
budgets (Mackey et al., 2015).
Despite early uncertainty, a light is finally shinning on how much is spent on 
certain pharmaceutical promotion activities. Given widespread public scrutiny over 
financial conflicts of interest arising from industry-provider relationships, in 2010, 
legislative provisions in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, for the first 
time, legally mandated the public disclosure of certain forms of financial relation-
ships and payments made by industry to physicians (Mackey & Liang, 2013c).
The Centers of Medicare and Medicaid Services implemented these provi-
sions through its online Open Payments program, which now houses data on 
physician-directed promotion activities for half of 2013 and all of 2014, compris-
ing a total of 15.67 million records and payments valued at some $9.92 billion (see 
https://openpaymentsdata.cms.gov). Hence, this public disclosure provision will 
allow for a more accurate estimation of total pharmaceutical promotion and ena-
ble the identification of macro and micro trends of the “who” (identification of 
variation in medical specialties receiving payments), “where” (temporal data and 
geographic locations of spending), and “what” (frequency, amounts, and the types 
of payments), as has already begun to be analyzed (Jarvies, Coombes, & Stahl-
Timmins, 2014; Marshall, Jackson, & Hattangadi-Gluth, “Disclosure of Industry 
Payments to Physicians,” 2016).
However, several pieces of information are missing that would help to provide 
a more complete picture of total health and pharmaceutical marketing spend-
ing. Specifically, the Open Payments program does not collect information about 

408  Mackey and Liang
certain types of physician-directed promotion (e.g., free drug samples, amounts 
under $10 and that do not exceed $100 in the aggregate, certain educational 
materials, rebates, and some forms of indirect payments) and also does not include 
reporting of marketing expenditures directed toward non-physicians (i.e., other 
healthcare professionals such as nurses, physician assistants, pharmacy benefit man-
agers, and healthcare payers) or consumers (Mackey & Liang, 2015). Critically, 
this means that DTCA expenditures are not included in this mandatory reporting, 
despite the fact that increased transparency on physician-industry relationships is 
leading to a shift in marketing strategies that now focus on the consumer-patient 
(i.e., DTCA). Even more uncertainty surrounds estimating amounts spent on 
eDTCA, as data collection and sampling methodologies to monitor digital adver-
tising used by marketing research firms appears to vary widely.
Critically, without accurate data on pharmaceutical promotion both offline 
and online, it is impossible to accurately identify important trends occurring in 
health marketing and assess its potential impact on healthcare utilization, quality, 
outcomes, and cost. As the media landscape continues to move to digital technol-
ogies, getting better data and conducting “real-time” analysis of online marketing 
that is now widespread on social media and other online platforms will be crucial 
for marketers, their clients, public health professionals, and policymakers alike.
Future Trends and Challenges
In this final section, we identify several future trends and emerging challenges that 
have accompanied the rise in digital health marketing. Specifically, we discuss the 
use of online prescription drug coupons, the recent approval by the Internet Cor-
poration for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) of new generic top-level 
health domains, and the understudied phenomenon of commercial online patient 
engagement portals. We also discuss the dark side of digital health advertising, 
examining how the internet has enabled the criminalization of health marketing 
by illicit online pharmacies and other suspect online providers. All of these trends 
and challenges demand greater attention, scrutiny, and sufficient research to deter-
mine their place in the future of digital advertising for health.
Prescription Drug Coupons: Getting Twice  
the Value for DTCA?
One unique form of pharmaceutical marketing that has taken advantage of digi-
tal technologies is the prescription drug coupon (PDC). A PDC (also known 
as a prescription drug discount card) is exactly what it sounds like, a coupon 
or discount that markets cost-savings and rebates that reduce the out-of-pocket 
expenses or insurance co-payment consumers must pay when they are prescribed 
a branded (i.e., non-generic) prescription drug (Grande, 2012).

Health Advertising in the Digital Age  409
PDCs are an innovative extension of DTCA. PDCs serve the dual purpose 
of providing short-term savings to the customer and as an attractive medium to 
directly promote the use and benefits of a drug. Importantly, this dual use allows 
PDCs to generate brand awareness, create more favorable attitudes toward PDC 
drugs, and establish customer loyalty, especially for top-selling branded drugs that 
are on the verge of losing patent protection and market exclusivity (Bhutada, 
Cook, & Perri, 2009; Mackey, Yagi, & Liang, 2014b).
For example, Pfizer Inc.’s PDC program for its blockbuster cholesterol-lowering  
drug Lipitor, first launched in December 2010, which was a direct response to 
impending patent expiration and generic competition. Lipitor’s PDC advertised 
a “$4 co-pay” that would cover the cost of a co-pay up to a maximum amount 
of $100 per month, leaving the consumer responsible for a remaining amount of 
only $4 (exact amount owed by the consumer is dependent upon the exact co-
pay share). As a reflection of this market opportunity, the number of PDC drug 
programs grew more than four-fold from 86 in 2009 to 362 in 2012, and a study 
conducted in 2012 found that 9 out of 10 of the top selling pharmaceuticals in 
2010 operated a PDC program (Mackey, Yagi, & Liang, 2014b).
PDCs are also available in several marketing mediums, including traditional 
forms of physical collateral (e.g., printed coupons, pamphlets, marketing inserts) 
that are left at physicians’ offices to be picked up by patients (Mackey, Yagi, & 
Liang, 2014b). However, PDCs have also made the leap to digital advertising, with 
manufacturer and third-party websites that enable consumers to sign up for dis-
counts using virtual discount cards and eCoupons. Advertising of PDC programs 
is similarly disseminated across common eDTCA marketing channels including 
Facebook promotional pages, YouTube videos, Tweets hyperlinking to PDCs, and 
even the use of mobile phone applications that allow users to search for and 
download coupons from the palm of their hand (Mackey, Yagi, & Liang, 2014b).
Though coupons may seem innocuous in other consumer and retail product 
industries, in healthcare, they are extremely controversial. Most importantly, PDCs 
distort the actual cost of prescription drugs, as insurance companies, not their 
customers, end up paying a higher bill for more expensive drugs. This can ulti-
mately lead to higher long-term healthcare expenditures due to overutilization 
and consumers favoring branded version over generic equivalents. Estimates vary, 
but trade associations like the Pharmaceutical Care Management Association have 
estimated that PDC programs could lead to an estimated $32 billion in additional 
costs for commercially insured patients over the span of a decade (Mackey, Yagi, & 
Liang, 2014b). Concerns also arise from risks that consumers will not fully redeem 
coupons, that savings may be less than advertised (each PDC has different terms 
and conditions, and savings are dependent upon insurance status), and concerns 
surrounding patient care when a PDC ends (Mackey, Yagi, & Liang, 2014b). Due 
to these factors, the debate on PDCs is likely to continue, pitting temporary 
consumer savings against larger concerns over the rise in overall healthcare costs.

410  Mackey and Liang
New Health Domains: The Future of Internet-Based Health 
Promotion?
Though only now becoming more widely known to the general public, a host of 
new generic top-level domain names (gTLDs) are starting to appear on the inter-
net. gTLDs are part of a new program launched by ICANN, a non-governmental 
organization that controls naming of the internet to vastly expand the footprint 
of the web by introducing nearly a thousand new top-level domain names (i.e., 
names in the root zone, or simply put, everything after the final “dot” in a web 
address). Commonly recognized existing top-level domains include .com, .org, 
and .edu, which prior to ICANN’s new gTLD program, were limited to 21 top-
level domains that distinguished different name spaces on the World Wide Web. 
All this is set to change, with the ongoing approval of 948 new gTLDs, comprised 
of virtually any name, including in different languages, corporate brands: “.micro-
soft”; .communities: “.irish”; locations: “.london”; and other terms: “.store” and 
“.sexy.” All are now in the process of being introduced to the internet hierar-
chy. Importantly, successful applicants/registrars are then given the exclusive rights 
to sell second-level domain names (i.e., everything before the top-level domain: 
“www.[name].com”) to virtually anyone who wants to buy one.
Within this wave of new gTLDs are also several for health-related terms 
(including “.health,” “.healthcare,” “.doctor,” “.hospital,” and “.diet”—to name a 
few) that have been applied for and awarded to various for-profit companies. This 
exclusivity could very well shape the future of how health information is organ-
ized, presented, and viewed online, and possibly in a negative way (Mackey et al., 
2014a).
These new health-related gTLDs, rather than serving as a signal of trustworthy 
and reliable health information, will create dedicated industry-specific spaces on 
the internet for health topics that will be largely unchecked for quality of con-
tent. Consequently, if previous activities are any guidance, their potential to create 
a much needed safe, evidence-based, and credible source of health information 
online is in serious question (Mackey, Liang, Attaran, & Kohler, 2013).
Indeed, concerned parties, such as the World Health Organization (WHO), 
national governments, medical professional societies, and non-governmental 
organizations have expressed grave concerns that without appropriate safeguards, 
these gTLDs will instead be populated by poor quality, inaccurate, misleading, 
and unreliable information that could adversely impact people’s health (Mackey 
et al., 2014a). These concerns remain unanswered and poorly addressed as several 
health gTLDs are set to become active and available to the public for domain 
name purchase and registration. For policy purposes, this area of digital expansion 
requires close scrutiny, as websites using sensitive gTLDs such as “.health” should 
be subject to appropriate oversight systems in order to ensure that consumers can 
rely upon these domains for accurate and reliable health information.

Health Advertising in the Digital Age  411
Patient Portals: Creating Marketing Opportunities  
in a Controlled Environment
Patient portals operated by pharmaceutical manufacturers, medical device com-
panies, and other healthcare service providers are a relatively new and under-
studied phenomenon. They use internet technology for raising disease awareness 
and support healthcare decision-making, but also to market health products. In 
the context of digital advertising, corporate patient engagement portals used by 
pharmaceutical and medical device companies can come in the form of branded 
and unbranded websites, with some operated under the exclusive control of a 
pharmaceutical firm and others by third-party marketing intermediaries (who 
may not disclose their funding sources). These patient-directed portals create 
structured online environments where manufacturers can provide a plethora of 
services. For example, they may raise consumer awareness regarding diseases/
conditions of interest (similar to reminder advertisements used in DTCA), offer 
advice about seeking diagnosis and treatment (including DTCA about their own 
products), offer tools for disease management, offer online patient coaches/advo-
cates, while also acting as online platforms to directly market to a desired, indeed, 
self-selected consumer segment (Collier, 2014).
Consumers join these portals by registering directly on the website or via 
email registration. In turn, users receive the benefits and services (often at no cost) 
described above, but also often opt in to allowing direct marketing regarding a 
company’s updates, news, products, and promotions. Most importantly, consumer 
registration data provides a wealth of information on consumer segmentation 
that is extremely valuable and can be mined for future marketing research pur-
poses (Mackey, 2016). Little is known about the makeup or key characteristics of 
commercial patient engagement portals from a research perspective, though use 
of these portals as an additional strategy in health and pharmaceutical marketing 
appears to be growing. The potentially hidden nature of sponsorship and possible 
insidious nature of advertising on these purported patient-oriented sites requires 
significant oversight to ensure exploitation of vulnerable patients and caregivers is 
not promoted by this digital health approach.
Digital Dangers: Criminalization of the Health Marketing
Though digital advertising tools carry the promise of new, innovative ways to 
interact and provide consumers with valuable health information, these same 
technologies introduce vulnerabilities that can be exploited by criminal actors 
(WHO, 2011). As a loose connection of networks, the internet is poorly regu-
lated, and its technology is agnostic to “good” and “bad” actors. Hence, those 
engaged in the promotion and sale of questionable health products and services 
have equal if not greater flexibility in engaging in illegal activities. A clear example 

412  Mackey and Liang
that personifies this risk is the illicit online pharmacy, defined as a website that fails 
to meet national or international pharmacy regulations, that often sell prescrip-
tion drugs that are of dubious quality, authenticity, and safety (Tu & Corey, 2008). 
Indeed, more bluntly, these are eDrugDealers.
Tens of thousands of these illicit online pharmacies now thrive in an e-commerce  
environment that is convenient, easily accessible, anonymous, and that can lev-
erage digital advertising channels to promote fraudulent and misleading health 
claims (Henney, 2001; Orizio, Merla, Schulz, & Gelatti, 2011). A telltale sign of 
an illicit online pharmacy is the marketing of their services as “no prescription,” 
with these sites advertising the sale of prescription drugs direct to the consumer 
but never requiring a valid prescription during the checkout process (Orizio et 
al., 2011; Mackey & Liang, 2013b).
Risks abound from these websites. They sell anything from lifestyle drugs (e.g., 
erectile dysfunction treatments) to life-saving vaccines to drugs of abuse (e.g., 
prescription pain killers), all without the need to consult a healthcare profes-
sional. Importantly, these sites undermine the patient safety filter that a learned 
intermediary is designed to provide (Forman, 2003; Liang  & Mackey, 2012). 
Unfortunately, these patient safety risks have been tragically demonstrated, with 
documented cases of consumers suffering adverse events and even death after 
purchasing prescription drugs illegally online (Liang & Mackey, 2009).
From a digital advertising perspective, online pharmacies are savvy and sophis-
ticated, often using argument-driven marketing combined with fraudulent claims 
to appeal to their customers. For example, illicit online pharmacies have been 
reported as using “selling arguments” (Orizio et al., 2010, p. 971) that enhance 
attractive characteristics of their products and services that are of value to con-
sumers (e.g., lower prices, shorter delivery times, greater privacy from purchasing 
online, convenience), while at the same time deemphasizing clear signs of risk 
(Levaggi et al., 2009; Orizio et al., 2010).
Illicit online pharmacies are also experts at message movements across plat-
forms, with studies detecting illegal “no prescription” online marketing using 
search engine marketing/optimization, social networking sites (SNSs), market-
ing affiliate networks, and other emerging digital mediums to target consumers 
directly where they seek health information and advice: on the internet (Liang & 
Mackey, 2011c; Mackey & Liang, 2013c; Tyrawski & DeAndrea, 2015). In fact, a 
study published in 2013 demonstrated how easy it was to create an illegal online 
pharmacy advertisement on popular social media platforms by creating a fictitious 
“no prescription” ad and link to a website that was used to monitor user traffic 
and location (see Figure 23.2) (Mackey & Liang, 2013a).
Hence, illicit online pharmacies represent the dark side of digital advertising, 
with cybercriminals exploiting the internet to reap profits at the expense of the 
health and safety of consumers. These quickly moving criminals will continue to 
exploit extant offerings in digital marketing, necessitating continued empirical 
study and policy assessment.

FIGURE 23.2  A Fictitious Illicit Online Pharmacy Ad Posted to Social Media Sites

414  Mackey and Liang
Conclusions
The digital marketing landscape today is in many ways similar to the plethora 
of unregulated nostrum vendors the FDA, and its first Commissioner Dr. Har-
vey Wiley, faced in 1907. The challenge of the distinct and critical nature of the 
health products and services, the need for greater patient/consumer education 
and access to reliable health information, the large amounts of resources spent on 
the healthcare industry, and the inevitable criminal element, all create important 
considerations for the future of digital health advertising. Through the process of 
understanding where health marketing has been and the challenges it has faced, 
we can be guided on approaches needed to ensure that the current revolution in 
digital health offerings and technologies primarily benefit consumers by, first and 
foremost, promoting their health and wellness and broader societal health.
References
AMA calls for ban on direct to consumer advertising of prescription drugs and medi-
cal devices. (2015, November  17). Ama-Assn.org. Retrieved from http://www.
ama-assn.org/ama/pub/news/news/2015/2015–11–17-ban-consumer-prescription-
drug-advertising.page.
Applbaum, K. (2006). Pharmaceutical marketing and the invention of the medical con-
sumer. PLoS Medicine, 3(4), e189. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030189.
Bhutada, N. S., Cook, C. L., & Perri, M., III. (2009). Consumers responses to coupons in 
direct-to-consumer advertising of prescription drugs. Health Marketing Quarterly, 26(4), 
333–346. doi: 10.1080/07359680903315902.
Brennan, T. A., Rothman, D. J., Blank, L., Blumenthal, D., Chimonas, S. C., Cohen, J. J., 
Goldman, J., Kassirer, J. P., Kimball, H., Naughton, J., & Smelser, N. (2006). Health 
industry practices that create conflicts of interest: A policy proposal for academic medi-
cal centers. Journal of the American Medical Association, 295(4), 429–433. doi: 10.1001/
jama.295.4.429.
Collier, R. (2014). Patient engagement or social media marketing? Canadian Medical Asso-
ciation Journal, 186(8), E237–E238. doi: 10.1503/cmaj.109–4739.
Donohue, J. M., Cevasco, M., & Rosenthal, M. B. (2007). A decade of direct-to-consumer 
advertising of prescription drugs. The New England Journal of Medicine, 357(7), 673–681. 
doi: 10.1056/NEJMsa070502.
Forman, R. F. (2003). Availability of opioids on the Internet. Journal of the American Medical 
Association, 290(7), 889. doi: 10.1001/jama.290.7.889.
Fox, S. (2011, May 11). The social life of health information. Retrieved from http://www.
pewinternet.org/2011/05/12/the-social-life-of-health-information-2011/
Frosch, D. L., Grande, D., Tarn, D. M., & Kravitz, R. L. (2010). A decade of controversy: Bal-
ancing policy with evidence in the regulation of prescription drug advertising. American 
Journal of Public Health, 100(1), 24–32. doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2008.153767.
Gagnon, M.-A., & Lexchin, J. (2008). The cost of pushing pills: A new estimate of pharma-
ceutical promotion expenditures in the United States. PLoS Medicine, 5(1), e1.
Grande, D. (2012). The cost of drug coupons. Journal of the American Medical Association, 
307(22), 2375–2376. doi: 10.1001/jama.2012.5603.

Health Advertising in the Digital Age  415
Henney, J. E. (2001). Cyberpharmacies and the role of the US Food and Drug Administra-
tion. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 3(1), e3. doi: 10.2196/jmir.3.1.e3.
IMS. (2015a). Global medicines use in 2020: Outlook and implications. Retrieved from  
http://www.imshealth.com/en/thought-leadership/ims-institute/reports/global- 
medicines-use-in-2020.
IMS. (2015b). Medicines use and spending shifts: A review of the use of medicines in 
the U.S. in 2014. Retrieved from http://www.imshealth.com/en/thought-leadership/
ims-institute/reports/medicines-use-in-the-us-2014.
ITU. (2015, May 26). ITU releases 2015 ICT figures. Retrieved from https://www.itu.int/
net/pressoffice/press_releases/2015/17.aspx.
Jarvies, D., Coombes, R.,  & Stahl-Timmins, W. (2014). Open payments goes live with 
pharma to doctor fee data: First analysis. British Medical Journal, 349, g6003–g6003. doi: 
10.1136/bmj.g6003.
Kornfield, R., Donohue, J., Berndt, E. R., & Alexander, G. C. (2013). Promotion of pre-
scription drugs to consumers and providers, 2001–2010. PLoS ONE, 8(3), e55504. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0055504.
Levaggi, R., Orizio, G., Domenighini, S., Bressanelli, M., Schulz, P. J., Zani, C., Cami, L., & 
Gelatti, U. (2009). Marketing and pricing strategies of online pharmacies. Health Policy, 
92(2–3), 187–196. doi: 10.1016/j.healthpol.2009.03.010.
Liang, B. A., & Mackey, T. (2009). Searching for safety: Addressing search engine, website, 
and provider accountability for illicit online drug sales. American Journal of Law & Medi-
cine, 35(1), 125–184. doi: 10.1177/009885880903500104.
Liang, B. A., & Mackey, T. (2010). Confronting conflict: Addressing institutional conflicts 
of interest in academic medical centers. American Journal of Law & Medicine, 36(1), 136–
187. doi: 10.1177/009885881003600103.
Liang, B. A., & Mackey, T. (2011a). Direct-to-consumer advertising with interactive inter-
net media: Global regulation and public health issues. Journal of the American Medical 
Association, 305(8), 824–825. doi: 10.1001/jama.2011.203.
Liang, B. A., & Mackey, T. (2011b). Reforming direct-to-consumer advertising. Nature Bio-
technology, 29(5), 397–400. doi: 10.1038/nbt.1865.
Liang, B. A., & Mackey, T. K. (2011c). Prevalence and global health implications of social 
media in direct-to-consumer drug advertising. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 13(3), 
e64. doi: 10.2196/jmir.1775.
Liang, B. A., & Mackey, T. K. (2012). Vaccine shortages and suspect online pharmacy sellers. 
Vaccine, 30(2), 105–108. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.11.016.
Lurie, P. (2009). DTC advertising harms patients and should be tightly regulated. The Jour-
nal of Law, Medicine & Ethics, 37(3), 444–450. doi: 10.1111/j.1748–720X.2009.00405.x.
Mackey, T. K. (2016). Digital direct-to-consumer advertising: A perfect storm of rapid evo-
lution and stagnant regulation comment on “trouble spots in online direct-to-consumer 
prescription drug promotion: A content analysis of FDA warning letters.” International 
Journal of Health Policy and Management, 5(4), 271–274. doi: 10.15171/ijhpm.2016.11.
Mackey, T. K., Cuomo, R. E., & Liang, B. A. (2015). The rise of digital direct-to-consumer 
advertising? Comparison of direct-to-consumer advertising expenditure trends from 
publicly available data sources and global policy implications. BMC Health Services 
Research, 15(1), 236. doi: 10.1186/s12913–015–0885–1.
Mackey, T. K., Eysenbach, G., Liang, B. A., Kohler, J. C., Geissbuhler, A., & Attaran, A. 
(2014a). A call for a moratorium on the health generic top-level domain: Preventing 

416  Mackey and Liang
the commercialization and exclusive control of online health information. Globalization 
and Health, 10(1), 62. doi: 10.1186/s12992–014–0062-z.
Mackey, T. K., & Liang, B. (2012). Globalization, evolution and emergence of direct-
to-consumer advertising: Are emerging markets the next pharmaceutical marketing 
frontier. Journal of Commercial Biotechnology, 18, 58–64. doi: 10. 5912/jcb.564.
Mackey, T. K., & Liang, B. A. (2013a). Global reach of direct-to-consumer advertising using 
social media for illicit online drug sales. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 15(5), e105. 
doi: 10.2196/jmir.2610.
Mackey, T. K., & Liang, B. A. (2013b). Pharmaceutical digital marketing and governance: 
Illicit actors and challenges to global patient safety and public health. Globalization and 
Health, 9(1), 45. doi: 10.1186/1744–8603–9–45.
Mackey, T. K., & Liang, B. A. (2013c). Physician payment disclosure under healthcare reform: 
Will the sun shine? Journal of the American Board of Family Medicine, 26(3), 327–331. doi: 
10.3122/jabfm.2013.03.120264.
Mackey, T. K., & Liang, B. A. (2015). It’s time to shine the light on direct-to-consumer 
advertising. The Annals of Family Medicine, 13(1), 82–85. doi: 10.1370/afm.1711.
Mackey, T. K., Liang, B. A., Attaran, A., & Kohler, J. C. (2013). Ensuring the future of health 
information online. Lancet, 382(9902), 1404. doi: 10.1016/S0140–6736(13)62215–1.
Mackey, T. K.,  & Schoenfeld, V. J. (2016). Going “social” to access experimental and 
potentially life-saving treatment: An assessment of the policy and online patient 
advocacy environment for expanded access. BMC Medicine, 14(1), 17. doi: 10.1186/
s12916–016–0568–8.
Mackey, T. K., Yagi, N., & Liang, B. A. (2014b). Prescription drug coupons: Evolution and 
need for regulation in direct-to-consumer advertising. Research in Social & Administrative 
Pharmacy, 10(3), 588–594. doi: 10.1016/j.sapharm.2013.08.002.
Marshall, D. C., Jackson, M. E., & Hattangadi-Gluth, J. A., (2016). Disclosure of industry 
payments to physicians: An epidemiologic analysis of early data from the open payments 
program, Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 91(1), 84–96. doi: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2015.10.016.
Orizio, G., Merla, A., Schulz, P. J.,  & Gelatti, U. (2011). Quality of online pharmacies 
and websites selling prescription drugs: A systematic review. Journal of Medical Internet 
Research, 13(3), e74. doi: 10.2196/jmir.1795.
Orizio, G., Rubinelli, S., Schulz, P. J., Domenighini, S., Bressanelli, M., Caimi, L., & Gelatti, 
U. (2010). “Save 30% if you buy today.” Online pharmacies and the enhancement of 
peripheral thinking in consumers. Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety, 19(9), 970–976. 
doi: 10.1002/pds.2007.
Palumbo, F. B., & Mullins, C. D. (2002). The development of direct-to-consumer prescrip-
tion drug advertising regulation. Food and Drug Law Journal, 57(3), 423–443.
PewInternet. (2014). Health fact sheet. Retrieved from http://www.pewinternet.org/
fact-sheets/health-fact-sheet/
Rodgers, W. C. (1927). Nostrums and quackery. Journal of the American Medical Association, 
88(19), 1502–1503. doi: 10.1001/jama.1927.02680450046032.
Rodriguez, A. (2014, September 16). Why digital marketing has become the health-care 
industry’s Rx for revenue. Adage.com. Retrieved from http://adage.com/article/digital/
digital-health-care-industry-s-rx-revenue/294940/
Stange, K. C. (2007). Time to ban direct-to-consumer prescription drug marketing. The 
Annals of Family Medicine, 5(2), 101–104. doi: 10.1370/afm.693.
Till, M. (2009). Secret remedies: What they cost and what they contain. BMJ, 338(3), 
b1624–b1624. doi: 10.1136/bmj.b1624.

Health Advertising in the Digital Age  417
Tu, H. T., & Corey, C. G. (2008). State prescription drug price web sites: How useful to 
consumers? Research Brief, 1, 1–16.
Tyrawski, J., & DeAndrea, D. C. (2015). Pharmaceutical companies and their drugs on 
social media: A content analysis of drug information on popular social media sites. Jour-
nal of Medical Internet Research, 17(6), e130. doi: 10.2196/jmir.4357.
Wazana, A. (2000). Physicians and the pharmaceutical industry: Is a gift ever just a gift? Jour-
nal of the American Medical Association, 283(3), 373–380. doi: 10.1001/jama.283.3.373.
WHO. (2011). Safety and security on the internet: Challenges and advances in member states. 
Who. Retrieved from http://www.who.int/goe/publications/goe_security_web.pdf.
Wolfe, S. M. (2002). Direct-to-consumer advertising—Education or emotion promotion? 
New England Journal of Medicine, 346(7), 524–526.


PART VI
Future Research Trends 
and Opportunities


Introduction
With online technologies facilitating the exchange of product-related informa-
tion, the internet is recognized as a global space that could reduce consumers’ 
information search costs. This chapter builds on the theoretical premise of the 
book by examining how internet users pass along or share information, namely 
electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM) but does so from a cultural perspective.
According to Internet World Stats (2015), the number of global internet users 
reached more than 3.36 billion in 2015. Meanwhile, digital advertising spending 
worldwide is forecasted to reach $252.02 billion by 2018, more than double that 
of $104.58 billion in 2012 (Statista, 2016). Today, the internet allows ordinary 
people to easily create and disseminate content about brands and services, namely 
user-generated content (UGC) (Smith, Fischer, & Chen, 2012; Bahtara & Muda, 
2016). Major social networking sites such as Facebook, YouTube, Twitter, and Ins-
tagram made a large portion of the profit with UGC (O’Neill, 2011). For exam-
ple, revenues of Facebook from UGC reached $1.86 billion in 2010, and YouTube 
earned $945 million the same year (Statista, 2010). With the proliferation of UGC, 
eWOM has gained increased prominence among researchers and professionals 
(Lee & Youn, 2009; You, Vadakkepatt, & Joshi, 2015; Baker, Naveen, & Kumar, 
2016).
Primarily through the internet, eWOM has been categorized as consumer-
to-consumer interactions (Yadav  & Pavlou, 2014) that play an important role 
in influencing consumer decision-making (Goodrich & de Mooij, 2014; You et 
al., 2015). Studies have found eWOM to be more trustworthy than corporate-
driven information (Goldsmith & Horowitz, 2006; Lee & Youn, 2009), and com-
panies are increasing their marketing budgets to generate and shape eWOM. With 
24
THE ROLE OF CULTURE IN 
ELECTRONIC WORD-OF-MOUTH 
COMMUNICATION
Shu-Chuan Chu

422  Chu
increased focus on eWOM by industry, eWOM has led to a growing research 
stream whereby researchers examine antecedents and consequences of eWOM 
(Phelps, Lewis, Mobilio, Perry, & Raman, 2004; You et al., 2015; Baker et al., 
2016). Despite this, little is known about the cross-cultural differences in the 
effectiveness of eWOM and its international applicability (Chu & Choi, 2011; 
Goodrich & de Mooij, 2014).
Park and Jun (2003) demonstrated differences in internet usage and perceived 
risks of internet shopping between Korean and American consumers. Dobele, 
Lindgreen, Beverland, Vanhammed, and van Wijk (2007) argued that culture is a 
determining factor in influencing recipients’ emotional responses to viral mar-
keting campaigns and subsequent forwarding behavior. Given the influence of 
nationalities in the acceptance of viral marketing campaigns, cultural values and 
backgrounds need to be taken into account in this context (Dobele et al., 2007). 
It is likely that incongruities also exist in how people from various nationalities 
differ in terms of their engagement with eWOM. An interesting question arises: 
do different cultural values (such as individualism vs. collectivism) have varying 
effects on eWOM? It would be theoretically interesting to examine cross-cultural 
differences in the context of eWOM, as culture has been identified as a key 
managerial consideration in online consumer behavior (Christodoulides, Michae-
lidou, & Argyriou, 2012).
The global nature of eWOM indicates that an understanding is also needed 
of how cultural values moderate the effects of eWOM on consumer product 
evaluation. Therefore, the goal of this chapter is twofold: 1) to review the cur-
rent literature on the role of cultural values in eWOM, and 2) to provide direc-
tions for future academic research on eWOM by offering managerial implications 
for online marketing communications. Through improved understanding of 
the effects of global cultural differences on eWOM, this chapter contributes to 
research on digital advertising by identifying an under-investigated yet important 
research topic. It is hoped that this chapter will generate increased research interest 
in eWOM across cultures and help international advertisers develop their eWOM 
strategy to better target internet users in different countries, thereby building 
long-term consumer-brand relationships.
Electronic Word-of-Mouth and Culture
In Hennig-Thurau, Gwinner, Walsh, and Gremler’s (2004) seminal study, eWOM 
is defined as “any positive or negative statement made by potential, actual, or 
former customers about a product or company, which is made available to a 
multitude of people and institutions via the Internet” (p. 39). eWOM has been 
found to have an impact on online customer value and loyalty (Gruen, Osmon-
bekov, & Czaplewski, 2006), sales (Chevalier & Mayzlin, 2006), eWOM elasticity 
(You et al., 2015), and virtual consumer communities (Hung & Li, 2007). What 
differentiates eWOM from offline WOM is that eWOM could lead to higher 

Culture in eWOM Communication  423
retransmission intentions than offline WOM conversations due to the easy acces-
sibility of finding new people to generate online conversations with on a global 
scale (Christodoulides et al., 2012; Baker et al., 2016). As a result, eWOM is con-
sidered to be more influential than offline WOM, and has been recognized as an 
important marketing technique in online global branding (Chu & Choi, 2011).
According to Hofstede’s (2001) definition, culture is “the collective program-
ming of the mind, which distinguishes the members of one group from another” 
(p. 9). Culture has been found to influence consumer behavior and aspects of 
traditional WOM, such as WOM referral in relational service exchange (Schu-
mann et al., 2010) and in the purchase of industrial services (Money, Gilly, & 
Graham, 1998), the relationship between self-relevance and WOM (Chung  & 
Darke, 2006), and the effects of consumers’ cultural values on WOM transmis-
sion patterns (Lam, Lee, & Mizerski, 2009). Cultural values have also been found 
to influence the nature of online communication, but there is little empirical 
research that has examined the impact of culture on the eWOM process. Because 
internet users from different cultures may use different channels and methods to 
disseminate messages, eWOM is expected to relate to international contexts and 
cultural values.
Fong and Burton (2008) examined United States-based and China-based elec-
tronic discussion boards and showed that differences in WOM across cultures can 
be extended to the online environment. Using the individualism-collectivism 
dimension, which explains the extent to which individuals value group member-
ship in a given society (see Hofstede, 2001, for a detailed discussion on the indi-
vidualism/collectivism dimension), Fong and Burton (2008) found that Chinese 
participants engaged in higher levels of information-seeking behavior, while posts 
from American counterparts involved information-giving behavior. In another 
study, Christodoulides et al. (2012) found that Chinese consumers were more 
susceptible to eWOM comments regardless of their valence, while UK consumers 
place more emphasis on negative eWOM. These studies revolve around the indi-
vidualism/collectivism dichotomy (Hofstede, 2001) and highlight the importance 
of the cultural context by examining the relationship between cultural values 
and consumers’ eWOM. The results of both aforementioned studies are consist-
ent with the general assumption that internet users from a collectivistic culture, 
such as China, are more likely to reply to information transmitted in the form 
of eWOM due to their greater emphasis on reference groups and group norms.
With the introduction of social networking applications, social media have 
recently gained tremendous popularity, and research on eWOM in social media 
has received increasing attention (Chu & Kim, 2011; Goodrich & de Mooij, 2014; 
Lien & Cao, 2014; He & Pedraza-Jiménez, 2015). Chu and Choi (2011) examined 
social relationship variables between the United States and China with a focus 
on social capital, tie strength, trust, and interpersonal influence as potential pre-
dictors of eWOM in online social platforms. The results of their study suggested 
that culture did play a role in determining consumers’ engagement in eWOM 

424  Chu
on social media in the two countries. Goodrich and de Mooij (2014) examined 
international differences in the use of social media and compared the effects of 
eWOM on consumer decision-making across 50 countries. Applying the cul-
tural dimension framework (Hofstede, 2001), Goodrich and de Mooij (2014) 
found that individuals from a collectivistic culture tended to rely more on social 
media than people from an individualistic culture, suggesting that social media has 
become an alternative for offline WOM. Such findings provide evidence that the 
effects of eWOM on online purchase decisions may vary by culture, which opens 
the door for future research.
Directions for Future Research
Over the past few years, digital and social media have enabled consumers to share 
their brand experiences that may assist others (e.g., followers and friends) in mak-
ing a more informed purchase decision. Through the examination of the moderat-
ing role of culture on the effect of eWOM on product evaluations, the following 
suggestions for future research are proposed. First, while social media provide the 
potential to advance eWOM research, limited empirical studies have investigated 
how and why consumers, across cultures, use social media and eWOM within 
social media. Thus, research could examine eWOM in a social media context 
through a “Uses and Gratifications” cultural lens to discover whether cultural dif-
ferences exist. Second, future academic research could look into specific countries 
of interest and consider cultural differences within a country. Third, additional stud-
ies could use an integrated approach to study eWOM by incorporating cultural 
factors, message factors (e.g., positive or negative eWOM), and individual factors 
(e.g., level of self-concept and personality traits). The complex nature of culture’s 
influence on eWOM and consumer decision-making requires continuous atten-
tion from researchers and practitioners. From a practical perspective, the cultural 
differences observed in eWOM would provide meaningful insights that help global 
advertisers adopt different strategies to better target consumers across cultures.
References
Bahtara, A. Z., & Muda, M. (2016). The impact of user-generated content (UGC) on prod-
uct reviews towards online purchasing: A conceptual framework.” Procedia Economics and 
Finance, 37, 337–342.
Baker, A. M., Naveen, D., & Kumar, V. (2016). Investigating how word-of-mouth conversa-
tions about brands influence purchase and retransmission intentions. Journal of Marketing 
Research, 53(2), 225–239.
Chevalier, J. A., & Mayzlin, D. (2006). The effect of word of mouth on sales: Online book 
reviews. Journal of Marketing Research, 43(3), 345–354.
Christodoulides, G., Michaelidou, N., & Argyriou, E. (2012). Cross-national differences in 
e-WOM influence. European Journal of Marketing, 46(11/12), 1689–1707.

Culture in eWOM Communication  425
Chu, S., & Choi, S. M. (2011). Electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM) in social networking 
sites: A cross-cultural study of the U.S. and China. Journal of Global Marketing, 24(3), 
263–281.
Chu, S., & Kim, Y. (2011). Determinants of consumer engagement in electronic word-
of-mouth (eWOM) in social networking sites. International Journal of Advertising, 30(1), 
47–75.
Chung, C. M., & Darke, P. R. (2006). The consumer as advocate: Self-relevance, culture, and 
word-of-mouth. Marketing Letters, 17(4), 269–279.
Dobele, A., Lindgreen, A., Beverland, M., Vanhammed, J., & van Wijk, R. (2007). Why pass 
on viral messages? Because they connect emotionally. Business Horizons, 50(4), 291–304.
Fong, J., & Burton, S. (2008). A cross-cultural comparison of electronic word-of-mouth 
and country-of-origin effects. Journal of Business Research, 61(3), 233–242.
Goldsmith, R. E., & Horowitz, D. (2006). Measuring motivations for online opinion seek-
ing. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 6(2), 2–14.
Goodrich, K., & de Mooij, M. (2014). How “social” are social media? A cross-cultural com-
parison of online and offline purchase decision influences. Journal of Marketing Com-
munications, 20(1–2), 103–116.
Gruen, T. W., Osmonbekov, T., & Czaplewski, A. (2006). eWOM: The impact of customer-
to-customer online know-how exchange on customer value and loyalty. Journal of Busi-
ness Research, 59(4), 449–456.
He, X., & Pedraza-Jiménez, R. (2015). Chinese social media strategies: Communication 
key features from a business perspective. El Profesional de la Información, 24(2), 200–209.
Hennig-Thurau, T., Gwinner, K. P., Walsh, G., & Gremler, D. D. (2004). Electronic word-
of-mouth via consumer-opinion platforms: What motivates consumers to articulate 
themselves on the Internet? Journal of Interactive Marketing, 18(1), 38–52.
Hofstede, G. (2001). Culture’s consequences: Comparing values, behaviors, institutions, and organi-
zations across nations (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Hung, K. H., & Li, S. Y. (2007). The influence of eWOM on virtual consumer communi-
ties: Social capital, consumer learning, and behavioral outcomes. Journal of Advertising 
Research, 47(4), 485–495.
Internet World Stats. (2015). World internet users and 2015 population stats. Retrieved 
from http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm.
Lam, D., Lee, A., & Mizerski, R. (2009). The effects of cultural values in word-of-mouth 
communication. Journal of International Marketing, 17(3), 55–70.
Lee, M., & Youn, S. (2009). Electronic word of mouth: How eWOM platforms influence 
product judgment. International Journal of Advertising, 28(3), 473–499.
Lien, C. H., & Cao, Y. (2014). Examining WeChat users’ motivations, trust, attitudes, and 
positive word-of-mouth: Evidence from China. Computers in Human Behavior, 41, 
104–111.
Money, R. B., Gilly, M. C., & Graham, J. L. (1998). Explorations of national culture and 
word-of-mouth referral behavior in the purchase of industrial services in the United 
States and Japan. Journal of Marketing, 62(4), 76–87.
O’Neill, M. (2011). How much do Facebook & YouTube profit from user-generated con-
tent? Retrieved from http://www.adweek.com/socialtimes/user-generated-content- 
infographic/69916.
Park, C., & Jun, J. (2003). A cross-cultural comparison of Internet buying behaviour: Effects 
of Internet usage, perceived risks, and innovativeness. International Marketing Review, 
20(5), 534–553.

426  Chu
Phelps, J. E., Lewis, R., Mobilio, L., Perry, D., & Raman, N. (2004). Viral marketing or elec-
tronic word-of-mouth advertising: Examining consumer responses and motivations to 
pass along email. Journal of Advertising Research, 44(4), 333–348.
Schumann, J. H., Wangenheim, F., Stringfellow, A., Yang, Z., Blazevic, V., Praxmarer, S., 
Shainesh, G., Komor, M. Shannon, R. M., & Jiménez, F. R. (2010). Cross-cultural dif-
ferences in the effect of received word-of-mouth referral in relational service exchange. 
Journal of International Marketing, 18(3), 62–80.
Smith, A. N., Fischer, E., & Chen, Y. (2012). How does brand-related user-generated con-
tent differ across YouTube, Facebook, and Twitter? Journal of Interactive Marketing, 26(2), 
102–113.
Statista. (2010). Social network revenue through user-generated content in 2010. Retrieved  
from http://www.statista.com/statistics/253651/social-network-revenue-through-user- 
generated-content/
Statista. (2016). Digital advertising spending worldwide from 2012 to 2018. Retrieved from 
http://www.statista.com/statistics/237974/online-advertising-spending-worldwide/
Yadav, M. S.,  & Pavlou, P. A. (2014). Marketing in computer-mediated environments: 
Research synthesis and new directions. Journal of Marketing, 78(1), 20–40.
You, Y., Vadakkepatt, G. G., & Joshi, A. M. (2015). A meta-analysis of electronic word- 
of-mouth elasticity. Journal of Marketing, 79(2), 19–39.

Digital advertising requires consideration of many platforms where traditional 
theories of advertising may not apply and where researchers must employ theories 
and concepts taken from other literatures. Video games are an excellent example 
of such a platform, and the study of them shows there is much to be learned. 
The growth in the popularity of video games has been accompanied by growth 
in using games as a platform for advertising. Because games provide a platform 
wherein individuals can interact directly with virtual representations of the prod-
uct as well as view advertisements in a more immersive virtual environment, it is 
not surprising that research consistently demonstrates the effectiveness of linking 
brand messages with games. But future research in this area will require thinking 
more carefully about how features of the game-player experience shape responses 
to the brand message, and this means a more nuanced understanding is required of 
the games themselves. As an illustration of this point, I briefly consider the role of 
immersion in games as a factor that may exert a non-linear influence on message 
effectiveness and which may also interact with brand and message characteristics 
in unexpected ways.
Immersion is a broad term that comprises variables such as spatial presence, 
flow, and narrative transportation (or presence). These ideas are not interchange-
able and some potential distinctions are considered at the end of this essay. In the 
context of advertising research, however, few studies consider more than one of 
these factors at a time, and this limits our understanding of how the factors may 
interact with each other. The importance of immersion is well-established from 
Nelson’s seminal work establishing presence as a relevant mediator (e.g., Nelson, 
Yaros, & Keum, 2006) to research showing that optimal challenge (a component 
of flow) enhances the effectiveness of advertising (Waiguny, Nelson, & Terlutter, 
2012), and demonstrating that difficulty in games may foster negative emotions 
and hinder brand effectiveness (Dardis, Schmierbach, Sherrick, & Luckman, 2013).
25
IMMERSION IN GAMES 
EXEMPLIFIES WHY DIGITAL MEDIA 
CREATE COMPLEX RESPONSES  
TO ADS
Mike Schmierbach

428  Schmierbach
However, future research needs to probe the limits of immersion as a means to 
enhance branding effectiveness. First, more immersive games may also be more 
demanding. Lee and Faber (2007) provided relatively early data on the application 
of the limited capacity model to the effectiveness of game advertising, showing 
that “focal” brands requiring less attention were more readily remembered. Sub-
sequent research parallels this, establishing not only a role for focal brands but also 
a complex influence of brand congruency and the presence of competing brands 
(e.g., Lee & Faber, 2007; Kim & Eastin, 2015). In these studies, the authors gener-
ally infer from ad characteristics the relative mental attention required to notice, 
process, and absorb brand messages. But game characteristics themselves are argu-
ably also an important determinant of the capacity to process brand messages, as 
these may influence outcomes when branding is inserted in a game with natu-
ralistic but unfamiliar controls (Dardis, Schmierbach, & Limperos, 2012). Facing 
the attentional demands of an unfamiliar control scheme, players may have been 
unable to put as much mental energy into processing brand messages.
As such, there is every reason to predict a non-linear relationship between 
immersion and advertising effectiveness. Low-immersion games may not draw 
the attention of players and, therefore, may not provide either the eyes-on-screen 
or the positive mood needed to make in-game product placement and advertising 
effective. But highly immersive games are cognitively demanding and may narrow 
the attention or focus of players to the point where they might miss all but the 
most intrusive of messages.
Variations in the game are only half of the picture, though. As Terlutter and 
Capella (2013) point out, variations in the advertisements also matter. Earlier, 
I noted that both the product-game congruency and placement of the advertise-
ment have been the focus of several studies. In the case of congruency, at least, 
the picture is incomplete. Congruent ads seem less likely to reduce immersion, 
but they may also be less memorable. Furthermore, the meaning of congruency is 
incomplete. Congruency in the context of a racing game may involve car-related 
products, but in real-life auto sports, many advertisers are common brand names. 
Is Budweiser “congruent” when placed on a stock car? Similarly, billboards in a 
city-based shooter could depict a range of brands while still being perceived as 
congruent or at least not disrupting immersion. When immersion is high, indi-
viduals may not be capable of in-depth processing and, thus, may not even notice 
the congruency of certain brand messages. In short, there is little reason to expect 
that all “congruent” ads are equally effective or to expect high immersion to auto-
matically enhance or reduce the effects of congruent ads.
Nor is congruence the only ad feature that matters. When actual ads appear in 
or alongside games, they may vary in the complexity of the message or in their 
emotional impact. A complex message would be difficult to process while play-
ing a highly immersive game, but if it interrupts the immersive experience, the 
resulting greater focus may well increase the likelihood of attending to the ad. 
A player highly absorbed in a sad story might respond well to an ad that matches 

Game Immersion and Complex Ad Responses  429
this emotional tone. Obviously, immersion is not the only aspect of the game or 
player experience that matters, but the fundamental point is that we need to move 
beyond the prominence and congruence of advertisements to think about other 
advertising features, and how features of digital advertising are likely moderated 
by the context in which they appear—context that is far more varied and less 
controlled than is often the case for traditional media.
Finally, we must return to a point referred to at the beginning of this essay. 
As noted, research to this point has most frequently focused on presence, but in 
a way that does not effectively distinguish it from other components of immer-
sion. However, better theorizing in the future requires greater precision with 
these variables. It makes sense, for example, that spatial presence would amplify 
the effectiveness of advertisements within the focal area of the player; presence in 
this context represents a sense of being “in” the game that directly relates to “see-
ing” the ads themselves in that same environment. But flow is at least ostensibly a 
discrete experience from presence, and a player experiencing a high level of flow 
may actually have less focus on the game environment and physical details, being 
absorbed instead in the activities of play. What’s more, both presence and flow 
are correlated with other game characteristics that may better explain why they 
have been related to the influence of advertising. Greater visual detail or vividness 
can generate presence; they can also make messages easier to see. Increased player 
performance is associated with flow; it might also be linked to positive moods and 
favorable impressions of in-game brands used in the play experience.
In summary, the future of research addressing digital advertising in games (and 
likely elsewhere) is going to need to move beyond establishing single-variable, 
linear-effect patterns. It needs to be more mindful of the nuanced meaning of 
ideas taken from media psychology (such as presence and flow). It needs to con-
sider how those game-experience variables function in non-linear ways, as some 
imply an optimal state that is neither too low nor too high. It needs to address 
not only the features of advertisements but the ways they interact with the game 
experience, as the same ad will be encountered and processed in very different 
ways depending on the game state.
References
Dardis, F. E., Schmierbach, M., & Limperos, A. M. (2012). The impact of game customiza-
tion and control mechanisms on recall of integral and peripheral brand placements in 
videogames. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 12(2), 1–12. doi: 10.1080/15252019.2012. 
10722192.
Dardis, F. E., Schmierbach, M., Sherrick, B., & Luckman, B. (2013, August). The impact of 
videogame-induced affect and ad type on memory of in-game advertisements. Paper presented 
at the annual meeting of the Association for Education in Journalism and Mass Com-
munication, Washington, DC.
Kim, E., & Eastin, M. S. (2015). External brand placement: The effects on game players’ 
processing of an in-game brand. Journal of Promotion Management, 21(3), 391–411. doi: 
10.1080/10496491.2014.996803.

430  Schmierbach
Lee, M., & Faber, R. J. (2007). Effects of product placement in on-line games on brand 
memory: A perspective of the limited-capacity model of attention. Journal of Advertising, 
36(4), 75–90. doi: 10.2753/JOA0091–3367360406.
Nelson, M. R., Yaros, R. A., & Keum, H. (2006). Examining the influence of telepresence 
on spectator and player processing of real and fictitious brands in a computer game. 
Journal of Advertising, 35(4), 87–99. doi: 10.2753/JOA0091–336735040.
Terlutter, R., & Capella, M. L. (2013). The gamification of advertising: Analysis and research 
directions of in-game advertising, advergames, and advertising in social network games. 
Journal of Advertising, 42(2–3), 95–112. doi: 0.1080/00913367.2013.774610.
Waiguny, M. K., Nelson, M. R., & Terlutter, R. (2012). Entertainment matters! The rela-
tionship between challenge and persuasiveness of an advergame for children. Journal of 
Marketing Communications, 18(1), 69–89. doi: 10.1080/13527266.2011.620766.

Research into in-game advertising has reached a stage that can incorporate many 
variables and concepts currently important to brand communication in the 
broader context of digital media. The purpose of this chapter is to briefly explain 
how examination of virtual direct experience (VDE) with brands through video 
games is uniquely suited to inform both in-game advertising and digital media 
research efforts.
Like any field that began as a nascent phenomenon, advertising research into 
video games began by focusing on attributes of the ads themselves. Early stud-
ies led by Nelson (2002) and others investigated features like ad size, location, 
duration, screen prominence, display mode (static vs. dynamic), and so on. This 
provided a great first understanding of how physical message characteristics could 
be manipulated to produce differing, important outcomes like brand recall and 
recognition, attitude toward the brand, and purchase intent. This line of valuable 
research—much of which is still being done today—would treat gaming plat-
forms as analogous to traditional media in which advertising effectiveness is seen 
as trying to determine the best places, times, locations, modes, etc., in which to 
place advertisements in and around the main media content.
Another phase of gaming research began to consider the impact of game-produced  
and player-based factors on in-game advertising effects. Many of these studies would 
find that such factors either moderated or mediated the direct relationships between 
physical message attributes and brand-related outcomes. For example, players who 
had to spend too much cognitive effort on game play would not remember ads 
as well as those who spent less effort (Lee & Faber, 2007). These effects could be 
further moderated when ad location (e.g., focal vs. peripheral) was introduced 
(Dardis, Schmierbach, & Limperos, 2012). Other studies of this type focused on the  
26
THE ADVENT OF VIRTUAL DIRECT 
EXPERIENCE (VDE) RESEARCH IN 
VIDEO GAMES
Integrating, Augmenting, and Informing 
Brand-Communication Strategies in Digital/
Interactive Media
Frank E. Dardis

432  Dardis
presence or flow-like state achieved by the players, and how this influenced advertis-
ing effects, while some focused on other experience-based variables like enjoyment, 
immersion, performance (“winning vs. losing”), game-induced mood or affect, and 
so on. Much like the research into message attributes described above, this line of 
research also is valuable, necessary, and informative to academics and practitioners 
alike. However, the approach still conceptualizes gaming as a “traditional” platform, 
in the sense that it investigates the intersection of message-attribute effects with 
media-experience-produced or media-consumption-produced effects; most of the 
time in which players are told to simply play a game without much control over 
game attributes or features, other than trying to do their best.
This is not to suggest, of course, that gaming does not have its own unique 
attributes and media-produced effects that differentiate it from other types of 
media—digital or traditional. What this means is that understanding ad effects in 
gaming requires much more research into uncovering and precisely understand-
ing effects from the gaming experience itself. But it is the next phase of gam-
ing research—virtual direct experience (VDE)—that I believe can allow gaming 
research to uniquely also speak to and inform the much larger realm of digital 
media effects in general. The construct VDE is based on traditional foundations of 
brand integration and also on digital-media concepts of interactivity.
Besharat, Kumar, Lax, and Rydzik (2013) categorized three types of brand 
placements in video games: 1) billboarding, or simple, passive brand placements 
unassociated with game play, 2) product placement, in which brands are placed 
within a game for potential usage (e.g., eating a bag of Doritos while playing a 
jungle survival game), and 3) product integration, in which, to play the game, 
branded objects need to be used in the realistic way in which they are actually 
experienced in the real-world (e.g., Dardis et al., 2015). This thereby ostensi-
bly makes the brand central to game playing, mimicking VDE as conceptualized 
in other non-gaming, interactive-media research, experiencing the product in a 
simulated or an online context as if in the real world (Griffith & Chen, 2004).
Early inquiry into VDE focused on how internet browsing allowed consumers 
to interact with brands or products in new ways, such as allowing for 3D product 
visualizations versus typical 2D ads (Li, Daugherty, & Biocca, 2001, 2003). Studies 
generally found that virtual experience could influence information processing 
(Schlosser, 2003), product knowledge (Jiang & Benbasat, 2007; Daugherty, Li, & 
Biocca, 2008), and brand attitudes and purchase intention (Li et al., 2003), due 
largely to increased interactivity. Further, Hang and Auty (2011) suggested that 
player interactivity with in-game brand placements can lead to enhanced “con-
ceptual fluency” (i.e., ease of processing information in the advertising stimuli), 
which results in higher memory and brand choice among players than do mere 
brand placements. Besharat et al. (2013) showed that pleasant virtual experiences 
with product attributes led to greater memory of and attitudes toward brands that 
were associated with the attributes. Finally, Dardis, Schmierbach, and Limperos 
(2012) showed that allowing customization of the integral brand needed for game 

Virtual Direct Experience in Video Games  433
play led to higher brand recall rates, and Dardis et al. (2015) demonstrated that 
the in-game performance of the branded, integral product needed for game play  
(a Volkswagen racecar) predicted players’ attitudes toward the real-world brand.  
We have just scratched the surface: there are many more factors to uncover as more  
is learned about VDE and in-game brand placements or advertisements.
The best part about examining VDE effects in video games is that it can be 
based very similarly upon the same two-pronged research approach described 
above: it entails a strategic communications decision (e.g., how and to what extent 
to allow a brand to be integrated into a game—which, in essence, becomes the 
“brand communication” itself—versus simply placing brand messages within or 
around a game). It also entails media-consumption based on game-produced 
effects within players that can influence the overall effectiveness of the strategy. 
But the difference in VDE is that the player is getting some “experience” with the 
brand as well as the gaming experience. This can lead to much more perceived 
interactivity, control, customization, and personalization with regard to the brand, 
all of which are factors that typically can speak more broadly to general digital-
media effects than simply describing gaming effects.
With digital spending consistently increasing within media advertising budg-
ets, such insight would seem to further validate gaming research as more critical 
than it already is to the larger fields of digital and interactive media. And when 
one considers the limitless interactivity that playing a VDE game allows the media 
user, such findings could be informative toward the understanding of whole new 
theories or methods of marketing communication of brands to consumers.
In sum, the research discussed here is obviously necessary and informative to 
move video game advertising forward. As brands continue to pump more market-
ing dollars into video game placements and experiences, researchers will need to 
pursue increased understanding of how each component makes the advertising 
efforts worthwhile or not. We are nowhere near “knowing it all.” This is true in 
most any advertising forum. However, I believe that VDE through video games is 
an intriguing topic that is ripe for empirical examination, and one that is ostensi-
bly and uniquely well-suited for integrating and adding to academic knowledge 
within the broader field of digital/interactive media.
References
Besharat, A., Kumar, A., Lax, J. R., & Rydzik, E. J. (2013). Leveraging virtual attribute 
experience in video games to improve brand recall and learning. Journal of Advertising, 
42(2–3), 170–182. doi: 10.1080/00913367.2013.774593.
Dardis, F. E., Schmierbach, M., Ahern, L., Fraustino, J., Bellur, S., Brooks, S., & Johnson, J. 
(2015). The effects of in-game virtual direct experience (VDE) on reactions to real-
world brands. Journal of Promotion Management, 21(3), 313–334.
Dardis, F. E., Schmierbach, M., & Limperos, A. (2012). The impact of game customization and 
control mechanism on recall of integral and peripheral brand placements in video games. 
Journal of Interactive Advertising, 12(2), 1–12. doi: 10.1080/15252019.2012.10722192.

434  Dardis
Daugherty, T., Li, H., & Biocca, F. (2008). Consumer learning and the effects of virtual 
experience relative to indirect and direct product experience. Psychology & Marketing, 
25(7), 568–586. doi: 10.1002/mar.20225.
Griffith, D. A.,  & Chen, Q. (2004). The influence of virtual direct experience (VDE) 
on on-line ad message effectiveness. Journal of Advertising, 33(1), 55–68. doi: 
10.1080/00913367.2004.10639153.
Hang, H., & Auty, S. (2011). Children playing branded video games: The impact of interac-
tivity on product placement effectiveness. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 21(1), 65–72. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jcps.2010.09.004.
Jiang, Z., & Benbasat, I. (2007). The effects of presentation formats and task complexity on 
online consumers’ product understanding. MIS Quarterly, 31(3), 475–500.
Lee, M., & Faber, R. J. (2007). Effects of product placement in on-line games and brand 
memory: A perspective of the limited-capacity model of attention. Journal of Advertising, 
36(4), 75–90. doi: 10.2753/JOA0091–3367360406.
Li, H., Daugherty, T., & Biocca, F. (2001). Characteristics of virtual experience in elec-
tronic commerce: A protocol analysis. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 15(3), 13–30. doi: 
10.1002/dir.1013.
Li, H., Daugherty, T., & Biocca, F. (2003). The role of virtual experience in consumer learn-
ing. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 13(4), 395–407.
Nelson, M. R. (2002). Recall of brand placements in computer/video games. Journal of 
Advertising Research, 42(2), 80–92.
Schlosser, A. E. (2003). Experiencing products in the virtual world: The role of goal and 
imagery in influencing attitudes versus purchase intentions. Journal of Consumer Research, 
30, 184–198. doi: 10.1086/376807.

In-Game Advertising: Promising Future or Passing Fad?
In today’s media landscape, advertising has reached a whole new level of ubiquity. 
One can argue that consumers expect to see advertising on TV, in print, outdoors, 
and on any kind of networked device, but not necessarily in video games. In fact, 
video games are often not the first thing that comes to mind when consumers 
and practitioners think about venues for advertising. Though no comprehensive 
history regarding advertising in video games exists, most studies and commentar-
ies that trace the evolution of this form of advertising seem to suggest that games 
(e.g., Kool-Aid Man and Avoid the Noid) made for the Atari 2600 and the per-
sonal computer (PC) in late 1970s and early 1980s represent some of the earliest 
examples of what is now commonly referred to as in-game advertising (Skalski, 
Campanella-Bracken, & Buncher, 2010). Even though in-game advertising was 
once considered a niche market, analysts estimate that the industry is currently 
worth $7 billion, and companies like Zynga have reported making as much as 
$153 million in revenue from in-game advertising in one year (Entertainment 
Software Association, 2014; Jordan, 2015). Despite their great value and potential, 
the reality is that most video game players are not making in-app or in-game 
purchases from advertising, leading some to question the real value of in-game 
ads (Robinson, 2016). Therefore, the purpose of this essay is to briefly synthesize 
in-game advertising research and discuss what researchers can do in the future to 
enhance understanding of the effectiveness of this form of advertising.
Common Types of In-Game Ads
There are many different forms of game-related advertising, but static in-game 
advertisements, dynamic in-game advertisements, and branded games (also known 
as “advergames”) are the three most common.
27
ADVERTISING IN VIDEO GAMES
An Overview and Future Research 
Considerations
Anthony M. Limperos

436  Limperos
Static advertisements in games are those that reside in the software, appearing 
during the course of game play. Sports and racing games contain a lot of static 
advertising. For example, FIFA 16, which is the most successful soccer video game 
franchise of all time, contains many different static ads ranging from team sponsors 
(e.g., Adidas, Nike, & Etihad) to ads for the game maker itself (EA Sports).
Dynamic in-game advertising is similar to static advertising in terms of the 
way it is displayed. However, online capabilities allow advertisers to serve ads in 
games based on the time of the day or location. For example, I used to routinely 
play a boxing game called Fight Night (EA Sports). There were a number of static 
advertisements in the game, but EA also sold dynamic ad space on the ring can-
vas within the game, and ads would change based on when people were playing. 
When playing one evening, I can vividly remember an ad for a new HBO show 
being prominently displayed in the ring. The ability to change an advertisement 
within a game due to networking capabilities captures the essence of dynamic 
in-game ads.
In 2006, Burger King worked with Blitz Games to create three different 
branded Xbox games that were sold at Burger King franchises (Barnes, 2016). 
These games were created with the idea of being another brand contact point for 
Burger King’s meats campaign and were relatively successful at the time. Branded 
games represent a third form of in-game advertising known as advergames. 
Though console-based advergames are not that common, many companies cur-
rently use web-based advergames in support of their marketing and communica-
tion objectives (Lee & Youn, 2008).
Video Game Advertising Research: A Picture of Mixed 
Effectiveness
While video game advertising has been around for quite some time, research on 
the subject first began to appear in communication and related marketing jour-
nals about 15 years ago. Early studies in this area illustrated that simply playing a 
game with embedded brand messaging is enough to impact simple recall of that 
brand, but not for all players (Nelson, 2002; Yang, Roskos-Ewoldsen, Dinu, & 
Arpan, 2006). As a result of this varied effectiveness, scholarship moved in a 
direction toward gaining a better understanding of the conditions and processes 
under which brand messaging in games can be effective. Unlike forms of passive 
media like television and print, video games are interactive and place demands 
on the players’ attention, which could ultimately be detrimental to information 
processing.
As a result of this shift toward understanding psychological process, research-
ers have examined how individual differences variables (Sparks & Chung, 2016), 
different types of games (Lull, Gibson, Cruz, & Bushman, 2016), and technologi-
cal features like customization and game control mechanisms (Dardis, Schmier-
bach, & Limperos, 2012) affect recall of brand messages and advertisements in 

Advertising in Video Games  437
games. Perhaps unsurprisingly, both the early and more current research in this 
area paint a rather complex picture of how individuals process ads in games.
As is the case with most research focused on understanding the cognitive pro-
cessing of media and persuasive messages, there is no all-encompassing theory 
or set of studies that can definitively explain both the value and effectiveness of 
forms of video game advertising. Almost all of the studies referenced above, and 
a good majority of research focused on advertising in games is experimental in 
nature taking place in a laboratory setting. Even though research has shown that 
individual, graphical, and technological differences, as well as the placement of ads 
in a game, impact recall and recognition, relatively few studies have been able to 
explain how these ad buys in games translate into purchase intentions or actual 
purchase of products or services advertised in the games. This is not to say that the 
theoretically driven laboratory studies are deficient in any way. In fact, without 
these studies, practitioners would merely be taking a shot in the proverbial dark 
in terms of message design for branded games and in-game advertising efforts. 
Research just needs to go a step further.
Future Research Considerations
In one of the most comprehensive essays focusing on digital games advertising, 
Terlutter and Capella (2013) provide a synthesis of the theories most often applied 
in the advertising and games context and provide a framework that highlights the 
key variables of interest that are often found in these studies. For anyone hop-
ing to conduct research on the effectiveness of in-game advertising, this article 
provides a great road map of the literature, complete with future research sugges-
tions. In the Terlutter and Capella (2013) article, there is a small section regarding 
the potential influence of “technical platform” on game advertising effectiveness. 
Based on my own research, and the fact that communication technologies con-
tinue to change and evolve, I believe that future research should place greater 
emphasis on isolating and explaining how variations in technology (e.g., different 
modalities) contribute to or detract from the effects of video game advertising. 
While individual differences, context, and types of games certainly matter, playing 
a console game on a 70-inch TV is fundamentally different than playing a mobile 
game on an 8-inch tablet or smartphone. Additionally, a game advertisement with 
sound and moving graphics is different than an advertisement that does not con-
tain these elements. Therefore, understanding how variations in technology influ-
ence the effectiveness of in-game advertising will likely remain an important 
question for years to come.
Although video games have reached critical mass and are very popular with 
a wide audience, tracking the return on in-game advertising expenditures is not 
as clear-cut. The more that researchers can do to bridge the gap between what 
is theoretically and what is practically relevant, the more promising the future 
will be for both researchers and practitioners concerned with understanding the 

438  Limperos
effectiveness of in-game advertising. On a final note, although it will continue 
to be important to research questions related to in-game advertising, the recent 
boom of e-sporting events and e-sports TV shows (which allow people to watch 
others play video games) presents a somewhat novel and vibrant area for future 
research consideration, especially since traditional elements of TV advertising are 
likely to be mixed with in-game advertising for multiple audiences.
References
Barnes, K. (2016). 10 oddities that found a home on Xbox. PureXbox. Retrieved May 26,  
2016 from http://www.purexbox.com/news/2016/05/feature_10_oddities_that found_ 
a_home_on_xbox.
Dardis, F. E., Schmierbach, M. G., & Limperos, A. M. (2012). The impact of game customi-
zation and control mechanism on videogame advertising effects. Journal of Interactive 
Advertising, 12, 1–12.
Entertainment Software Association. (2014). Games: In-game advertising. ESA. Retrieved 
May  26, 2016 from http://www.theesa.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/Games_ 
Advertising-11.4.pdf.
Jordan, J. (2015). Zynga generated $153 million of revenue from in-game ads in 2014. Pocketgamer. 
Retrieved May  26, 2016 from http://www.pocketgamer.biz/chart-of-the-week/60848/
zynga-generated-153-million-of-revenue-from-in-game-ads-in-2014/
Lee, M., & Youn, S. (2008). Leading national advertisers’ use of advergames. Journal of Cur-
rent Issues & Research in Advertising, 30, 1–13. doi: 10.1018/10641734.2008.10505243.
Lull, R. B., Gibson, B., Cruz, C., & Bushman, B. J. (2016). Killing characters in video games 
kills memory for in-game ads. Psychology of Popular Media Culture, Advance online pub-
lication. doi: 10.1037/ppm0000108.
Nelson, M. R. (2002). Recall of brand placements in computer/video games. Journal of 
Advertising Research, 42, 80–92.
Robinson, M. (2016). Understanding in-game advertising’s crisis of confidence. Adweek. 
Retrieved May 26, 2016 from http://www.adweek.com/socialtimes/deltadna-mark- 
robinson-guest-post-in-game-advertising-crisis-of-confidence/639056.
Skalski, P. Campanella-Bracken, C., & Buncher, M. (2010). Advertising: It’s in the game. In 
M. S. Eastin, T. Daugherty, & N. M. Burns (Eds.), Handbook of research on digital media 
and advertising: User generated content consumption (pp. 437–455). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference.
Sparks, J. V., & Chung, S. (2016). The effects of psychobiological motivational traits on 
memory of in-game advertising messages. Psychology of Marketing, 33, 60–68. doi: 
10.1002/mar.20840.
Terlutter, R., & Capella, J. N. (2013). The gamification of advertising: Analysis and research 
directions of in-game advertising, advergames, and advertising in social network games. 
Journal of Advertising, 42, 95–112. doi: 10.1080/00913367.2013.774610.
Yang, M., Roskos-Ewoldsen, D. R., Dinu, L., & Arpan, L. M. (2006). The effectiveness of 
“in-game” advertising: Comparing college students’ explicit and implicit memory for 
brands. Journal of Advertising, 35, 143–152. doi: 10.2753/JOA0091–3367350410.

The act of Liking online content has become a routine task in our day-to-day 
interactions with family, friends, colleagues, and companies who advertise online. 
Facebook’s emblematic thumbs-up button and a variety of similar heart-shaped 
mechanisms across social media platforms woo us to signal positive affect toward 
online content. Given the ease with which reactions are formed and commu-
nicated on social media, advertisers are cautioned against interpreting a Like as 
proxy for emotional engagement with online advertisements. Consequently, tra-
ditional advertising models such as response hierarchy models should be translated 
cautiously to social media contexts.
Whether thoughts or feelings are the better predictor of consumer intention is 
a highly debated topic in advertising and marketing research. Cognitive theories 
propose that viewers’ attitude formation toward the object of an ad is mediated 
by their cognitive elaboration of the arguments presented in a persuasive commu-
nication (e.g., Greenwald & Leavitt, 1984; Tsal, 1985). The introduction of emo-
tional response as a mediator for attitude formation (e.g., Batra & Ray, 1986) and 
as a predictor of behavioral outcomes (e.g., Smith, Haugtvedt, & Petty, 1994) indi-
cates that focusing exclusively on cognitive processes impedes our understanding 
of consumer behavior in its entirety (Allen, Machleit, & Kleine, 1992). Affect 
has always played a central role in attitudinal research (e.g., Edell & Burke, 1987; 
Burke & Edell, 1989; Morris, Woo, Geason, & Kim, 2002). Given the increasing 
amount of stimuli that are competing for attention on social media, we discuss 
the theoretical implications of these developments for advertising and marketing 
research.
During the first decade of social media’s evolution, the Like button was repur-
posed by many users: Liking bad news—public or private—was to be understood as 
a signal of empathy or concern; Liking an article about movie spoilers was to signal 
28
EASY LOVING
Understanding Affect in Social Media
Attila Pohlmann and Qimei Chen

440  Pohlmann and Chen
a real-world conversation topic to others. Often, the Like serves as an indicator of 
personal relevance, to validate others, or to simply acknowledge that a message was 
received, heard, or seen rather than being an expression of true fondness.
Recognizing this development, Facebook introduced an augmented Like but-
ton in 2016 that offers universal cultural emotional expressions, namely Love, 
Haha, Wow, Sad, and Angry, in addition to Like. These additional buttons allow 
users a more nuanced expression of emotions toward online advertisements and 
can provide marketers with valuable quantitative insight regarding consumer atti-
tudes when they interact with an ad. In fact, marketers have access to an abun-
dance of digital metrics, such as the number of Likes, followers, shares, co-creation 
attempts, and video views, to name a few (Hoffman  & Fodor, 2010). Market 
research companies aggregate these data and build consumer profiles that tran-
scend the boundaries of their activity on a single platform or device. Such struc-
tured data allow the tracking of the spread of information through networks and 
gauges user engagement, but more involved qualitative approaches, such as web 
scraping and sentiment analysis, are still needed to extract the emotional context 
and valence of these activities.
So, what insights can marketers hope to glean in the future from the expanded 
reaction set now available to Facebook users? What are some of the theoretical 
implications of social media users when they give their hearts away so easily 
online without really feeling the love? How will advertising researchers respond 
to this proliferation of quasi-emotion in a post-emotional society (Mestrovic, 
1996; Wade, 2015) where social media users share a lighthearted Haha without 
moving a single facial muscle, least of all rolling on the floor? Would emotional 
responses perhaps be less diluted if there were an emotional allowance built into 
social media accounts prompting users to consider the allocation of their emo-
tional bandwidth? And among how many emotions can one truly oscillate in a 
single minute without the risk of going numb while scrolling through the unpre-
dictable emotional potpourri of updates from friends, news feed subscriptions, 
and sponsored advertisements?
While we cannot answer all of the questions, these questions hold important 
implications for advertising researchers regarding how consumers’ experience 
and intensity of emotions affect various behavioral outcomes. Among these ques-
tions, and of particular relevance is how traditional advertising models—such as 
response hierarchy models—should be refurbished to capture these new develop-
ments in social media advertising. In what follows, we first review the challenges 
traditional response hierarchy models are facing and then propose a new interac-
tive response model for advertising in the era of social media.
Traditional Response Hierarchy Models
Traditional response hierarchy models (e.g., Strong, 1925; Lavidge  & Steiner, 
1961; McGuire, 1978) of marketing communication propose that consumers 
move through at least three stages that can be aggregated into 1) the cognitive 

Understanding Affect in Social Media  441
stage, where the consumer is exposed to an ad and cognitively becomes aware of 
its existence and content; 2) the affective stage, where persuasion occurs and an 
attitude or evaluation is formed; and 3) the behavioral stage, where consumers act 
on an intention or positive attitude, most often referring to purchase behavior.
Considering that most internet users try to avoid and ignore online ads 
(Drèze & Hussherr, 2003; Cho & Cheon, 2004)—merely processing them at pre-
attentive levels (Schweizer, 2001; Yoo, 2007)—it is unlikely that users of social 
media will pause to carefully consider the persuasive appeals of an ad that they 
encounter in their social media stream. It is more likely that they remain swept 
up in the emotional flurry delivered by the next post in the eternal vertical scroll 
of their social media feed. Thus, consumer reactions communicated by employ-
ing the new reaction emojis are indicative of ad exposure, and their attitudes are 
likely based on peripheral cues rather than constituting the formation of a lasting 
attitude bonded with the object of the ad.
Toward a New Response Model in the  
Era of Social Media
These challenges are not necessarily a bad thing for advertisers. Given the lim-
ited attention and low motivation needed to process online ads, the elaboration 
likelihood model (ELM) (Petty & Cacioppo, 1986) predicts that consumers are 
not motivated to commit mental resources to cognitively process the stimuli they 
haphazardly encounter online. Instead, their attitude formation is based upon 
peripheral cues, such as attractiveness and credibility of the source of the message, 
or its perceived production quality, for instance.
For example, Goodrich (2011) found that when consumers browsed a website, 
lower levels of attention were positively correlated with brand attitude toward 
the advertised product, supporting prior findings that low attention positively 
affects attitude (Bornstein, 1989; Heath, Brandt, & Nairn, 2006). The reason for 
this outcome is that liking judgments are spontaneously made when attention 
is low, whereas the formation of disliking judgments requires a more involved 
cognitive process (Herr & Page, 2004). However, advertisers need to consider the 
implications of attitude persistence in social media under low-involvement condi-
tions (Sengupta, Goodstein, & Boninger, 1997). Attitude persistence is of primary 
concern when attitude formations and purchase decisions are temporally delayed 
(Shen & Chen, 2007) or when attitude decays after the purchase (He, Chen, & 
Alden, 2016). Traditional conversion marketing in e-commerce aims to optimize 
the direct route to persuasion, from ad exposure to an online purchase behavior, 
compressing the temporal delay, and thereby reducing the need to foster attitude 
persistence for the sake of purchase behavior. Yet, managed without the proper 
diligence in an online context, the exposure to self-serving sales pitches of the 
business can easily be interpreted unfavorably by the viewer as single-sided, since 
such messages neglect the conversational and relational nature of social media 
(Hoffman & Fodor, 2010; Ramsay, 2010).

442  Pohlmann and Chen
Furthermore, the evolution of technology profoundly alters the parameters of 
online customer attitude formation (e.g., Chen & Wells, 1999) and now allows 
for complex real-time interactions between customers and firms, facilitating the 
delivery of elaborately targeted communications. Issues that require attention are 
contagion effects, such as spreading attitude effects (Walther, 2002). Such effects 
occur when negative affect from user-generated content (UGC) is transferred 
onto the object of a sponsored ad or even from one ad to another. For example, 
reading about a friend’s fear of flying or negative holiday experience can taint atti-
tude toward the subsequently encountered advertisement for an airline or hotel 
chain. In traditional advertising media, such unfortunate occurrences used to be 
largely outside of the scope of marketers influence, but context-aware dynamic ad 
delivery systems need to be carefully configured to distribute global ad impres-
sions accordingly.
Based on the discussion above, we propose a new interactive response model, 
shown in Figure 28.1, to help address the challenges associated with the traditional 
FIGURE 28.1  Peripheral Route, Only of the Elaboration Likelihood Model (ELM), 
on the Left (adapted from Petty & Cacioppo, 1986). Proposed Interac-
tive Model of Attitude Formation for Social Media on the Right.

Understanding Affect in Social Media  443
response hierarchy models in a landscape of changing technology. This proposed 
model for social media takes into account that advertisers can quantitatively 
gauge social media users’ incidental affect and emotional reactions to ads from the 
expanded reaction set. To prevent unfavorable attitudes toward advertisements, an 
extended understanding of social media users’ dynamic affective states is required 
that takes into account the interaction with UGC and provides for the delivery 
of communications with tailored peripheral cues to prime positive affective states. 
Once attained, such positive affective states can be associated with the attitude 
object of persuasive communications to elicit a desired behavior, such as making a 
purchase or otherwise supporting the formation of a brand relationship.
Compared to the traditional peripheral route to persuasion purported by ELM 
(e.g., Petty & Cacioppo, 1986), we believe that this new interactive response model 
more adequately captures the dynamics of consumer interactions and emotional 
processes. Marketers can employ this conceptual route to facilitate favorable con-
sumer behaviors.
Nonetheless, ethical concerns with regard to consumer privacy require careful 
attention (see Chapter 17), considering that a substantial number of sensitive per-
sonality attributes (e.g., political views, personality traits, sexual orientation, use 
of addictive substances, general happiness, etc.) can be predicted with substantial 
accuracy from a digital record of about 50 Likes (Kosinski, Stillwell, & Graepel, 
2013). Thus, an ad that is overly tailored can be perceived as outright uncanny. 
Especially in social media contexts where consumers expect an equitable relation-
ship that they wish to form with a brand, the behavior of the business is evaluated 
according to social norms and human interaction etiquette. Consequently, norm 
violations or transgressions of a brand may ultimately be penalized by consumers 
(Aggarwal, 2004).
References
Aggarwal, P. (2004). The effects of brand relationship norms on consumer attitudes and 
behavior. Journal of Consumer Research, 31(1), 87–101.
Allen, C. T., Machleit, K. A., & Kleine, S. S. (1992). A comparison of attitudes and emotions 
as predictors of behavior at diverse levels of behavioral experience. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 18(4), 493–504.
Batra, R., & Ray, M. L. (1986). Affective responses mediating acceptance of advertising. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 13(2), 234–249.
Bornstein, R. F. (1989). Exposure and affect: Overview and meta-analysis of research, 
1968–1987. Psychological Bulletin, 106(2), 265.
Burke, M. C., & Edell, J. A. (1989). The impact of feelings on ad-based affect and cognition. 
Journal of Marketing Research, 26(1), 69–83.
Chen, Q., & Wells, W. D. (1999). Attitude toward the site. Journal of Advertising Research, 
39(5), 27–38.
Cho, C.-H., & Cheon, J. H. (2004). Why do people avoid advertising on the internet? 
Journal of Advertising, 33(4), 89–97.

444  Pohlmann and Chen
Drèze, X., & Hussherr, F. X. (2003). Internet advertising: Is anybody watching? Journal of 
Interactive Marketing, 17(4), 8–23.
Edell, J. A., & Burke, M. C. (1987). The power of feelings in understanding advertising 
effects. Journal of Consumer Research, 14(3), 421–433.
Goodrich, K. (2011). Anarchy of effects? Exploring attention to online advertising and 
multiple outcomes. Psychology & Marketing, 28(4), 417–440.
Greenwald, A. G., & Leavitt, C. (1984). Audience involvement in advertising: Four levels. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 11(1), 581–592.
He, Y., Chen, Q., & Alden, D. L. (2016). Time will tell: Managing post-purchase changes in 
brand attitude. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 43(3), 1–15.
Heath, R., Brandt, D., & Nairn, A. (2006). Brand relationships: Strengthened by emotion, 
weakened by attention. Journal of Advertising Research, 46(4), 410–419.
Herr, P. M., & Page, C. M. (2004). Asymmetric association of liking and disliking judg-
ments: So What’s not to like? Journal of Consumer Research, 30(4), 588–601.
Hoffman, D. L., & Fodor, M. (2010). Can you measure the ROI of your social media mar-
keting? MIT Sloan Management Review, 52(1), 41.
Kosinski, M., Stillwell, D., & Graepel, T. (2013). Private traits and attributes are predictable 
from digital records of human behavior. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
110(15), 5802–5805.
Lavidge, R. J., & Steiner, G. A. (1961). A model for predictive measurements of advertising 
effectiveness. The Journal of Marketing, 25(6), 59–62.
McGuire, W. J. (1978). An information-processing model of advertising effectiveness. In H. 
L. Davis & A. J. Silk (Eds.), Behavioral and management science in marketing (pp. 156–180). 
New York, NY: Ronald (Wiley).
Mestrovic, S. (1996). Postemotional society. London: Sage.
Morris, J. D., Woo, C., Geason, J. A., & Kim, J. (2002). The power of affect: Predicting inten-
tion. Journal of Advertising Research, 42(3), 7–17.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). The elaboration likelihood model of persuasion. In L. 
Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology, (Vol. 19, pp. 1–24). Orlando, 
FL: Academic Press, Inc.
Ramsay, M. (2010). Social media etiquette: A guide and checklist to the benefits and per-
ils of social marketing. Journal of Database Marketing & Customer Strategy Management, 
17(3–4), 257–261.
Schweizer, K. (2001). Preattentive processing and cognitive ability. Intelligence, 29(2), 
169–186.
Sengupta, J., Goodstein, R. C., & Boninger, D. S. (1997). All cues are not created equal: 
Obtaining attitude persistence under low-involvement conditions. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 23(4), 351–361.
Shen, F., & Chen, Q. (2007). Contextual priming and applicability: Implications for ad 
attitude and brand evaluations. Journal of Advertising, 36(1), 69–81.
Smith, S. M., Haugtvedt, C. P., & Petty, R. E. (1994). Attitudes and recycling: Does the 
measurement of affect enhance behavioral prediction? Psychology & Marketing, 11(4), 
359–374.
Strong, E. K. (1925). The psychology of selling and advertising. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill 
Book Company.
Tsal, Y. (1985). On the relationship between cognitive and affective processes: A critique of 
Zajonc and Markus. Journal of Consumer Research, 12(3), 358–362.

Understanding Affect in Social Media  445
Wade, L. (2015). What is a world in which commercials make you cry? The Society Pages.  
Retrieved from https://thesocietypages.org/socimages/2015/12/28/what-is-a-world- 
in-which-commercials-make-you-cry/
Walther, E. (2002). Guilty by mere association: Evaluative conditioning and the spreading 
attitude effect. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82(6), 919–934.
Yoo, C. Y. (2007). Preattentive processing of web advertising. Youngstown, NY: Cambria Press.

Advertising is an inherently interdisciplinary field, situated primarily at the inter-
section of mass communication, marketing, and psychology. With the evolution of 
digital technologies and availability of massive datasets containing extensive infor-
mation about consumer participation in brands’ promotional radiation through an 
interconnected network of paid, earned, social, and owned media channels, a new 
stream of advertising research has emerged in collaboration with unlikely research 
partners: data scientists. Such a research approach is often referred to as big data 
analytics or, more generally, computational social science research.
Computational social science research is a fast-growing research approach 
across various disciplines. The expansion of its application to advertising research 
has been facilitated by the advancement of digital media technology, tracking 
online activities of large numbers of consumers, and increasing computing capac-
ities enabling analysis of such massive datasets. Ranges of activities, including 
search, content viewing, product purchasing, connecting, liking, sharing, forward-
ing, and game-playing, can be captured and analyzed by marketers for targeting, 
ad development and placement strategies, and effect assessment.
With the profound shift in digital advertising focus to viral spread of ads 
through consumer activities and interactions, and availability of big data captur-
ing them, computational advertising research has huge potential for revealing new 
insights and building theories explaining and predicting consumers’ participatory 
behaviors related to advertising. As advertising researchers take an interest in, and 
gain familiarity with, computation social science research and its application to 
the advertising field, there is rising interest and engagement in multidisciplinary 
collaboration with researchers from computer science, statistics, and informa-
tion and decision science fields. Like any multidisciplinary research, while having 
great advantages, computational advertising research presents unique challenges 
29
CONSIDERATIONS FOR APPLICATION 
OF COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL 
SCIENCE RESEARCH APPROACHES TO 
DIGITAL ADVERTISING RESEARCH
Jisu Huh

Computational Social Science Research  447
stemming from differences among disciplines. This think piece is aimed at pre-
senting important considerations in multidisciplinary computational advertising 
research and proposing directions for future research.
Importance of Theory-Building Research
The current state of computational advertising research, in both industry and 
academe, seems to be dominated by primarily exploratory, data-driven approaches 
with pattern-drawing motivations. Big data are mined and explored often without 
a clearly focused theoretical framework, and patterns emerging from the mined 
data are often subjectively interpreted by the researcher, opening the possibility 
that similar data patterns might be interpreted differently by different researchers 
and different conclusions might be drawn.
For effective and fruitful computational advertising research, both exploratory 
research and theory-based research are important and should be properly imple-
mented. Exploratory research can contribute to theory building by discovering 
new patterns of advertising phenomena leading to new theory development and 
testing the new theory by rigorous testing and retesting. On the other hand, for 
many of the new phenomena (e.g., analyzing traffic details for various devices to 
provide consumers with relevant advertisements), a clear and focused theoretical 
framework would be critically important. Researchers need to make strong con-
nections between existing theories and the new research method, and to test old 
theories using the computational research approach.
In developing a theoretical framework for computational advertising research, 
an important consideration is to understand the limitations of the computational 
social science research approach. Overly complicated models with too many con-
cepts, and constructs with multiple sub-dimensions, cannot be adequately mod-
eled and tested in a computational system (Golbeck, 2005). Another limitation is 
that some of the important constructs in advertising theory represent individual 
consumers’ internal mental state (e.g., involvement, motivation) and cannot be 
adequately measured by indicators obtained from big data, although evolution 
of neuroscience and other physiological measurements, and longitudinal com-
putational research, show great promise to address this limitation (see Hofacker, 
Malthouse, & Sultan, 2016). With the consideration of such limitations, for com-
putational advertising research, researchers should develop a simplified theoreti-
cal model with a small set of variables that are clearly and narrowly defined and 
measurable through quantitative data computation.
Matching between a Concept and Indicators, and 
Importance of Concept Explication
As concepts are the fundamental building blocks of theory, for viable application 
of the computational research approach to the advertising field, rigorous concept 

448  Huh
explication and measurement validation would be absolutely critical. Most of the 
concepts and constructs in advertising research have traditionally been measured 
by consumers’ self-reported data collected using questionnaires or manipulated 
by researchers. As an alternative to the traditional approach, the biggest advantage 
of computational research is its ability to collect and analyze machine-observable 
activities performed by hundreds of thousands (sometimes millions) of individuals 
in a natural setting, and to overcome the limitations of questionnaire-based meas-
urements, including sampling error, nonresponse error, and resource demand (e.g., 
time, financial). On the other hand, computational research’s primary challenge 
is that abstract concepts and human mental events are not directly observable, 
and researchers need to identify valid proxy measures to be used for mathemati-
cal calculation of abstract concepts. Thus, the fundamental premise of computa-
tional social science research is scientifically justified linking or mapping between 
abstract concepts and appropriate indicators or proxies (Roy, Borbora, & Srivas-
tava, 2013).
To make it possible to examine advertising phenomena, abstract concepts must 
be converted to observable data, and computational research requires selecting 
certain indicators representing each concept. In relation to this inherent challenge 
in computational research, a crucial issue in the current computational research 
in marketing/advertising industry and academe is a lack of rigorous concept 
explication guiding the concept-to-indicator mapping, resulting in confusion and 
discrepancies in the operationalization of concepts. Especially when research is 
conducted by those unfamiliar with the particular concepts and theories related 
to the observed phenomena, terms are often used imprecisely and can mean dif-
ferent things, the same concept is represented by different indicators, different 
concepts are measured by the same set of indicators, or sometimes wrong indica-
tors are used. In multidisciplinary research involving scholars from different fields, 
another related issue is the communication gap, where concepts are understood 
differently and the same concept is represented by different terminologies in dif-
ferent fields.
Such an example is observed in the computational trust research and compu-
tational social influence research. For example, computational research on social 
influence has been fast growing with the rise of social media and eWOM phe-
nomena (e.g., Leenders, 2002; Cha, Haddadi, Benevenuto, & Gummadi, 2010; 
Trusov, Bodapati, & Bucklin, 2010; Kaiser, Kröckel, & Bodendorf, 2012; Zhang, 
Zhao, & Xu, 2015; Subbian, Aggarwal, & Srivastava, 2016). Common social net-
work indicators used to represent influence in a social media context include 
number of followers, number of friends, number of retweets, number of men-
tions, and frequency of online activities (e.g., Cha et al., 2010; Guo, Pathak, & 
Cheng, 2015; Zhang et al., 2015). Indicators for social influence vary across 
studies, and while some studies provide very cursory discussion of a conceptual 
definition, many of the studies cited do not offer concept explications of social 
influence.

Computational Social Science Research  449
As a concept developed in social psychology, social influence is generally con-
ceptualized as a phenomenon that “occurs when an actor adapts his behavior, 
attitude, or belief, to the behavior, attitudes, or beliefs of other actors in the social 
system” (Leenders, 2002, p. 26). Given its theoretical origin and conceptual defi-
nitions, social influence is clearly an effect concept referring to influence of one 
entity on another. Thus, influence should be measured in terms of a causal link 
between the thoughts and actions of the influential and the influenced. This raises 
questions about the validity of using number of followers, number of friends, 
number of retweets, number of mentions, and frequency of online activities as 
indicators of social influence.
Moreover, very similar social media metrics are also used as indicators of 
trust between individuals in computational trust research (e.g., Adali et al., 2010; 
Roy, 2015). Trust is a concept that has been defined and examined in many 
different social science fields, including advertising (e.g., Cho, Huh, & Faber, 
2014). Computational trust research, which examines trust between human 
actors mediated through computers, has evolved over the past decade primarily 
by researchers in the computer science field. This line of research focuses on 
discovering patterns of computer-mediated trust formation between individu-
als in social networks and explaining and predicting human trust formation in 
the real world (Golbeck, 2005; Roy, 2015). Some of the computational trust 
studies provide conceptual definitions of trust, while others lack solid con-
ceptualization and theoretical justifications for selection of indicators for the 
concept.
The use of the same metrics as indicators for different concepts like influence 
and trust, or use of different indicators for the same concept, causes confusion 
and hinders cohesive theory development. Comparing trust and influence—since 
influence is an effect concept whereas trust is a relationship concept referring 
to the nature of a relationship between one individual and another (e.g., Mayer, 
Davis, & Schoorman, 1995; McKnight & Chervany, 2001; McKnight & Chervany, 
2002)—it can be argued that social media metrics indicating interpersonal links 
are more suitable indicators for trust than influence, because they fit the concep-
tual definition of trust better than that of influence.
In order to move the computational advertising research forward, rigorous 
concept explication should guide the selection and justification of right indicators 
for a concept that are valid representations of the concept the way it is conceptu-
ally defined. Computational social science research needs the same measurement 
development procedures as the traditional social science research to develop and 
validate measures (see Chaffee, 1991; MacKenzie, Podsakoff, & Podsakoff, 2011). 
It will help especially in the multidisciplinary research context, to bring every-
one together in terms of thinking about research questions and procedures, and 
disciplined and consistent use of terms. Additionally, it is important to carefully 
consider the existing discrepancies in matching between a concept and its indica-
tors in reviewing previous computational research. As stated by Chaffee (1991), 

450  Huh
“our measures will be improved more by evaluation of what they are intended to 
measure than by technical tinkering” (p. 5).
Proposed Directions for Computational Research  
in Advertising
Computational social science research has great potential for examining and 
understanding consumers’ interactions with and responses to digital advertising 
and advertising effects. Evolving digital technologies, such as social media, mobile 
devices, wearable technology, virtual reality, and the internet of things, will con-
tinue to produce more massive data, capturing every aspect of human behaviors 
mediated by computers. Such data are a gold mine of information for advertising 
researchers developing and testing theories, as well as for advertising practitioners 
devising more effective advertising strategies. Exploratory computational research 
offers valuable new insights about consumer behavior and effects of various mar-
keting activities. However, purely exploratory research has limitations in its theo-
retical contributions, and, without theoretically grounded research frameworks 
and rigorous concept explication, simply following descriptive patterns or mistak-
enly believing that data patterns show objective truth can be problematic.
Given the technological challenges in conducting computational research with 
big datasets, multidisciplinary collaborations between advertising and computer 
science and decision science fields would be imperative. For meaningful and fruit-
ful multidisciplinary collaborations contributing to advertising theory building, a 
strong theoretical framework and rigorous concept explication that makes theo-
retically sound matching between a concept and valid indicators would be crucial. 
Also, clear communication is absolutely critical among members of the multidis-
ciplinary project team to bridge the differences among disciplines in understand-
ing and using theoretical concepts and terms. With these considerations, several 
research directions are proposed for future research.
First, some theories or theoretical constructs seem to be especially more suit-
able than others for the computational research approach. Aforementioned social 
influence and trust constructs are such examples. Many digital advertising phe-
nomena involve consumer-to-consumer and consumer-to-brand interactions and 
relationships, and computational trust research seems to have great potential for 
mapping, explaining, and predicting such phenomena.
Second, just like the traditional measurement scale development, thoughtful 
and rigorous research is needed to develop and test the right indicators for vari-
ous concepts examined in advertising theory. For each concept-indicator map-
ping, thorough measurement validity tests should be conducted for face, content, 
criterion-related, and construct validity.
There are also many other possibilities and new avenues for research that can 
contribute to digital advertising theory building. New technology and complex 
social networks will constantly bring new types of data that will reveal some 

Computational Social Science Research  451
aspects of human psychological and behavioral phenomena. Datasets with edges 
(links or connections between network actors) representing human relations are 
very common in social media (e.g., network links indicating liking, friending, 
or following someone). However, the true meaning of edges in different net-
works is not clear and calls for more research. For example, friending someone 
or liking something on Facebook, following or retweeting someone on Twitter,  
liking or commenting on a video on YouTube—these actions might all represent 
different concepts and should not be assumed as the same network edges. In 
exploring social media data, expanding the theoretical scope from the individual-
level psychology theory to social-level theory would be especially useful. Also, 
new theories could emerge from exploratory computational research, but, more 
importantly, rigorous causality testing should follow to test and validate the new 
theories.
The scope of computational advertising research could be further expanded 
beyond the current suggestions. Among the various interactive advertising 
response outcomes proposed in Rodgers and Thorson’s (2000) Interactive Adver-
tising Model (IAM), there are variables that are readily observable and currently 
measured in computational research, such as product purchase, but other more 
abstract and hard-to-measure concepts could be also captured. Researchers are 
encouraged to explore if some of the important theoretical concepts that are 
not currently examined in computational research (e.g., attention, involvement, 
attitude) could be captured through specific web metrics. Such potential for com-
putational research is thoughtfully discussed in a recent article by Hofacker, Malt-
house, and Sultan (2016), where the authors propose numerous possibilities for 
researchers to infer consumers’ psychological characteristics and responses (e.g., 
attitude, satisfaction, dissatisfaction, pleasure) from behavioral big data.
A noticeable example of attempting to capture an abstract advertising-related 
concept using big data is research on engagement. Noting wide disagreements 
in the conceptual definition of engagement and inconsistencies in its operation-
alization in the previous engagement research literature, Maslowska, Malthouse, 
and Collinger (2016) proposed a new engagement model with four distinctive 
customer engagement components, with a conceptual definition and operation-
alizational approaches for each of them: 1) customer brand experience, 2) brand 
dialogue behaviors, 3) brand consumption, and 4) shopping behaviors. While big 
data cannot capture the psychological aspect of customer brand experience, they 
offer ample indicators for the other three components. Particularly, brand dialogue 
behaviors, defined as “all brand-related non-purchase behaviors” (Maslowska et al., 
2016, p. 483), can be measured by tracking, counting, and analyzing a wide range 
of consumer actions, such as liking or following brand pages on social network 
sites (SNSs), downloading branded apps, playing branded games, and viewing/
sharing/posting/creating brand-related user-generated content (Maslowska et al., 
2016). Future research is encouraged to empirically test the proposed engagement 
model and measurement approaches.

452  Huh
Finally, expanding the source of big data beyond the current website brows-
ing and social networking data would open new possibilities for computational 
advertising research. For example, virtual reality (VR) and online games are espe-
cially interesting environments where human psychology and behaviors can be 
observed in a virtual environment that mimics the real-world social atmosphere. 
Especially promising is massively multi-player online games (MMOGs), micro-
cosms of real worlds, where various forms of digital advertising can be easily 
placed, and human interactions with and responses to them, as well as interper-
sonal trust and other types of relationships, can be tracked, stored, and analyzed 
(Roy, 2015). Researchers should also explore how unstructured data in forms of 
text, image, audio, and video can be analyzed to reveal new insights about con-
sumer behavior and advertising phenomena.
References
Adali, S., Escriva, R., Goldberg, M. K., Hayvanovych, M., Magdon-Ismail, M., Szymanski, 
B. K., Wallace, W. A., & Williams, G. T. (2010). Measuring behavioral trust in social 
networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security 
Informatics (ISI) (pp. 150–152), Vancouver, Canada, May 23–26. Retrieved from http://
www.cs.rpi.edu/~szymansk/papers/isi.10.pdf.
Cha, M., Haddadi, H., Benevenuto, F., & Gummadi, K. P. (2010). Measuring user influ-
ence in Twitter: The million follower fallacy. In Proceedings of the Fourth International 
AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (pp. 10–17). Retrieved from https://
www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEw
iwtiCv_vNAhXFPCYKHRGoCTkQFggeMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.aaai.
org%2Focs%2Findex.php%2FICWSM%2FICWSM10%2Fpaper%2Fdownload%2F15
38%2F1826&usg=AFQjCNGNx7BiOl2YEc0B0HVjPQ-1RpoH-Q.
Chaffee, S. H. (1991). Communication concepts I: Explication. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Cho, S., Huh, J., & Faber, R. J. (2014). The influence of sender trust and advertiser trust on 
multistage effects of viral advertising. Journal of Advertising, 43(1), 100–114.
Golbeck, J. A. (2005). Computing and applying trust in web-based social networks. Doctoral 
Dissertation. University of Maryland. Retrieved from http://drum.lib.umd.edu/bit 
stream/handle/1903/2384/umi-umd-2244.pdf?sequence=1.
Guo, H., Pathak, P., & Cheng, H. (2015). Estimating social influences from social network-
ing sites: Articulated friendships versus communication interactions. Decision Sciences, 
46(1), 135–163.
Hofacker, C. F., Malthouse, E. C., & Sultan, F. (2016). Big data and consumer behavior: 
Imminent opportunities. Journal of Consumer Marketing, 33(2), 89–97.
Kaiser, C., Kröckel, J., & Bodendorf, F. (2012). Simulating the spread of opinions in online 
social networks when targeting opinion leaders. Information Systems and e-Business Man-
agement, 11(4), 597–621.
Leenders, R. T. A. (2002). Modeling social influence through network autocorrelation: 
Constructing the weight matrix. Social Networks, 24(1), 21–48.
MacKenzie, S. B., Podsakoff, P. M., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2011). Construct measurement and 
validation procedures in MIS and behavioral research: Integrating new and existing 
techniques. MIS Quarterly, 35(2), 293–334.

Computational Social Science Research  453
Maslowska, E., Malthouse, E. C., & Collinger, T. (2016). The customer engagement ecosys-
tem. Journal of Marketing Management, 32(5–6), 469–501.
Mayer, R., Davis, J., & Schoorman, F. D. (1995). An integrative model of organizational 
trust. The Academy of Management Review, 2, 709–734.
McKnight, D. H., & Chervany, N. L. (2001–2002). What trust means in e-commerce cus-
tomer relationships: An interdisciplinary conceptual typology. International Journal of 
Electronic Commerce, 6(2), 35–59.
Rodgers, S., & Thorson, E. (2000). The interactive advertising model. Journal of Interactive 
Advertising, 1(1), 41–60.
Roy, A. (2015). Computational trust at various granularities in social networks. Doctoral Disserta-
tion. University of Minnesota. Retrieved from http://conservancy.umn.edu/bitstream/
handle/11299/177102/Roy_umn_0130E_16776.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y.
Roy, A., Borbora, Z. H., & Srivastava, J. (2013, August). Socialization and trust formation: 
A mutual reinforcement? An exploratory analysis in an online virtual setting. In Proceed-
ings of Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM), 2013 IEEE/ACM 
International Conference (pp. 653–660). IEEE.
Subbian, K., Aggarwal, C., & Srivastave, J. (2016). Mining influencers using information 
flows in social streams. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD), 
10(3), 1–28.
Trusov, M., Bodapati, A. V., & Bucklin, R. E. (2010). Determining influential users in inter-
net social networks. Journal of Marketing Research, 47(4), 643–658.
Zhang, L., Zhao, J., & Xu, K. (2015). Who creates trends in online social media: The crowd 
or opinion leaders? Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 21, 1–16.


INDEX
academics: industry and 40
actor within medium 175
ad-blocker software: advertising avoidance 
155; reasons for using 244 – 5; threatening 
free content 251 – 2; use of  
70 – 1, 116
ad-context congruency: importance of 74
ad-context congruity: mobile advertising 
and levels of 80 – 1
ad formats: advertiser-controlled 383 – 4; 
banner blindness 78; digital advertising 
clutter in 77 – 9; pre-roll vs mid-roll 
commercials 78 – 9
ad intrusiveness: perception of 113 – 14
Adobe Page Fair Ad Blocking Report 70
Advances in Consumer Research ( journal) 7
advergames 32, 34 – 5, 39, 50, 194, 311, 355, 
435 – 6
advertising: ad avoidance 115 – 17; ad 
irritation 114 – 15; attention and 
140 – 2; changing nature of 170 – 4; 
cognition, affection or behavior (CAB) 
model 384; computational research 
in 450 – 2; engagement in 173 – 4; 
exchange between media and audience 
139; interactivity of 170 – 2; limited 
capacity processing 145 – 6; measures of 
effectiveness 14 – 15; media multitasking 
and 142 – 51; perceived ad intrusiveness 
113 – 14; personalization in 172 – 3; 
processes 21, 23; role of attention in 
138 – 9; spending 25; way to spread 
information 15 – 16; see also in-game 
advertising (IGA); targeted digital 
advertising
Advertising Age ( journal) 34, 39 – 41
advertising avoidance 155 – 60; across 
time 250 – 1; ad blocking and self-
regulation 253; antecedents of 246 – 7, 
250; definition of 244; digital world 
and 244 – 5; ignoring ads 156; literature 
on potential negative campaigns 386; 
mechanical ad blocking threatening free 
content 251 – 2; models of 247 – 50; new 
trends in 251 – 3; in online environment 
247 – 8; passive exposure or active 
avoidance 156 – 8; reckless use of content 
252; on social networking sites (SNSs) 
248, 249; tech trends in 158 – 60; toward 
a new model of 248 – 50; types of 245 – 6
advertising clutter 69; advertising in 
multiple web pages 76 – 7; affective 
effects of 75 – 6; approaches to clutter 
effects 71 – 4; banner blindness effects 78; 
behavioral effects of 76; causes of 70 – 1; 
cognitive effects of 75; competitiveness 
of ads 77 – 8; conceptual framework in 
offline media 72; conceptual framework 
in online media 73; digital, in different ad 
formats 77 – 9; future research in digital 
81 – 2; levels of ad-context congruity 
80 – 1; measures of 79 – 80; mobile 
advertising 80 – 1; online and offline 
72 – 3; perceived ad intrusiveness 113 – 14; 
pre-roll ads vs mid-roll commercials 
78 – 9; pull vs push advertising 81 – 2; 

456  Index
research on 69 – 70; search advertising 
77 – 8; three dimensions of 71, 80; types 
of effects 75 – 7
advertising efficacy: applications in  
digital advertising 335 – 8; brain imaging 
333 – 4; concept testing 336; copy 
testing 336 – 7; emotional responses 
to 327 – 9; ethics and privacy 339; eye 
tracking 330; facial analysis 331 – 2; 
frameworks for studies 334 – 5; future 
direction in measuring 338 – 9; in-field 
studies 334 – 5; in-lab studies 334; 
literature review of 363 – 5; methods 
for measuring 329 – 34; physiological 
responses 332 – 3; self-report on 
329 – 30; single source studies 338; social 
networks 371 – 4; spreadability on SNSs 
15, 20, 370, 373; tracking studies 337
age: in media multitasking 149
Akamai’s video delivery network 78
Alhabash, Saleem 285 – 96
Amazon 32; Alexa on 95, 158; behavioral 
advertising 95; just-in-time message 159; 
Prime, 42
American Psychological Association 140
androids: as representatives 179
Angulo-Ruiz, Fernando 382 – 94
Apple 32; iOS supporting ad-blocking 
apps 155; iPhone 33
appointment model 173
Apter, Michael 125
attention: advertising and 140 – 2; advertising 
avoidance 155 – 60; selective 141
augmented reality (AR) advertising: 
action-route mechanisms 103; bells-and-
whistles heuristic 93, 94, 103; coolness 
heuristic 93, 94, 103; cue-route heuristic 
103; novelty heuristic 93, 103; shopping 
178; theory of interactive media effects 
(TIME) 92 – 4
authority heuristic 102, 104
automated facial coding (FC): measuring 
advertising efficacy 328, 331 – 2
avoidance behavior 243; see also advertising 
avoidance
Baek, Tae Hyun 222 – 32
bandwagon heuristic 88 – 9, 102, 104
banner advertising 34 – 5; banner 
blindness 78; internet format 366; 
recommendations for 374 – 5
beacons 98
behavioral advertising: action-route 
mechanisms 103; cue-route heuristic 
103; first–party 96; fuzzy boundary 
heuristic 97, 103; helper heuristic 97, 
103; intrusiveness heuristic 97, 103; 
online security heuristic 97, 103; 
similarity heuristic 97, 103; theory of 
interactive media effects (TIME) 95 – 7; 
third-party 96
being-there heuristic 92, 103
bells-and-whistles heuristic 93, 94, 103, 
 104
“Big Five” personality model 261, 263, 
275, 276
boomerang effect 112
brain imaging: measuring advertising 
efficacy 333 – 4
brand communities: engagement in 
210 – 11; motivation for participation 
in 211 – 12; social networking sites 207, 
208 – 10
brand interactivity: impact of 317 – 19,  
323; placements into games 319 – 22,  
324
brand-related content: bivariate 
correlations between variables 284; 
conceptual framework 265; connectivity 
262, 269, 270, 273 – 4; consumer 
characteristics 261 – 3; control variables 
for 267 – 8; dependent variable of 267; 
differing consumers and motivations 
270, 272 – 5; future research directions 
277 – 8; identifying consumers creating 
259 – 60; interplay of characteristics 
and motivations to creation of 264 – 5, 
275 – 6; limitations of 277; mavenism 
262, 268, 270, 273; measures of 266 – 8; 
mediation analyses 272; motivation 
instrument 283; motivations for creating 
263 – 4, 270, 271; persuasiveness 263, 
269, 270, 275; practical implications 
276 – 7; research method 265 – 8; 
sample and procedure 266; social 
networking sites (SNSs) 265 – 6; uses 
and gratifications (U&G) approach and 
260 – 1
broadband: international advertising 347
browsing heuristic 101, 104
browsing history: personalization by 
118 – 19
bubble heuristic 89
build the brand: digital advertising 
principle 356 – 8
Cannes Lions advertising festival 138
Cauberghe, Verolien 207 – 17
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) 190

Index  457
Centers of Medicare and Medicaid 
Services 407
Charney, Jeff 252
Chatbot advertising: action-route 
mechanisms 103; cue-route heuristic 
103; helper heuristic 95, 103; machine 
heuristic 95, 103; scaffolding heuristic 
95, 103; theory of interactive media 
effects (TIME) 94 – 5
Chen, Qimei 439 – 43
Chu, Shu-Chuan 421 – 4
click-through-rates (CTRs) 14, 32, 40, 76
clutter: definition of 69; see also advertising 
clutter
Coca-Cola 35, 160
cognition, affection or behavior (CAB) 
model: advertising 384
communication see public health 
communication
computational social science research: 
advertising 450 – 2; digital advertising 
446 – 7; importance of concept explication 
447 – 50; importance of theory-building 
research 447; metrics in 449 – 50; social 
influence 449; trust 449
computer-mediated environments 
(CMEs) 52
concept testing: advertising efficacy 336
connectivity: brand-related content 
creation 271; consumer characteristic 
261, 262; influence on consumers 269; 
motivations of 270, 273 – 4; personality 
characteristic 266 – 7; predicting 
motivations 264
consumer-generated ads (CGA): digital 
advertising 387
consumer motivations: measures of 267; 
SNS brand community participation 
211 – 12
consumer online privacy: advertising 
avoidance 244 – 5; balancing 
personalization and privacy 120; 
boomerang effect 112; consumers’ 
information and activity 111 – 12; 
control of, in social media 349 – 50; 
Federal Trade Commission (FTC) 110; 
international digital advertising 348 – 50; 
location-based advertising (LBA) 349; 
psychological reactance perspective 
111 – 13; sense of control to consumers 
120; trust 350 – 1; see also personalization
consumers: backlash in-game advertising 
(IGA) 314; cultural impact on response 
of 352 – 3; electronic word-of-mouth 
and culture 422 – 4; empowerment in 
digital advertising 389 – 90; information 
and privacy of 301 – 3
contingency: game advertising 124; reversal 
theory 127 – 8
contingency heuristic 88, 89
control center: internet users 13 – 14
cookies 96, 118
coolness heuristic 93, 94, 99, 103, 104
copy testing: advertising efficacy 336 – 7
Cortana: virtual agent 158
cost effectiveness: advertising campaigns 
390; digital advertising 392 – 3
Costello, John P. 345 – 59
criminalization of health marketing 
411 – 12
customer service: real or virtual agents 
178 – 9
Dardis, Frank E. 431 – 3
data envelopment analysis (DEA): decision-
making unit (DMU) 391 – 2; digital 
advertising 390 – 3; directional  
distance function (DDF) 393; 
orientation of model 392
Daughtery, Terry 45 – 56
De Pelsmacker, Patrick 207 – 17
De Veirman, Marijke 207 – 17
digital advertisers: building trust with 
consumers 119 – 20
digital advertising: ad avoidance 115 – 17; 
ad irritation 114 – 15; advergames 35; 
balancing personalization and privacy 
concerns 120; banner advertising 
34 – 5; computational social science 
research 446 – 52; digital innovations 
32 – 4; evolution of interactive 
advertising 38 – 9; immersion in games 
427 – 9; industry trends 32 – 4; mobile 
advertising 36 – 7, 39; native advertising 
38; perceived ad intrusiveness 113 – 14; 
personalization and reactance to 
117 – 20; potential outcomes of 
psychological reactance in 113 – 17; 
principles of 346; regulating privacy in 
303 – 4; research on presence and 176 – 7; 
role of presence 174 – 81; role of reversal 
theory in 131 – 3; search advertising 36; 
social media advertising 37 – 8; types of 
34 – 8; video advertising 35 – 6; see also 
advertising clutter; financial value of 
digital advertising; international digital 
advertising; presence; reversal theory; 
targeted digital advertising
digital advertising efficiency: ad type 
format and features 383 – 4;  

458  Index
advertiser-controlled elements 383 – 6; 
consumer-controlled inputs 386 – 8; 
consumer empowerment in 389 – 90, 
393; consumer-generated ads (CGAs) 
387; cross-effects with traditional 
advertising 384; current measures of 
383 – 6; data envelopment analysis 
(DEA) as method 390 – 3; decision-
making unit (DMU) 391 – 2; directional 
distance function (DDF) 393; electronic 
word-of-mouth (eWOM) 387 – 8; 
inclusive model of effectiveness 388 – 90; 
integrative model of 391; interactiveness 
389, 394; mobile advertising 385 – 6; 
online display advertising 385; outcome 
measures 384; paid search advertising 
384 – 5; potential of ad avoidance 386; 
social media advertising 385; uses and 
gratification (U&G) approach 389; viral 
advertising 387 – 8
digital gaming see in-game advertising 
(IGA)
digital innovations: industry trends and 
32 – 4; interactive advertising 38 – 9
digital media: health information 192 – 4; 
message strategies for 194 – 200; public 
health messages and 192 – 4; see also 
health communication
direct-to-consumer advertising (DTCA): 
digital, for healthcare 401 – 4; 
expenditures 403; health marketing 401
distraction heuristic 92, 103
Djuric, Vanja 45 – 56
Drennan, Judy 243 – 53
drug marketing see health advertising
Duff, Brittany R. L. 138 – 60
earned media 27 – 8, 33, 286, 364, 372 – 3,  
388
EBSCO database 47
e-commerce 87, 412: consumer behavior 
vs concerns 304; interactive advertising 
51, 54, 55; native advertising 102; 
websites 159
elaboration heuristic 101, 104
Elaboration Likelihood Model (ELM) 74; 
social media 441 – 3
electrodermal activity (EDA): measuring 
advertising efficacy 328, 332, 334
electroencephalography (EEG):  
measuring advertising efficacy  
328, 333
electromyography (EMG): measuring 
advertising efficacy 328, 331 – 4
electronic communication system 21
electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM) 15, 
27, 50, 51, 52, 54, 285; consumer-to-
consumer interactions 421 – 2; culture 
and 422 – 4; efficiency of 387 – 8; future 
research 424; literature analysis of 364; 
social media 292
empowerment motivation: brand 
community engagement 213, 215
engagement 174, 175; in advertising 
173 – 4; engaging content 179 – 80; 
engaging form 179; motivations as 
antecedents of 212 – 13; parasocial 
interaction and authenticity 180; in 
social media advertising 294 – 5
entertainment: of international digital 
advertising 354 – 6; motivation for brand 
community participation 212, 214
ethical consideration: measuring advertising 
efficacy 339; power of presence 181
event study: assessing effects of digital 
advertising 227 – 30; calculating 
abnormal stock returns 225 – 6; defining 
224 – 5; explaining abnormal returns 
226 – 7; firms in Twitter channel launch 
235 – 42; launching Twitter channel 
228 – 31; research design and methods 
for 224 – 7; specifying criteria for 
inclusion in 224 – 5; testing statistical 
significance 226; underlying assumptions 
of 223 – 4
excitation transfer theory 317, 319
eye-catching software 169
eye-tracking (ET): measuring advertising 
efficacy 328, 330
Facebook 10, 15, 20; advertising 286; 
advertising avoidance 251; advertising 
effectiveness 372; advertising formats on 
370; advertising on 20; animated emoji 
reactions 195; antecedents of cognitive 
avoidance 249, 250; banner blindness 
78; brand communities on 207, 208 – 10; 
consumer data 302; data collection 
by 306; digital advertising spending 
25; health information 192 – 3; health 
marketing on 404 – 5; illustration of 
brand community engagement 213 – 16; 
“Like” button 87, 439 – 40; location-
based advertising 98; measurement 
model for participation 215; Messenger 
94 – 5; native advertising 101 – 2; paid 
advertising 27 – 8; posting algorithm for 
26; search advertising 36; social media 
advertising 37 – 8; social norms on 292
FaceTime 178

Index  459
facial analysis: measuring advertising 
efficacy 331 – 2
FDA see U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA)
Federal Trade Commission (FTC) 110, 
302; regulating privacy 303 – 4
financial value of digital advertising 222 – 3; 
assumptions of event study 223 – 4; event 
studies for evaluating 227 – 8, 231 – 2; 
Twitter channel launch 228 – 31; see also 
event study
FitBit: health information 192
flaming 116
floating formats: internet advertising 
366 – 8
flow heuristic 99, 103
Food Drug and Cosmetic Act of 1938 400
Forever21.com 97
Friendster 32, 38
frustration: reversal theory 128 – 9
functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI): measuring advertising efficacy 
328, 333 – 4
fuzzy boundary heuristic 89, 97, 103
Gambino, Andrew 86 – 105
gaming/games: brand placements in 432; 
immersion for digital advertising 427 – 9; 
in-game advertising 311 – 14, 431 – 2, 
435 – 8; interactive advertising 54, 55;  
see also in-game advertising (IGA)
gender: in media multitasking 149
generic top-level domain names (gTLDs): 
health promotions 410
Global Positioning System (GPS): 
location-based advertising 98 – 9
Google 15; advertising on 20; algorithm 
for ordering items 26; data collection 
306; digital advertising spending 25; 
paid advertising 27 – 8; Pokemon Go app 
300; search advertising 36; search engine 
advertising 100; social media advertising 
37 – 8
Google+ 38: advertising formats on 369, 
371; health marketing 404 – 5
Google AdWords 38
Google Cardboard: Oreo 92
Google Now 158
Google Scholar 6; citations per year in 
JIAD 53, 54
GPS (Global Positioning System) 81, 98
Ha, Louisa 69 – 82
health advertising 398 – 400, 414; 
challenges and opportunities for social 
media in 404 – 6; criminalization of 
marketing 411 – 12; digital DTCA 
(direct-to-consumer advertising) 401 – 4; 
Dr. Google 399; DTCA expenditures 
403; future of internet-based health 
promotion 410; generic top-level 
domain names (gTLDs) 410; history 
of evolution of marketing of 400 – 401; 
marketing expenditures 406 – 8; patient 
portals 411; prescription drug coupons 
(PDCs) 408 – 9; trends and challenges 
408 – 13
health communication 188 – 9; digital 
media for 192 – 4; emotional appeals 
198 – 200; lifestyle behavior and 
problems 189, 200 – 201; marketing 
of unhealthy products to vulnerable 
populations 190 – 1; message strategies 
for digital media 194 – 200; rational 
appeals 195 – 8; regulatory focus 196 – 8; 
self-construal 197 – 8; self-efficacy and 
response-efficacy 197; social-ecological 
model for health promotion 191 – 2
heart rate variability (HRV): measuring 
advertising efficacy 328, 333
heavy media multitaskers (HMM) 
150 – 1, 154
helper heuristic 89, 95, 97, 101, 103, 104
Herrewijn, Laura 310 – 24
holographic product displays 178
Hudders, Liselot 207 – 17
Huh, Jisu 446 – 52
Hulu 36; mutual shaping 42; Plus 70
Hussain, Syed Ali 285 – 96
immersion: advertising in games 427 – 9
incidental exposure: definition 294
industry: academics and 40
influencer marketing 27
information control: perceived ad 
intrusiveness 114
information motivation: brand community 
participation 212, 214
in-game advertising (IGA) 310 – 11; 
advertising research 436 – 8; benefits and 
drawbacks 311 – 14; case study for brand 
interactivity 317 – 19, 323; effectiveness 
of 314 – 16, 323; interactive brand 
placements 319 – 22, 324; method and 
rationale 319 – 22; theoretical models 
316 – 17; types of in-game ads 435 – 6
Instagram 20; advertising 286; brand 
communities on 208 – 10; health 
marketing 404 – 5
instant gratification heuristic 99, 103

460  Index
integrated marketing 55
integrated marketing communication 
(IMC) 19, 28
interaction heuristic 99, 103
interactive advertising: creation and 
delivery of advertising 45 – 6; evolution 
of 31 – 2, 38 – 9; impact and contribution 
of 53 – 5; mobile 39; as a paradigm 46; 
research and commentary about 172; 
search 38; social media 38 – 9; see also 
paradigm funnel
Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB) 71, 
155, 252
Interactive Advertising Model (IAM) 3 – 4, 
31, 125; ad feature 5 – 6; ad format 5; 
ad type 5; citation trends 6 – 8; clutter 
effects 74; computational advertising 
research 451; consumer- and advertiser-
controlled elements of 382 – 3; consumer 
responses to ad formats 9 – 10; content 
analysis 11 – 12, 39 – 41; evaluation of 
IAM’s contribution 8; function of 4 – 5; 
internet modes and motives 8 – 9, 132; 
journals referenced by 7; methodology 
6; mixed motives 12 – 13; most cited 
aspects of 8; Network Advertising 
Model vs 19 – 20; new ad formats 
and promotional techniques 10 – 11; 
overview of 4 – 6; primary aspects of 9; 
structure of 5
interactivity: of advertising 170 – 2; concept 
of 87; in digital advertising 389, 394; 
evaluation of 11; international digital 
advertising 354; variables influencing 
the degree of 171
Interagency Working Group on Foods 
Marketed to Children (IWG) 190
international digital advertising: building 
the brand for 356 – 8; consumer 
considerations in 348 – 53; consumer 
privacy 348 – 50; culture’s impact 
on consumer response 352 – 3; 
entertainment in 354 – 6; executional 
variables and 353 – 6; factors leading 
to growth of 346 – 8; future research 
for 358 – 9; interactivity of 354; mobile 
display advertising (MDA) 351; 
multimedia messaging service (MMS) 
advertising 351, 355; relevance in 351; 
trust in 350 – 1
International Journal of Advertising 
( journal) 7
International Journal of Internet Marketing and 
Advertising ( journal) 7
International Society for Presence 
Research (ISPR) 174
International Telecommunication Union 
(ITU) 347, 398
internet advertising 55; formats of 366 – 8; 
side effects of 9; trends and topics 364 – 5
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names 
and Numbers (ICANN) 408, 410
intrusiveness heuristic 89, 92, 97, 103
inverse presence 175
ISPR see International Society for 
Presence Research (ISPR)
James, William 140
Jones, Amy Rebecca 188 – 201
Journal of Advertising ( journal) 7, 364
Journal of Advertising Research ( journal)  
364
Journal of Current Issues and Research in 
Advertising ( journal) 7, 364
Journal of Interactive Advertising ( JIAD) 
( journal) 7, 39, 45, 47, 50, 52 – 5, 364; 
general research topics in 55; Google 
Scholar citations per year 54; publication 
timeline by topic 55
Journal of Marketing Communication 
( journal) 7
Jung, Jae Min 124 – 34
Kelly, Louise 243 – 53
Kerr, Gayle 243 – 53
Kim, Jinyoung 86 – 105
Learning Hierarchy Model 116
Levy, Marian 188 – 201
Liang, Bryan A. 398 – 414
lifestyle choices: problems related to 189; 
social-ecological model for health 
promotion 191 – 2
light media multitaskers (LMM) 
150 – 1, 154
limited capacity: affect, evaluation and 
attitude 147 – 8; application to media 
multitasking 153 – 5; breadth vs depth 
154 – 5; memory in 146 – 7, 152; 
motivation for task switching 153 – 4; in 
multitasking 145 – 6
limited capacity model of motivated 
mediated message processing (LC4MP) 
145, 316 – 17
Limperos, Anthony M. 435 – 8
LinkedIn 15; advertising formats on 
370 – 1; health marketing 404 – 5
list length effect 71

Index  461
location-based advertising (LBA) 81; 
action-route mechanisms 103; consumer 
privacy in 349; coolness heuristic 99, 
103; cue-route heuristic 103; flow 
heuristic 99, 103; instant gratification 
heuristic 99, 103; interaction 
heuristic 99, 103; personalization of 
119; reciprocity heuristic 99, 103; 
responsiveness heuristic 99, 103; theory 
of interactive media effects (TIME) 
98 – 9
Lombard, Matthew 169 – 82
lurking: consuming behavior 211
Lutchyn, Yuliya 138 – 60
McDonalds: advergames 35
McDuff, Daniel 327 – 9
machine heuristic 95, 103
Mackey, Tim K. 398 – 414
Macy’s: ad through digital communication 
network 22 – 4
Maden, Dave 35
MAIN see modality, agency, interactivity, 
and navigability (MAIN) model
marketing funnel 26
Martin, Drew 124 – 34
Martínez-López, Francisco J. 362 – 76
massively multi-player online games 
(MMOGs) 452
mavenism: brand-related content creation 
271; consumer characteristic 261, 
262; influence on consumers 268; 
motivations of 270, 273; personality 
characteristic 266 – 7; predicting 
motivations 264
media effects: role of attention in 138 – 9
media multitasking: advertising and 
142 – 51, 160; advertising effects 
144 – 5; affect, evaluation and attitude 
147 – 8; age and gender 149; audience 
level factors 148; defining 143 – 4; 
future research 151 – 2; heavy media 
multitaskers (HMM) 150 – 1, 154; 
individual differences 148; light media 
multitaskers (LMM) 150 – 1, 154; limited 
capacity of 145 – 6, 153 – 5; memory 
146 – 7, 152; task performance 150 – 1; 
traits and preferences 149 – 50
Media Multitasking Index 143
memory: future research 152; media 
multitasking 146 – 7
mere exposure effect (MEE): ad 
processing 157
Messenger: Facebook 94 – 5
Millward Brown Global AdReactions 
Report 75
Min, Kyeong Sam 124 – 34
mobile advertising 28 – 9, 36 – 7, 39; formats 
of 367 – 8; interactive 55; levels of 
ad-context congruity 80 – 1; literature 
on impact of 385 – 6
mobile display advertising (MDA) 351; 
relevance in 351
mobile video advertising: action-
route mechanisms 103; being-there 
heuristic 92, 103; cue-route heuristic 
103; distraction heuristic 92, 103; 
intrusiveness heuristic 92, 103; realism 
heuristic 92, 103; theory of interactive 
media effects (TIME) 91 – 2
modality, agency, interactivity, and 
navigability (MAIN) model 41; 
affordances of 88 – 9; TIME based on 
90, 91
Moorman, Marjolein 259 – 78
Morimoto, Mariko 110 – 20
MP3 files 41 – 2
multitasking: growth of 142; see also media 
multitasking
Mundel, Juan 285 – 96
Muntinga, Daniel G. 259 – 78
Murdoch, Rupert 45
mutual shaping: concept of 31, 41; of 
technology 41 – 2
MySpace 32, 37 – 8; advertising avoidance 
250 – 1
native advertising 38, 82; action-route 
mechanisms 104; authority heuristic 
102, 104; bandwagon heuristic 102, 
104; cue-route heuristic 104; theory of 
interactive media effects (TIME) 101 – 3
Netflix: just-in-time message 159; mutual 
shaping 42
Network Advertising Model (NAM) 15; 
advertising processes in communication 
network 23; advertising processes 
in mass communication system 
21; articulating aspects of 25 – 9; 
background of 19 – 24; Interactive 
Advertising Model (IAM) vs 19 – 20; 
introduction of 19 – 24
networked communication: smartphone  
29
New Age see presence
Nielsen Entertainment: studies of in-game 
advertising (IGA) 314 – 15
novelty heuristic 93, 103, 104

462  Index
offline media: framework of advertising 
clutter in 72
online advertising: banner ad 
recommendations 374 – 5; literature 
review of 363 – 5; research suggestions 
for 376; suggestions for social 
networking sites (SNSs) 375
online environment: advertising avoidance 
in 247 – 8; consumer behavior 55; 
control of 13 – 14; framework of 
advertising clutter in 73; literature on 
impact of advertising 385
online security heuristic 97, 103
Orea: Google Cardboard 92
Ouyang, Sifan 3 – 16
paid search advertising: literature on 
impact of 384 – 5
paradigm: interactive advertising as 46
paradigm funnel 46 – 53, 56; analytical 
methods 48 – 9, 50 – 1; benefits of 52 – 3; 
core assumptions 49, 52; diagram of 
47; empirical observation 48, 49 – 50; 
interactive advertising 48 – 9; percentage 
of articles at each level of 50; specific 
theory 49, 51 – 2
paratelic state: overview of 125 – 7; state 
balance state dominance and change 
130 – 1; state dominance and individual 
difference 129 – 30
patient portals: health advertising 411
Peace: ad-blocking app 155
perceptual realism 175
Pergelova, Albena 382 – 94
personality 130 – 1; “Big Five” model 261, 
263, 275, 276; measures of 266 – 7
personalization: advertising and 110 – 11, 
172 – 3; balancing with privacy concerns 
120; demographic information 
118; of digital advertising 117 – 18; 
location-based information 119; 
online browsing and purchase histories 
118 – 19; perceived ad intrusiveness 114; 
psychographic information 118; sense 
of control to consumers 120; types of 
118 – 19
persuasion: blurring lines 289; dual process 
models of 287 – 8, 290; information 
overload and 288 – 9; social media, for 
behavioral change 293 – 5; theories in 
social media context, 287 – 93
persuasion knowledge model (PKM): ad 
processing 157
persuasiveness: brand-related content 
creation 271; consumer characteristic 
261, 263; influence on consumers 269; 
motivations of 270, 275; personality 
characteristic 266 – 7; predicting 
motivations 264
Pew Research Center 110, 192, 346, 
348, 398
Pharmaceutical Care Management 
Association 409
pharmaceutical marketing: history of 
400 – 401; see also health advertising
physiological responses: measuring 
advertising efficacy 332 – 3
Pinterest 15, 87; health marketing 404 – 5
Poels, Karolien 310 – 24
Pohlmann, Attila 439 – 43
Pokemon Go app 300
pop-unders: internet format of 366, 367
pop-up ads 5, 10, 21 – 2; ad avoidance 116, 
157, 247; ad intrusiveness 114, 243; 
banner blindness 78; clutter 70, 80; 
internet format of 366 – 8
posting: communicative membership 211
Pounders, Kathrynn 188 – 201
predictors: theory of interactive media 
effects (TIME) 88, 90
preferences: in media multitasking 149 – 50
prescription drug coupons (PDCs) 408 – 9
presence: engagement 179 – 80; ethical 
considerations 181; experiences in 
advertising 181 – 2; in more distant 
future 180 – 1; research on digital 
advertising and 176 – 7; role in digital 
advertising 174 – 81; social 178 – 9; spatial 
177 – 8; technologies evoking 177; types 
of 175; see also digital advertising
privacy: of consumer 110; consumer 
online concerns 111 – 13; consumer’s 
information and activity 111 – 12; 
information and 301 – 3; measuring 
advertising efficacy 339; psychological 
reactance and relationship to 112 – 13; 
regulating in digital advertising context 
303 – 4; targeted digital advertising 
300 – 301
product displays: holographic 178
product placement 178
prominence heuristic 101, 104
psychological reactance: ad avoidance 
115 – 17; ad irritation 114 – 15; advertisers 
building trust with consumers 119 – 20; 
digital advertising 113 – 17; perceived ad 
intrusiveness 113 – 14; sense of control to 
consumers 120
public health see health communication
public service announcements (PSAs) 388

Index  463
pull and push advertising: differences 
between 81 – 2
purchase history: personalization by 
118 – 19
Pure Food and Drug Act (1906) 400
quiet membership 211
realism heuristic 88, 92, 103
reciprocity heuristic 99, 103
Regulatory Focus Theory 196 – 8
Rejón-Guardia, Francisco 362 – 76
remuneration motivation: brand 
community engagement 213, 214
response hierarchy models: traditional 
440 – 1
responsiveness heuristic 99, 103
ReThink: breast cancer campaign 192
retweeting: engagement in advertising 173
reversal theory: causes of reversals in telic-
paratelic states 127 – 9; contingency 
127 – 8; description of 125; frustration 
128 – 9; interactivity in digital advertising 
and 131 – 2; online consumers’ mode 
and advertising interactivity 132 – 3; 
overview of telic and paratelic states 
125 – 7; relationship between arousal 
and hedonic tone 126; role in digital 
advertising 131 – 3; satiation 129; state 
balance state dominance and change 
130 – 1; state dominance and individual 
difference 129 – 30
robots: as representatives 179
Rodgers, Shelly 3 – 16, 19 – 29, 31 – 42
Rothenberg, Randall 251
Royne, Marla B. 188 – 201
satiation: reversal theory 129
scaffolding heuristic 88, 89, 95, 103
Schmierbach, Mike 427 – 9
search advertising 36; competitiveness of 
ads 77 – 8
search engine advertising (SEA): action-
route mechanisms 104; browsing 
heuristic 101, 104; cue-route heuristic 
104; elaboration heuristic 101, 104; 
helper heuristic 101, 104; prominence 
heuristic 101, 104; theory of interactive 
media effects (TIME) 100 – 101
search engines: interactive advertising 38
selective attention 74, 141, 147, 155
self-presence 175
self-regulation: ad blocking and 253
self-report methods: measuring advertising 
efficacy 329 – 30
self-representation: brand community 
engagement 213, 214
Shoenberger, Heather 300 – 306
short message service (SMS): advertising  
114
similarity heuristic 97, 103
Simons, Dan 141
Siri: Apple’s 94, 158
Skip button: advertising avoidance 155
Skype 32, 178
smart ads 77
smartphones 10, 29; digital advertising 
33 – 4
Smit, Edith G. 259 – 78
Smith, K. C. T. 125
Snapchat 15, 20, 304
Snyder-Duch, Jennifer 169 – 82
social-ecological model for health 
promotion 191 – 2
social interaction motivation: brand 
community engagement 212 – 13, 214
social media 13 – 14; act of Liking online 
content 439 – 40; advertising 37 – 8; 
advertising concepts 286 – 7; consumer 
privacy control in 349 – 50; dual process 
models of persuasion 287 – 8, 290; 
elaboration likelihood model (ELM) 74, 
441 – 3; engagement effects in 294 – 295; 
growth of digital advertising 347 – 8; 
incidental exposure on 294; information 
overload 288 – 9; interactive advertising 
38 – 9, 54, 55, 354; literature on impact 
of advertising 385; message strategies 
for 195; motivational use 51; mutual 
shaping 42; persuasion for behavioral 
change 293 – 5; pharmaceutical 
marketing challenges and opportunities 
404 – 6; re-envisioning persuasion 
theories in 287 – 93; social norms on 
291 – 3; spreading information 15 – 16; 
theory of planned behavior (TPB) 
289 – 91; theory of reasoned action 
(TRA) 289 – 91; toward a new response 
model 441 – 3; traditional response 
hierarchy models 440 – 1; user-generated 
content (UGC) effects 286, 295
social networking sites (SNSs) 37 – 8; 
advertising avoidance 246 – 7, 248; 
advertising effectiveness on 362 – 3, 
371 – 4; advertising formats on 
368 – 71; advertising objectives 369; 
brand communities 208 – 10; brand 
profiles 265 – 6; consumer motivations 
for brand community participation 
211 – 12, 216 – 17; creation of brand 

464  Index
communities 207; empirical illustration 
213 – 16; engaging in brand-related 
activities on 210 – 11; model of 
advertising avoidance 249; motivations 
as antecedents of engagement 
212 – 13; personalization possibilities 
of advertising 385; pharmaceutical 
marketing challenges and opportunities 
404 – 6; recommendations for advertising 
375; research suggestions for 376; 
spreadability of advertising 15, 20, 
370, 373
social presence 175, 176; customer service 
178 – 9; robots and androids 179
social realism 175
spatial presence 175, 176, 177 – 8; 
holographic product displays and 
demonstrations 178; home and public 
virtual reality 177 – 8; product placement 
178; virtual shopping environments 178
Spotify 42, 369, 371
spreadability: social media advertising 15, 
20, 370, 373
The Structure of Scientific Revolution 
(Kuhn) 46
Sundar, S. Shyam 86 – 105
targeted digital advertising 300 – 301; 
consumers’ behavior vs concerns 
304 – 6; information and privacy 301 – 3; 
regulating privacy 303 – 4
task performance: in media multitasking 
150 – 1
Taylor, Charles R. 345 – 59
technology: advertising avoidance and 
155 – 60; trends in ad avoidance 158 – 60
Telic Dominance Scale (TDS) 130
Telic/Paratelic Statement Instrument  
(T/PSI) 132 – 3
telic state: overview of 125 – 7; state 
balance state dominance and change 
130 – 1; state dominance and individual 
difference 129 – 30
Tham, Samuel 31 – 42
theory of interactive media effects (TIME) 
87 – 90; action-route of 89 – 90, 103 – 4; 
affordances 87, 88; applying to digital 
advertising 90 – 103; augmented reality 
advertising 92 – 4; behavioral advertising 
95 – 7; Chatbot advertising 94 – 5; 
cue-route of 88 – 9, 103 – 4; location-
based advertising 98 – 9; mobile video 
advertising 91 – 2; native advertising 
101 – 3; search engine advertising 
100 – 101; virtual reality advertising 
92 – 4
theory of planned behavior (TPB): social 
media advertising 289 – 91
theory of reasoned action (TRA): social 
media advertising 289 – 91
third screen 33
Thorson, Esther 3 – 16, 19 – 29, 31 – 42
TIME see theory of interactive media 
effects (TIME)
tracking studies: advertising efficacy 337
traits: in media multitasking 149 – 50
transportation 175
TripAdvisor.com 87
TrueView ads 79, 80
Twitter 10, 15, 87; advertising formats 
on 370; advertising on 20, 286; brand 
communities on 208 – 10; health 
marketing 404 – 5; mutual shaping 42; 
social norms on 292
Twitter channel: assessing financial value of 
launching 228 – 31; cumulative average 
abnormal returns (CAARs) 229, 230; 
event study results 229 – 30; explaining 
negative abnormal returns 230 – 1; 
Factiva database 229; firms in sample 
235 – 42; impact on shareholder’s value 
231 – 2; launch dates 229; samples and 
data 228 – 9
user-generated content (UGC) 33, 50, 
87; customer attitude 442 – 3; electronic 
word-of-mouth and culture 421 – 4; 
growth of digital advertising 347 – 8; 
health marketing 405; interactive 
advertising 54, 55; social media 
advertising 286, 295
uses and gratifications (U&G) approach: 
brand-related content 260 – 1, 275 – 6; in 
digital advertising 389
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
400, 402, 405, 414
Verlegh, Peeter W. J. 259 – 78
video advertising 35 – 6
video games: advertising research 436 – 7; 
brand placements in 432; future research 
437 – 8; in-game advertising 435 – 8; types 
of in-game ads 435 – 6; virtual direct 
experience 431 – 3; see also gaming
viral advertising: efficiency of 387 – 8
virtual agents: customer service 178 – 9
virtual direct experience (VDE) 14; video 
games 431 – 3

Index  465
virtual reality (VR) 41; games 452; 
home and public 177 – 8; shopping 
environment 178
virtual reality (VR) advertising: action-
route mechanisms 103; bells-and-
whistles heuristic 93, 94, 103; coolness 
heuristic 93, 94, 103; cue-route heuristic 
103; interactive advertising 54, 55; 
novelty heuristic 93, 103; theory of 
interactive media effects (TIME) 92 – 4
Weinstock, Jerry 169
“Wonder-Vault”: Oreo 92
word-of-mouth (WOM) 27; advertising 
on social networking sites (SNS) 373 – 4
World Health Organization (WHO) 410
worldwide advertising see international 
digital advertising
Yahoo! 36, 100, 347
Yoo, Chan Yun 222 – 32
YouTube 10, 24, 33; advertising 286; 
advertising formats on 371; health 
information 192; health marketing 
404 – 6; pre-roll vs mid-roll ads 79; social 
norms 293; YouTube Red 70

