Matt Renwick
Showcasing and Assessing Student Work


Showcasing and Assessing Student Work
Matt Renwick
Alexandria, Virginia USA

1703 N. Beauregard St. • Alexandria, VA 22311-1714 USA
Phone: 800-933-2723 or 703-578-9600 • Fax: 703-575-5400
Website: www.ascd.org • E-mail: member@ascd.org
Author guidelines: www.ascd.org/write
Deborah S. Delisle, Executive Director; Robert D. Clouse, Managing Director, Digital 
Content & Publications; Stefani Roth, Publisher; Genny Ostertag, Director, Content 
Acquisitions; Allison Scott, Acquisitions Editor; Julie Houtz, Director, Book Editing & 
Production; Jamie Greene, Associate Editor; Thomas Lytle, Senior Graphic Designer;  
Mike Kalyan, Director, Production Services; Circle Graphics, Typesetter; Kelly Marshall, 
Senior Production Specialist
Copyright © 2017 Matt Renwick. All rights reserved. By purchasing only authorized 
electronic or print editions and not participating in or encouraging piracy of copyrighted 
materials, you support the rights of authors and publishers. Readers may duplicate the Site 
Assessment in Appendix A for non-commercial use within their school. All other requests 
to reproduce or republish excerpts of this work in print or electronic format may include a 
small fee. Please contact the Copyright Clearance Center (CCC), 222 Rosewood Dr., Danvers, 
MA 01923, USA (phone: 978-750-8400; fax: 978-646-8600; web: www.copyright.com). To inquire 
about site licensing options or any other reuse, contact ASCD Permissions at www.ascd.org/
permissions, or permissions@ascd.org, or 703-575-5749. For a list of vendors authorized to 
license ASCD e-books to institutions, see www.ascd.org/epubs. Send translation inquiries 
to translations@ascd.org. Please note that it is illegal to otherwise reproduce copies of this 
work in print or electronic format (including reproductions displayed on a secure intranet 
or stored in a retrieval system or other electronic storage device from which copies can be 
made or displayed) without the prior written permission of the publisher.
ASCD® and ASCD LEARN. TEACH. LEAD.® are registered trademarks of ASCD. All other 
trademarks contained in this book are the property of, and reserved by, their respective 
owners, and are used for editorial and informational purposes only. No such use should 
be construed to imply sponsorship or endorsement of the book by the respective owners.
All web links in this book are correct as of the publication date below but may have 
become inactive or otherwise modified since that time. If you notice a deactivated or 
changed link, please e-mail books@ascd.org with the words “Link Update” in the subject 
line. In your message, please specify the web link, the book title, and the page number 
on which the link appears.
PAPERBACK ISBN: 978-1-4166-2464-6    ASCD product #117005    n8/17
PDF E-BOOK ISBN: 978-1-4166-2465-3; see Books in Print for other formats.
Quantity discounts are available: e-mail programteam@ascd.org or call 800-933-2723,  
ext. 5773, or 703-575-5773. For desk copies, go to www.ascd.org/deskcopy.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Renwick, Matt, author.
Title: Digital portfolios in the classroom : showcasing and assessing student 
   work / Matt Renwick.
Description: Alexandria, Virginia : ASCD, [2017]  Includes bibliographical 
   references and index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2017026437 (print)  LCCN 2017029820 (ebook)  ISBN 
   9781416624653 (PDF)  ISBN 9781416624646 (pbk.)
Subjects: LCSH: Electronic portfolios in education.
Classification: LCC LB1029.P67 (ebook)  LCC LB1029.P67 R43 2017 (print)  
   DDC 371.39—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017026437
26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17        1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12

Introduction .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   1
Chapter 1:  Defining Digital Portfolios  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . .   7
Chapter 2:  Making a Case for Digital Portfolios .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . .   33
Chapter 3:  Getting Started with Digital Portfolios .  .  .  .  .  . . . . .   59
Chapter 4:  Digging Deeper into Digital Portfolios .  .  .  .  .  . . . . .   91
Chapter 5:  Going Schoolwide with Digital Portfolios .  .  .  . . .   125
Chapter 6:  Moving Beyond Digital Portfolios .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . .   149
Appendix A:  Digital Portfolio Assessment 
Readiness Tool .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   158
Appendix B:  Planning Template for Digital Portfolios 
in the Classroom  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   160
References .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   162
Index .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   165
About the Author .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   171

1 
Introduction
Assessment is messy. I’m not referring to the standardized forms 
of assessment that are typical in schools today. The tools and 
results they produce are clean but show little more than a score 
or basic indicator of a student’s current ability. The messi­ness 
I’m referring to includes the day-to-day, in-the-moment assess-
ment that reveals information to inform teaching and learning. 
These assessments offer a more complete picture of a student’s 
current abilities and dispositions. Indeed, assessment of this 
nature can reveal the student behind the symbols and numbers 
and tell his or her whole story.
Teachers know what this latter type of assessment looks and 
feels like, yet it can be hard to describe and capture—hence the 
messiness. What assessment resembles in this context might 
be a frustrated look or a sense of excitement while working on 
a new project. I’ve found that when I ask teachers what they 
most enjoy about working in education, their responses usually 
reflect these types of moments:
• “When their eyes light up when they finally get something.”
• “When that light bulb turns on.”

2   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
• “When students can see how they’ve progressed over the 
course of the school year.”
The purpose of this book is to provide a guide for teachers 
to capture, organize, analyze, and take action on the more dis-
crete and qualitative pieces of information in the classroom. 
An abundance of 21st century tools now available offer oppor-
tunities for students to represent their learning that is more in 
line with their understanding. Digital portfolios offer one such 
opportunity. The documentation of audio, video, images, text, 
and creative content should be held in the same regard as their 
quantitative counterparts (Figure 0.1). It’s the goal of this book 
to help educators use this information to drive their instruction. 
Teaching becomes more rewarding when we can experience the 
true impact of our instruction in ways that better illustrate the 
whole child.
Figure 0.1
Qualitative Versus Quantitative Data
Quantitative
Data
Qualitative
Data
Audio
Video
Images
Text
Grades
Percents
Scores
Levels

Introduction   •   3
With that in mind, digital portfolio assessment is an effec-
tive way to structure and analyze qualitative student learning 
results. This approach can help teachers embrace the messiness 
of teaching and learning in a way that better honors our craft. 
Digital portfolio assessment, when implemented successfully, can 
reveal a more complete description of our students as learners. 
In the process, parents and other teachers become partners in 
our students’ learning journeys.
The organization of this book is intended to guide teachers 
toward building a comprehensive approach to using digital 
portfolios with students. We take it one step at a time. Chap­
ter 1 offers a definition plus a vignette of digital portfolio assess-
ment in action. This description creates a context for unpacking 
the three types of portfolios—performance (best work), prog-
ress (growth over time), and process (student reflections and 
experiences)—and how they are difficult to categorize. A brief 
history of portfolio assessments is also examined. Through this 
understanding, we develop the foundation for assessment liter-
acy that we explore in the following chapters.
In Chapter 2, I make the case for implementing digital student 
portfolios in schools. The rationale focuses on both academic 
reasons and social and emotional benefits of this more authentic 
approach to assessment. I also share a few words of caution. With 
any significant pedagogical or practical change, there is a certain 
level of departure from prior practice. However, I believe that any 
challenges associated with adopting a portfolio assessment—
with the help of technology—is worth the effort, especially con-
sidering the benefits.
In Chapter 3, we get started with using digital portfolios with 
students. Guidance is provided for how to assess the needs of 
your students, develop a yearlong plan for instruction, and select 
the digital tools to capture their best work within performance 
portfolios. This is a logical first step to implementing digital port-
folios in the classroom. The success experienced at this stage 

4   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
can pave the way for integrating technology more powerfully in 
the future.
In Chapter 4, we delve deeper in portfolio assessments. Spe­
cifically, we look at how backward design, or planning with the 
end in mind, can be enhanced with progress, process, and per-
formance portfolios. Instruction should be intentional to ensure 
that students arrive at essential understandings. This chapter 
offers suggestions for aligning portfolio assessment, both sum-
mative and formative, with standards. We will explore multiple  
examples of how a comprehensive portfolio assessment system 
can help teachers create more authentic pathways toward high- 
quality student learning outcomes.
In Chapter 5, I describe the larger process of going school-
wide with digital portfolios. In my first book on digital student 
portfolios (Renwick, 2014), I shared the three-year journey my 
previous school took to integrating technology in our building. 
The lessons I learned from that experience, both positive and con-
structive, inform the steps I offer here for principals and teacher 
leaders. The overarching goal in this chapter is to ensure equity 
and agency for all students through the development of curricu-
lum, along with consistent beliefs and practices.
In Chapter 6, we look beyond the construct of digital port-
folio assessment. Specifically, I ask big questions, such as “How 
can students truly own their learning?” and “Could digital student 
portfolios replace more traditional forms of assessment?” The 
objective of this chapter is to challenge our thinking and con-
sider students’ learning lives beyond their K–12 experiences.
It is said that what gets measured is what gets done. I would 
add to this statement another adage: what we measure is what we 
value. For far too long, grades, scores, levels, and standardized 
tests have driven the conversation in education. Assumptions 
are made about students that are based on unreliable information 
and faulty logic. If we truly value the whole child—healthy, safe, 
engaged, supported, and challenged—then our assessments need 

Introduction   •   5
to reflect this philosophy. Digital portfolios should not be seen as 
a panacea for all that ails assessment in schools today. However, 
what it can do is serve as the next step in doing better by our stu-
dents, our families and communities, and society at large.
With that, let the journey begin!
Linked Activity: Build Professional Knowledge
When I wrote my first book on the topic of digital portfolios, it 
was partly because a resource on that topic didn’t exist. I had 
to collect and curate many resources on the topics of portfolio 
assessment, 21st century learning, and teaching the whole child. 
This process was as important to increasing my knowledge as 
the actual act of writing the book.
Consider taking a similar learning journey. This resource does 
not contain all there is to know about digital portfolios. Use 
advanced Google search strategies with key phrases to discover 
new ideas on this subject. Collect and curate this information 
using online tools, such as Pinterest, Evernote, and LiveBinders. 
Share your findings with others, and come back to this informa-
tion when you run into challenges while implementing digital 
portfolios. Building a dynamic body of knowledge is an impor­
tant first step in becoming a lifelong learner in the 21st century.

This page intentionally left blank

7 
1
Defining Digital Portfolios
“I did then what I knew how to do. Now that I know better, I do better.”
—Maya Angelou
Too much assessment in schools today is done to students 
instead of with students. Even when the assessment reveals 
more than a score, the student or teacher does not have much 
say in the process. That said, within the context of the class-
room, teachers still have considerable authority over how they 
can guide their students to improve daily. For example, through 
thoughtful language choices that are focused on a growth mind-
set, students can develop agency—the belief that things such as 
our intelligence and life’s outcomes are changeable (Johnston, 
2012). These teacher-student conversations bring students to 
focus on what they are doing instead of just how they are doing. 
In such a context, numbers and grades no longer direct these 
discussions.
1

8   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
In this chapter, we explore how digital portfolios can help 
students and teachers make this shift toward a partnership 
approach to assessment. A working definition, along with types 
and examples of digital portfolios, is offered to build a common 
understanding. We also look at the history of portfolio assess-
ment in education, including why it seemed to disappear—along 
with reasons for its resurgence. The chapter ends with a frame-
work for thinking about digital portfolio assessment through the 
lens of good pedagogy. Though technology is here to stay and 
has brought a lot of good into our world, the tenets of strong 
instruction are timeless.
Defining Digital Portfolios
Using technology to aid teaching and learning is not a new con-
cept. Interactive whiteboards, the Internet, and wireless access 
are commonplace in schools. Recent technology, such as learning 
management systems like Edmodo and Schoology, has provided 
teachers with the ability to facilitate some classroom activities 
online. What is new is how technology can and should be lever-
aged to transform teaching and learning—instead of just enhanc-
ing it. This requires a shift in practice. Both teachers and students 
can improve in their work with the inclusion of digital tools when 
they are thoughtfully integrated with instruction.
Digital portfolio assessment is one such approach that could 
build a learning partnership. David Niguidula (2010) coined the 
term digital student portfolios, defined as “a multimedia collection 
of student work that provides evidence of a student’s skills and 
knowledge” (p. 154). I’ve expanded on this definition and con-
sider digital student portfolios to be dynamic, digital collections 
of information from many sources, in many forms, and with many 
purposes that better represent a student’s understanding and 
learning experiences.

Defining Digital Portfolios   •   9
How we define digital student portfolios, though, is second-
ary to how we use the related technology in the classroom. Strong 
instruction with technology embedded as a necessary resource 
is preferable. For example, implementing a 1:1 program (i.e., 
one digital device per student) without any type of forethought, 
research, or planning does not lead to significant learning out-
comes. In fact, such an approach could exacerbate achievement 
gaps for at-risk students who are not familiar with the technology 
(Toyoma, 2015). The change we want to see in schools—and that 
we hope technology will help facilitate—requires more than just 
a financial investment.
Three Types of Portfolios
Let’s take a deeper look at the purposes of portfolios and 
the different types of portfolios that have been used in schools 
(Figure 1.1). Literacy professors Richard Allington and Patricia 
Cunningham (2006) offer clear definitions for this assessment 
tool and process (p. 179):
•	 Performance portfolios are collections of a student’s best 
work, with the student taking the lead in the selection of the 
work and providing an explanation as to why they should 
be included.
•	 Process portfolios contain several versions of a selected 
work. Such a portfolio might hold early drafts of a paper or 
poem to show how the piece developed over time.
•	 Progress portfolios are often managed by teachers. They hold 
collections of work intended to illustrate children’s devel-
opment over time.
Bear in mind that regarding the different types of student 
portfolios, “few pure examples of any of these types exist” 
(Allington & Cunningham, 2006, p. 179). The vignette that follows 
is a good example. A teacher and a student celebrate a piece of 

10   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
published writing (a performance), yet it also serves as a point 
of instruction (progress). This combination of a showcase port-
folio that is student driven and a benchmark portfolio that is 
teacher directed can be referred to as a “collaborative portfolio” 
(Jenkins, 1996).
In my experience, I have found it helpful when getting started 
with digital portfolios to categorize them based on purpose. We 
can refer to the three types of portfolios in terms of “best work” 
or “growth.” Students, families, and colleagues typically under-
stand this terminology better. Best-work portfolios are student 
driven and include collections of students’ best work. Growth 
portfolios are teacher directed and represent students’ develop-
Figure 1.1
Different Types of Portfolios
Portfolio  
Assessment
Growth
Mastery
Performance
(best work)
Summative
(of learning)
Formative
(for learning)
Progress
(over time)
Process 
(of learning)

Defining Digital Portfolios   •   11
ment over time. Regardless of the type of portfolio, opportuni-
ties for documenting and sharing student learning can happen 
at any time. Teachers need to take advantage of these situations 
and worry about how to categorize them later, if at all.
To provide some context for digital portfolios, the following 
passage describes a small moment in which a teacher (Janice) is 
conferencing with a student (Calleigh). Janice video-recorded her 
writing conference using an application called FreshGrade (www.
freshgrade.com). This conference was eventually shared with 
Calleigh’s family through the application. Each piece selected 
by Calleigh throughout the school year is also saved within  
FreshGrade to show growth over time. Previously, Janice had 
provided instruction through minilessons on writing strategies. 
She was already aware of her students’ writing abilities through 
a fall schoolwide writing assessment. The results of that assess-
ment were quantitative (i.e., numerical) and based on one rubric. 
However, Janice’s success in the writing conference was mea-
sured through Calleigh’s ability to monitor her own growth in 
writing and take more responsibility for the results.
In the Classroom with Janice and Calleigh
Calleigh, a 2nd grader, sits down with her teacher, Janice 
Heyroth, to prepare for an assessment. This is a regularly sched-
uled conference during the middle of the school year; Janice 
meets with each student six times a year to reflect on a piece of 
writing in their digital portfolios. At the beginning of the year, 
students completed a reading and writing survey, which was 
uploaded and shared with students’ families via FreshGrade. 
The information gleaned from that survey gave Janice infor-
mation about each student’s dispositions toward reading and 
writing. Questions such as “What types of books does your 
child enjoy reading on this/her own?” and “Does your child 
enjoy writing? Why or why not?” gave insights into how students 
approached literacy in their lives. It also informed her future 

12   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
instruction, such as generating writing ideas and topics students 
could choose to explore if they needed more support.
Elbows on the table, Calleigh props her head on her hands 
as her teacher spreads out some of her own writing. Because it 
is the middle of the school year, Calleigh’s folder already contains 
multiple compositions. Janice encourages Calleigh to locate a 
recently published piece she is proud of. She selects one, and 
then Janice starts off their assessment with a question: “So, what 
are some things you are doing well?”
Calleigh doesn’t hesitate. She states, “Handwriting.” Calleigh 
pulls an older piece of writing from her folder and compares it 
with a more recent entry to show the difference. Janice listens 
and smiles while she writes down Calleigh’s response in her con-
ferring notebook.
Janice prompts, “What else?” and then silently waits and 
allows Calleigh the time she needs to look back at her writing 
and find other points to highlight. After a few seconds, she 
responds, “I don’t know.”
Janice acknowledges Calleigh’s honesty and follows up with 
more specific language. She says, “Well, I have noticed a lot of 
areas where I think you’re doing well in your writing. First, you 
stayed organized with your writing. Did you notice that?”
Calleigh tentatively nods.
Janice then says, “Do you know what I mean by staying orga-
nized in your writing?”
Calleigh hesitates and then smiles as she responds, “No.”
“Okay . . . did you stay on topic?”
“Yeah”
“What is your topic about?”
“Going to Florida.”
“Right. It’s all about going to Florida. Did you tell me about 
what you did first and go all the way through to the end?”
“Yes.”

Defining Digital Portfolios   •   13
The conversation continues, and while this assessment is  
taking place, the rest of the students in the classroom are busy 
independently reading and writing, working on self-guided vocab-
ulary activities, or using computers to listen to narrated digital 
stories. At one point in the assessment, Janice starts to make a 
suggestion (“Would it have made sense . . .”), stops herself, and 
then restarts her inquiry: “Why did you start your real narra-
tive in this way?” Calleigh shares that she started her story by 
describing an important scene during her visit to Florida. This is 
a strategy for developing a lead that she learned during whole-
group writing instruction. Janice makes sure to note this connec-
tion between teaching and learning in her notebook.
The assessment closes with Janice asking Calleigh what she 
would like to continue working on with her writing. This time, 
she waits 15 seconds for a response.
Finally, Calleigh says, “Spaces.”
Janice pauses and then responds, “Actually, your spacing is 
fine. The same with your spelling and handwriting—everything 
looks great. Let’s take a look at your ending, though. ‘Our trip to 
Florida was fun and exciting.’ How could you have spiced things 
up and made your ending more memorable?”
Calleigh struggles with how to respond. Janice reminds her 
that endings can often resemble leads. With this information in 
hand, Janice makes a note to prepare future minilessons that 
address endings. Janice finishes up her time with Calleigh by 
showing her how to upload her writing to FreshGrade so her 
parents can see her work.
Assessment in Context
To understand how digital portfolio assessment can inform 
teaching and learning, let’s unpack the conference scenario 
between Janice and Calleigh.

14   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
Relationships as a Foundation for Learning
Relationships are the cornerstone of all teaching and learn-
ing. Consider the initial interaction between Janice and her stu-
dents. When Calleigh stated “I don’t know” to Janice, she was 
being honest. She was willing to reveal her lack of knowledge 
about what good writing might resemble. Janice responded pro-
fessionally, instead of “What do you mean you don’t know? We 
covered this yesterday.” She saw this admission as an oppor-
tunity for celebration and for instruction. Janice pointed out 
Calleigh’s strengths in organization and how her conventions 
and presentation made her writing more readable. This opened 
the door for feedback and growth, especially when they started 
talking about her ending.
It is hard to learn from someone whom we do not respect or 
particularly care for. Learners must have trust in their teachers. 
Making mistakes puts us in a vulnerable position, and when 
we’re forced to admit that we don’t know something, we open 
ourselves up to potential criticism. This can be good situation if 
a high level of trust and a positive relationship have been devel-
oped between student and teacher. Students need to see their 
teachers as credible and reliable to be able to accept feedback 
about their performance.
Janice understood this. She maintained her relationship 
with Calleigh as a way to help her student grow as a writer. This 
trust was developed through genuine celebration and thought-
ful interaction. In addition, it allowed Janice to document this 
assessment through a digital portfolio tool.
Assessment and Agency
As the writing conference transitioned from celebration to 
observation and feedback, Janice caught herself about to make 
a suggestion. This would not have been the end of the world, 
but it also would not have given Calleigh enough credit for her 
potential. By rephrasing her suggestion into a question, Janice 

Defining Digital Portfolios   •   15
allowed for Calleigh to take more ownership of her writing. 
Asking a question that begins, “Would it have made sense . . .”  
is leading and teacher directed. Unfortunately, this is much too 
typical in classrooms today. The alternative approach (“Why 
did you start your narrative . . .”) casts the student in the 
position of expert and requires them to justify their decisions. 
Calleigh was asked to support her own writing decisions, which 
were the result of strategies previously taught in the class-
room. Calleigh was the lead assessor in this situation, and Janice 
was acting as a coach looking to build independence with her  
student. Bringing an authentic audience into this conference 
heightened the importance of Calleigh’s work.
Clear Criteria for Success
Near the end of the writing conference, it became clear to 
Janice that Calleigh lacked the knowledge to develop informed 
writing goals for the next time they met. At that point, she rec-
ognized the need to be more prescriptive in her feedback. Her 
suggestion was brief and built on prior knowledge (using leads 
to build endings), yet she didn’t spend a lot of time on it. Using 
this gap in knowledge as information to drive her instruction, 
Janice began to plan a future minilesson (or two) on endings. 
Chances are high that if Calleigh, who happened to be one of the 
stronger 2nd grade writers, needed more instruction in this area, 
then so did her classmates.
It’s hard for students to meet expectations in any discipline 
if the criteria for success are unclear. Assessment is effective 
when teachers can provide instruction during the process of 
learning. The function of the conference was for Calleigh to iden-
tify her best writing within the context of current work and the 
standards of excellence conveyed by Janice. Their conversation 
was about celebrating success and moving forward as a writer. 
Calleigh was therefore positioned to consider improvement 
instead of simply being evaluated. With this in mind, assessments 

16   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
should focus on teachers and students working together with a 
clear set of criteria to get better. How better to capture this work 
than through technology?
Students of Our Own Instruction
The video recording of their conference for Calleigh’s digital 
portfolio served as an artifact of reflection, self-assessment, and 
goal setting. Both the video reflection and image of her writing 
were combined within FreshGrade and shared with her parents. 
They were able to watch the conference and read Calleigh’s writ-
ing on their smartphone, tablet, or computer. In addition, they 
could leave a simple, supportive comment on the digital artifact, 
or even go deeper and emulate Janice’s language by offering spe-
cific feedback and asking thoughtful questions.
Just as important, Janice later watched the footage and 
evaluated her own practice within FreshGrade. While Calleigh’s 
parents could appreciate her growth by comparing her submit-
ted work online, Janice could critique her own interactions with 
her student and assess whether her feedback moved Calleigh 
forward as a learner. Janice saw this footage as essential data 
to inform her instruction—information just as valuable as any 
rubric or test might offer. In using digital portfolios in this way, 
the teacher becomes the learner as much as the student.
Additional Examples of Digital Portfolios
The following vignettes offer more examples of digital port-
folios in the context of the classroom. Consider these three 
scenarios and how they might apply to your grade level and/or 
discipline.
Scenario #1: Barry, a high school English teacher, finds his 
students’ writing lacking in both skill and voice. He therefore 
makes the decision to use Google Drive for his students’ writing 
projects throughout the school year. The classroom has access to 
one cart of Chromebooks. Because of the one-device-per-student  

Defining Digital Portfolios   •   17
ratio in his classroom, every learner has access to his or her 
digital writing and projects within this web-based software and 
storage system. Students are taught how to create folders within 
Google Drive for different writing projects (created with both 
Google Docs and Slides). At specific times during the school year, 
students are expected to select a piece of writing that represents 
their best work and post it to their performance portfolio, hosted 
on a Google Site. Every student is expected not only to select and 
publish a piece of writing but also to offer feedback for classmates.  
In addition, Barry has connected with another classroom in a 
different state to expand the number of opportunities for his 
students to communicate with a meaningful audience. The clarity 
provided by the teacher on how to use Google Drive to organize 
the process of writing, along with an authentic audience that 
could facilitate feedback in an online environment, offered rel-
evance and motivation for students to increase their voice and 
better apply their skills.
Scenario #2: Lori, a middle school math teacher, is not see-
ing her students transfer their learning to new situations. They 
are respectful and attentive during class, but when presented with 
a similar yet novel problem, the students struggle to apply their 
knowledge and skills.
Lori believes that the missing link between instruction and 
understanding is the lack of integration of the recommended 
eight mathematics practices in her curriculum (Common Core 
State Standards):
1.	Make sense of problems and persevere in solving them.
2.	Reason abstractly and quantitatively.
3.	Construct viable arguments and critique the reasoning of 
others.
4.	Model with mathematics.
5.	Use appropriate tools strategically.
6.	Attend to precision.
7.	Look for and make use of structure.
8.	Look for and express regularity in repeated reasoning.

18   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
For students to become more self-aware of how these prac-
tices help them in mathematics, Lori decides to have her classes 
reflect daily about their learning. She signs up for a Kidblog (www.
kidblog.org) account. Students have their own blogs to write 
about how they used one or more of the mathematical practices 
during the lesson. Lori teaches her students how to categorize 
and tag their posts based on the topic of study and mathematic 
practices. This math journaling happens at the end of the lesson 
and serves multiple purposes: to give students the opportunity 
to reflect on their math work through writing, to reveal their 
understanding of the day’s lesson for Lori to read, and to pro-
vide a window for parents who want to better understand how 
their children are doing in school. As homework, instead of a 
worksheet, students are often expected to respond to at least 
two classmates’ posts in the comments. This type of work seems 
more authentic, and it promotes the idea of a community of 
learners rather than kids competing with one another in learning.
Scenario #3: Cathy, an elementary school teacher, finds her 
reading conference notebook cumbersome. She wants to be 
smarter about documenting students’ reading goals and taking 
notes as she talks one on one with students during independent 
reading time. Cathy learns about CCPensieve, an online con-
ferring notebook application that is connected to the Daily 5 
literacy workshop model (Boushey & Moser, 2014). Within this 
web-based software, teachers can quickly move from student to 
student and find personalized assessment data that show their 
growth as readers. Using CCPensieve as a progress portfolio, 
there’s no need to leaf though a thick binder full of papers to 
find reading goals, lists of books read, or strategy notes for the 
next student conference. Cathy can quickly see a snapshot of all 
of her students on the main page of her digital account. In addi-
tion, because the information is stored online, she can access 
this information from any computer or mobile device with an 
Internet connection.

Defining Digital Portfolios   •   19
Another advantage is how CCPensieve allows others to be 
involved in the process. Students can use the information about 
their reading lives to gain a better understanding of their accom-
plishments and next steps. Parents are able to ascertain their 
child’s learning progress because of how the qualitative data is 
organized and shared out via email. Other teachers can be invited 
to view and add to a student’s progress portfolio. CCPensieve 
becomes an additional way for colleagues to communicate and 
collaborate without actually being in the same room. Cathy, her 
colleagues, and students’ family members are all partners in stu-
dents’ journeys toward becoming lifelong readers.
These three examples have much in common. First, each 
scenario identifies the specific access necessary for teachers 
and students to be successful. For example, when a 1:1 student- 
to-technology ratio is required, only then is it provided. Second, 
the purpose for the inclusion of technology is prompted by 
pedagogy. Whether it is the need to facilitate peer feedback, 
to include students in the process of goal setting and reflection, 
or to better communicate students’ learning progress, the ratio-
nale for the inclusion of digital tools is steeped in learning. Third, 
students’ learning becomes visible outside the classroom. In all 
three examples, families and peers are brought in to the learn-
ing process. Because of this audience, the work automatically 
becomes more authentic and meaningful. These common ele-
ments serve to frame technology integration for educators, 
shared later in this chapter.
Understanding Portfolio Assessment
The previous example of digital portfolios in action (Janice and 
Calleigh) is a powerful portrait of what’s possible with digital 
portfolio assessment in the classroom. To understand this pro-
cess, it is helpful to understand the concept of assessment as 
well as the origins of portfolios in education.

20   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
Assessment 101
Assessment is the form, not the function. Teachers assess 
student learning to discover if their understanding of a concept 
or ability to demonstrate a skill is at a proficient level, and if not, 
then to respond accordingly. To understand how portfolio assess-
ment has evolved to the present day, it is helpful to understand 
assessment in general and how portfolios have attempted to cap-
ture the qualitative information in the classroom that can better 
represent the whole child.
Assessment can be defined as the process and tools used to 
reveal information about a learner’s progress and achievement. 
As teachers, we assign certain values to levels of development 
that a student most likely has attained as a reader, writer, and 
thinker. The more information we can glean regarding a student’s 
ability, the better and broader a picture we have to make instruc-
tional and curricular decisions.
Of course, too much information might result in data over-
load. A certain limit must be determined so we remain focused 
on teaching and learning rather than on gathering and organiz-
ing. A good analogy is a visit to the doctor’s office. Your doctor 
will take your blood pressure, listen to your heart, check your 
ears and eyes, and so on. However, he or she is not going to take 
a blood sample if the initial assessments don’t warrant it. There 
are many correlations between the two situations. Age, expected 
cognitive development, experience, and other outside factors 
(e.g., background knowledge, parental support) also come into 
play as we build an understanding of our students’ strengths, 
needs, and interests.
The concept of assessment is often divided into two types: 
formative and summative. The simplest comparison between 
formative and summative assessment is that formative is assess-
ment for learning and summative is assessment of learning (Black 
& Wiliam, 1998). If you break down these words etymologically, 
inform is related to formative. This information would therefore 
inform our instruction. An example might be exit cards/tickets, 

Defining Digital Portfolios   •   21
where students respond to a question to check for understand-
ing at the end of the lesson. Their work isn’t graded. Exit cards/
tickets are used to simply inform the teacher’s instruction for 
the future.
By contrast, summary is closely related to summative, which 
would imply that data from this type of assessment are collected 
after the learning has occurred. Your typical unit tests and per-
formance tasks would fall into this category. Figure 1.2 expands 
on this comparison.
Qualities of 
Formative Assessment
Qualities of 
Summative Assessment
along the way, everyday instruc-
tional practice 
at the end, after learning has 
occurred, with no chance to redo
daily practice toward a product
product only
immediate feedback for the 
teacher and learner
feedback for both the teacher 
and learner often delayed
informs the teacher and the 
learner so instruction and prac-
tice can be adjusted the next day
informs future instruction and 
course design
focuses on the task; geared 
toward understanding
focuses on the individual’s mas-
tery of information at specific 
point in time
allows assessor to get and give 
immediate feedback to improve 
student achievement
frequently used as a way to sift 
and sort students for placement; 
serves as a gatekeeper for 
advanced classes and electives
Figure 1.2
Formative Versus Summative Assessment
Source: From So What Do They Really Know? Assessment That Informs Teaching and Learning, by C. Tovani, 2010, 
Portsmouth, NH: Stenhouse. Copyright 2010 by Stenhouse. Reprinted with permission.

22   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
Cris Tovani accompanies this comparison with a helpful 
analogy (2010). When she speaks with teachers, she often com-
pares formative and summative assessments with athletics. 
Practice time is an opportunity for coaches to provide explicit 
feedback based on current performance. At game time, however, 
very little feedback is given except for the final score. Much more 
time is devoted to practice, where the goal is to improve. The 
summative assessments (game time) are more infrequent oppor-
tunities to “show me what you know.”
These two types of assessments clearly work in concert 
within the arena of athletics. Yet this connection is often lacking 
in the classroom. If formative assessments are there to guide 
instruction for learning, then both student and teacher need to 
know the learning target(s) they must hit (Moss & Brookhart, 
2012). To know the target, a clear understanding of the standard 
of excellence needs to be developed and conveyed. If the district 
and state (summative) assessments are aligned with these stan-
dards, then the target should hopefully be clear. And with that 
destination in mind, formative assessments can provide a path-
way for learners to achieve strong growth and eventually mastery.
A Brief History of Portfolio Assessment
Portfolios have long been used to document student learn-
ing. Portfolios came into prominence during the 1980s and 90s 
as an authentic assessment tool for writing workshop. This 
approach was spearheaded by educators such as Donald Graves 
and Sheila Valencia (Jenkins, 1996). These innovators in literacy 
instruction believed that reading and writing were too complex 
to be evaluated through letter grades or single scores. With that 
in mind, an authentic approach to portfolio assessment sought 
to “minimize the distance between instruction and assessment” 
(Valencia & Place, 1994, p. 154). Portfolios in the context of liter-
acy can be a better approach to assessment, as reading and writ-
ing rely on qualitative results to gauge growth and achievement.

Defining Digital Portfolios   •   23
Around the same time, education was also exploring the use  
of portfolio assessment for groups of students with specific needs. 
For example, Moya and O’Malley (1994) reported on some of 
the benefits of using portfolios for English language learners, 
including a greater ability to focus on the process of learning 
(instead of only on outcomes) and the ability to tailor assess-
ment to the needs of each student. In addition, with the emer-
gence of new learning theories, such as multiple intelligences, 
educators and researchers saw a new pathway for leveraging 
portfolio assessment to capture, reflect upon, and share student 
learning artifacts. Educational researchers such as Evangeline 
Stefanakis (2002) advocated for the use of portfolio assessment 
to document students’ intelligence beyond the core disciplines. 
Students who demonstrated strength in physical education and 
music, for instance, were offered new opportunities to convey 
their understandings through a more authentic approach to 
assessment. As an example, students could use a video record-
ing from a choir concert to show proficiency in their musical 
abilities. An assessment such as this, facilitated through tech-
nology, is better aligned with the expectations for the discipline.
Given these benefits, it still is not surprising that portfolio 
assessment has fallen out of favor in schools. This more authentic 
approach to assessment also demands more time and attention; 
reflection, self-assessment, and goal setting are critical compo-
nents of the process. With large class sizes, less support, and 
more resources devoted to standardized assessments, limita-
tions are placed on educators who might want to facilitate port­
folio assessment. As veteran literacy educator and author Regie  
Routman notes, “I remember decades ago when portfolio assess-
ment was all the rage. Then it died a slow death because it was 
overwhelming for teachers to implement with their students, 
not to mention all the time it took” (personal communication). 
Another challenge is the qualitative nature of this approach. For 
example, student writing is more difficult to assign a grade or 

24   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
score to than, say, a solution to a math problem. The draw of 
an easier-to-implement assessment system that relied mainly on 
numbers and symbols gave way instead.
With recent advances in technology, portfolio assessment 
has experienced a resurgence in popularity. Many technology 
companies now offer digital portfolio tools to use in the class-
room. The biggest reason is the capacity of technology to cap-
ture, house, and share artifacts of student learning online. The 
advent of the Internet, along with a bevy of affordable mobile 
devices, has caused educators to rethink student work as more 
than only a physical object or file. In using digital tools to cap-
ture student thinking and progress, students’ learning journeys 
start to become alive. We can hear the confidence in their voice 
when giving a speech and see their enthusiasm when present-
ing on a research topic in school. In addition, technology has 
allowed students to become better involved in the assessment 
process itself. Tablets and laptops put in the hands of learners 
give them more opportunities to document, reflect upon, and 
publish their work. This access to share and assess growth and 
best work is more easily captured with digital portfolios. Finally, 
these tools inform families about their children’s current under-
standings and future goals. How digital portfolios are integrated 
into the classroom is an important next step.
A Framework for Digital Portfolios
Digital portfolios, these dynamic repositories of student learning 
artifacts, stand in contrast with the symbols that have typi-
cally represented learning in schools, including grades and test 
scores. Quantitative assessment results are static and unrespon-
sive. They draw little attention to the overall learning process. 
Numbers and symbols are not without some worth. Grades on 
high school transcripts still act as prerequisites for acceptance 
to higher education. Test scores provide a snapshot of a school’s 

Defining Digital Portfolios   •   25
general achievement levels. However, these assessments are 
instruments that can, at best, make rough estimates about a 
student’s or school’s achievement levels. Still, numbers and 
symbols are much easier to collect, organize, and analyze.
Qualitative assessment results need processes and proto-
cols so teachers and students can more systematically imple-
ment them in classrooms. In my previous work (Renwick, 2014, 
2015), I offered a basic framework for assessing the effect that  
technology can have on student learning: access, purpose, and 
audience. Access is the availability for students to use con-
nected tools, discover new knowledge, and tap into currently 
unavailable resources. Access can also take into account how 
technology modifies and accommodates content and tasks for 
students with specific needs. Purpose is defined as the reason 
for utilizing technology in the context of learning. It also should 
offer a rationale for the work in which students engage while 
at school and in their lives. Audience includes anyone who can 
view and celebrate students’ learning, as well as provide feed-
back to promote thinking. The three tenets of necessary use of 
technology are described in Figure 1.3.
Access, purpose, audience: within these three tenets of a dig-
ital integration framework, we are more likely to experience suc-
cess in the classroom. Technology comes and goes. With a strong 
understanding of portfolio assessment in general, we can better 
align the digital tools to meet our students’ true needs. Technol-
ogy should support the learning, not the other way around.
Linked Activity: Using a Framework  
to Reflect on Current Practice
Think about your current learning environment for students, 
including the discipline(s) you teach, assessment practices 
used in your classroom, resources available, and schoolwide 
expectations.

26   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
Considering your context, respond to the following questions 
to help you reflect on your current practice and what’s possible 
for the future.
1.	What type of access do your students have to technology in 
your classroom? Specifically, what is the wireless situation? 
How many and what types of devices are available? What 
is your district’s current policy on sharing student informa-
tion in an online space? What needs should be addressed?
2.	Given your current teaching assignment, what entry point 
in your curriculum makes the most sense for integrating 
Access
It is nice to purchase 
one type of device for 
every learner, provide 
initial training, and 
allow staff and stu-
dents to explore what’s 
possible.
It is necessary to 
assess infrastructure, 
school needs, and stu-
dent needs as well as 
purchase specific tools 
and schedule ongoing 
training.
Purpose
It is nice to use trial- 
and-error with the 
technology and select 
a curriculum unit or 
lesson that allows for 
its use.
It is necessary to 
design curriculum 
focused on essential 
knowledge and skills 
and apply technology 
within the learning 
progression.
Audience
It is nice to house 
student work on the 
devices or in the cloud 
for easy retrieval.
It is necessary to  
publish student work 
for those outside the 
classroom to view and 
give feedback and  
affirmation.
Figure 1.3
Access, Purpose, and Audience

Defining Digital Portfolios   •   27
digital portfolios? That is, what would be the purpose of 
incorporating technology within your discipline? How will 
student learning benefit from this inclusion?
3.	If access is strong and a purpose has been identified, who 
will be the audience that will be celebrating and assessing 
students’ work? Will family members be the main recipi-
ents for looking at and commenting on their learning? How 
might peers be involved in recognizing and offering feed-
back for what’s posted and shared?
Learner Profile: John Spencer
John Spencer is a professor of educational technol-
ogy within the School of Education at George Fox 
University in Portland, Oregon. Prior to that, he was 
a middle school social studies and digital journalism 
teacher in the Phoenix, Arizona area. His school had 
many Spanish speakers in a state that demanded all 
school work be read and completed in English. John 
is also the author of Launch: Using Design Thinking 
to Boost Creativity and Bring Out the Maker in Every 
Student (2016).
Questions in each chapter’s Learner Profile are 
adapted from The Action Research Guidebook: A Four-
Stage Process for Educators and School Teams (Sagor, 
2010, pp. 37–38).
Why did you introduce digital portfolio assessment in 
your classroom?
I started digital portfolios early on in my career. The purpose 
was to have a classroom assessment system that mirrored what 
professionals and artists (creative types) do in the real world. 
They do not take tests—they select their best work to showcase 

28   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
and explain why. Not aware of other resources available, my col-
leagues and I started with portfolios from scratch.
Our first step was teaching students how to choose their 
learning artifacts during the school year and reflect upon them. 
This led to having the students start to document their growth 
over time, which then led to students self-selecting goals to work 
toward for the future. This is ideal summative work in the creative 
fields, where people make plans for the future based on what they 
have accomplished so far and where they want to grow.
In what way(s) were the effects of implementing digital 
portfolios in school unique or unusual?
There were positive effects about using a portfolio process 
with students. By celebrating their work once a quarter (when 
they put entries in their portfolios), they started to see them-
selves as learners—as creative people who can accomplish proj-
ects. There were changes in their self-concept, not necessarily 
in their confidence, but in becoming more reflective individuals.
There was also an increase in metacognition because of the 
time given for students to reflect on their learning. When the 
growth piece was added, a lot of the power in portfolios came in 
having the students articulate what they learned and how. It was 
on their terms and facilitated by the teacher. This portfolio pro-
cess led into goal setting, which was a phenomenal thing. Had I 
stayed in my position as a social studies teacher (instead of tran-
sitioning to an encore class), I would have scheduled this goal 
setting to happen weekly where it became a habit for the school.
How would you describe the characteristics of the prod-
ucts from the digital portfolio work and of the educa-
tors who were involved?
Working on a teaching team at the middle level, we could 
really see the students as learners. We got a great snapshot of 
each person; seeing their strengths and areas for growth were 

Defining Digital Portfolios   •   29
documented in multiple disciplines. When I started teaching dig-
ital journalism toward the end of my K–12 teaching career, the 
ability to collaborate with colleagues became more challenging. 
Career-based courses such as journalism lend themselves to a 
portfolio style of assessment. What they created, such as news 
reports and reviews, was already online and selected because 
of its quality. Writing in multiple genres happens naturally. 
The work is relevant. When schools and teachers select units 
of study focused on a genre, such as persuasive and exposi-
tory writing, the learning can become more about completing 
the assignments than about creating an actual product for an 
authentic audience.
While we didn’t receive any training on how to implement 
portfolios when our school went to standards-based grading, 
portfolios made a whole lot more sense. We were no longer 
assigning a number or a letter to student work. Instead, we looked 
at specific knowledge and skills in which students had to show 
proficiency and then built assessments and developed the cur-
riculum around them. Both standard-based grading and portfolio 
assessment do a better job of showing a student’s learning jour-
ney over time.
What resources were used to support the use of digital 
portfolios?
Going digital with student portfolios demanded technolog-
ical resources. The biggest benefits were improved communi-
cation with families and bringing in a more authentic audience. 
Our team used Weebly (www.weebly.com) for students to show-
case their learning online. My wife went to school with one of 
the developers of Weebly. When she shared this new tool with 
me, I thought, “Hey, our kids could use this for their digital port­
folios.” We had been using Dreamweaver, which required stu-
dents to actually build the website in addition to posting their 

30   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
work. Through Weebly, our students could focus on the learning. 
One of the outcomes of using online portfolios is the positive 
digital footprint they create though the process. If the portfolios 
do not stay with them after graduating, they aren’t as real.
What specific outcomes do you attribute to the use of 
digital portfolios?
The positive outcomes of a portfolio assessment culture are 
not reserved just for students. Professionalism was also increased 
when we, as teachers, collaborated on this initiative. I would not 
have worked as closely with my colleagues on my team if port­
folio assessment were not a part of our work.
In your opinion, what other factors contributed to the 
achievement of these outcomes?
The support from our administrators, such as providing time 
to discuss student learning and develop authentic assessments, 
was necessary to allow this to happen. This is in addition to the 
district’s decision to use a more student-friendly reporting system 
(i.e., standards-based grading). Another factor that led to stu-
dents becoming more mindful and reflective about their learning 
included a school culture in which teacher leadership was hon-
ored and encouraged.
What problems did you encounter when developing or 
introducing digital portfolios?
Portfolio assessment does not come without its issues. Any 
significant change in how school looks and works for students 
will have bumps in the road. For us, most of the problems 
stemmed from the technology itself. Having students upload 
their multi­media creations, such as videos and images, proved 
to be challenging for all of us. Bandwidth strength and different 
types of files affected this process. Also, we as teachers had to 
make sure we were compliant with FERPA (Family Educational 
Rights and Privacy Act) and COPPA (Children’s Online Privacy 
Protection Act) guidelines regarding student privacy and infor-

Defining Digital Portfolios   •   31
mation. Providing universal access to all students regarding tech-
nology can also prove to be a roadblock. This access includes 
language barriers, as a number of our students and their families 
spoke Spanish as their primary language. Ensuring that student 
learning was communicated was not an easy process.
What else do you think a teacher or school should know 
before implementing digital portfolios?
First, choose the digital portfolio platform wisely. It makes 
a big difference as to how easy it is for students to upload their 
work, reflect on it, and set goals for the future. Second, show stu-
dents how to curate digital portfolios. Don’t assume they know 
how because they are familiar with digital tools. Make exemplars 
or find strong examples of what student portfolios can and should 
look like. Teach portfolio assessment like you would teach any 
other complex task. Third, do your homework on student privacy 
laws. Find out what the district policy states about digital port­
folio assessment, and make sure you have administrative support. 
Finally, if possible, facilitate portfolio assessment with a team of 
teachers—or the entire school. Hold one another accountable 
to do this type of work, which does not come naturally for those 
who are used to a more traditional approach to education. You 
learn a lot more about your students when everyone is contrib-
uting to their learning journey—the student included!

This page intentionally left blank

33 
2
Making a Case 
for Digital Portfolios
“Relationships are the agents of change.”
—Dr. Bruce Perry
As a school principal, I helped facilitate an action research course 
for district teachers. One teacher wanted to explore blogging as 
a writing tool in her classroom. The professor who taught the 
course asked her, “So why do want your students to blog?” She 
paused, not sure how to answer the question. Blogging is an excel-
lent tool for writing and bringing in an authentic audience. How-
ever, without an ability to convey the necessity of this integration, 
an innovation such as this tends to fall flat. Without purpose, 
change is fleeting.
In the first chapter, we defined portfolio assessment, explored 
what a digital portfolio could look like in the classroom, and 
examined digital portfolios within a technology integration frame-
work. In this chapter, I make the case that implementing digital 
student portfolios is a necessary action and should become a  
part of a teacher’s assessment process. Each of the following 

34   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
reasons is accompanied with explanations and/or examples in 
this chapter:
  1.	 Celebrate all students as learners.
  2.	 Improve home-school communication.
  3.	 Facilitate better feedback.
  4.	 Highlight the process of learning.
  5.	 Demonstrate progress over time.
  6.	 Guide students to become self-directed learners.
  7.	 Maximize formative assessment.
  8.	 Integrate speaking and listening.
  9.	 Advocate for every student.
10.	 Work smarter as a teacher.
To know what we are getting into, responses to common con-
cerns and challenges regarding implementation of digital port­
folios are also provided. By understanding the purpose, we gain 
the motivation to ensure technology integration initiatives such 
as digital portfolios are successful for students.
Reason #1: Celebrate All Students as Learners
To expect the best from our students, we have to start with suc-
cess. Acknowledging all the potential they have to offer paves 
the way for future growth. Think about your favorite teachers 
and what made them memorable. Didn’t you work the hardest 
for them because they recognized all that you had to offer? 
This isn’t about dolloping spoonfuls of unsubstantiated praise 
on students. Rather, it is looking at students through the lens 
of what’s possible for them as learners—instead of immediately 
identifying their deficits.
I remember when my children were toddlers and learning to 
understand the world around them. When they started to talk, 
my wife and I never called them out for their mistakes. Instead, 
we recognized their efforts while scaffolding their responses 

Making a Case for Digital Portfolios   •   35
with what they were trying to say and convey (e.g., “Did you say 
dee? Yes, the dog is barking at the squirrel outside. You said it!”). 
This language comes natural to most young parents. So what 
happens when children get older?
In a word: school. All of a sudden, kids are compared to one 
another. Instead of collaboration, competition typically takes 
over. Whether it is the visible groupings of students based on 
reading levels, the clip charts that admonish our most active 
learners, or the school data walls that tell teachers what they 
already know about their students, these unhealthy compari-
sons can lead to a decrease in students’ sense of self-worth and 
a lack of engagement with learning in general.
What digital portfolio assessment provides for students 
is a more level playing field. No longer are we pigeonholing 
kids into one, narrow way of showing their learning. Instead, 
they can speak their understanding and record it with various 
digital tools. They can video record a demonstration of their new 
knowledge or skills and post it online for others to see. They can 
write about their experiences in a preferred way that helps them 
express themselves comfortably and clearly. Whatever approach 
they take, the limits have been lifted regarding performance 
assessment and what it means to be successful.
Reason #2: Improve Home-School 
Communication
I believe that what students bring home in their backpacks 
becomes their family’s perception of what occurs at school. If 
your child’s backpack were full of only math fact practice sheets, 
corrected reading quizzes, and graded content exams, what 
would be your interpretation? Parents might make the (hopefully) 
incorrect assumption that all their children do at school is comply 
with teachers’ directions and dutifully take the pre­determined, 
one-size-fits-all assessments to show what they know.

36   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
Because you are reading this book, my guess is that you 
are not comfortable with our families or community members 
having this point of view. Nevertheless, without an alternative 
way to communicate student learning, we create a perception 
vacuum. Digital portfolios offer a better system. Students’ reg-
ular efforts at demonstrating their knowledge, understandings, 
and dispositions are all on display for families to witness as they 
develop. This formative process breathes life into an otherwise 
mundane method of reporting student learning.
By developing a digital portfolio with students, we create  
a better representation of who they are as learners. Portfolio 
assessment is a mosaic of their understandings, reflections, 
and attempts at meeting personal goals. Capturing these arti-
facts opens up our classroom doors to important audiences. In 
addition, students come to see themselves in a more accurate 
way—as complex learners who are unique and always striving to 
become better. The importance of the connection made between 
home and school—facilitated through digital portfolios—cannot 
be overstated.
Reason #3: Facilitate Better Feedback
Feedback is critical for learning. Without it, we have no idea 
if we are improving. Feedback can be defined as the flow of 
information between teacher and learner or between learners 
that informs current performance and next steps. It should be 
a “recipe for future instruction” (Wiliam, 2011, p. 121). Feedback 
can take a variety of forms. For example, our interactions with 
students during guided practice can offer a lot of information—
from students’ responses to our questions, to the conversations 
they have with their peers, to their facial expressions and body 
language. All of this can serve to inform teaching and learning—
but how?

Making a Case for Digital Portfolios   •   37
Digital student portfolios offer teachers and students a way 
to facilitate feedback more successfully. Consider the following 
example. Students are struggling with reading fluency (i.e., the 
ability to read text with expression, at a reasonable rate, and 
with understanding). The teacher, recognizing a lack of aware-
ness among her students, decides to record her students once 
a week while they are reading. The videos are then shared with 
the students’ families via digital notifications. They can hear 
their prosody (pace and rhythm) and enunciation (pronuncia-
tion) as they listen to themselves read aloud. Each week, this 
authentic artifact of their progress is a topic of conversation at 
home and school. After watching themselves on the recordings, 
students start to see and hear for themselves why fluency is 
critical for understanding.
The way that digital tools can capture true learning—in the 
moment—calls into question some of the more traditional liter-
acy assessments currently used in schools. Which assessment 
helps students better understand their own abilities? If we 
agree that learners should be the lead assessors in the class-
room, then what tools will best allow that to happen? Digital 
portfolios can change the game when it comes to students taking 
ownership of the data that is captured. Indeed, this information 
can be the motivation a student needs to improve.
Reason #4: Highlight the Process of Learning
A favorite biography of mine is Walter Isaacson’s Steve Jobs 
(2011). What made the story of Jobs’s life so compelling was not 
that he was a pioneer in the computer industry or that he revo-
lutionized how people listen to music. What was most interesting 
was the road he traveled to get to that point. Jobs’s biological 
parents abandoned him. He dropped out of college—though con-
tinued to attend courses that interested him, such as calligraphy. 

38   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
Jobs eventually became a successful business leader, but he was 
fired by his own board of directors due to his caustic personality. 
These setbacks made the ultimate successes of his journey more 
rewarding.
What digital portfolios provide for learners is an opportunity 
to showcase their best work and highlight the journey they took 
to get there. Learning is no longer merely an abstract outcome 
of the process; it becomes visible. In addition, the audience is 
not limited to the teacher. Family members, peers, and the larger  
community can become “readers” of a student’s narrative. There 
is also a focus on the importance of striving toward one’s per-
sonal goals while becoming more aware of that growth. Students 
learn to think critically about what they produced and take 
action from that reflection.
A case in point: Teachers at my previous school had received 
training in specific instructional strategies for teaching the pro-
cess of writing. Part of the expectation for that training was to 
include students’ prewriting, plans, and drafts behind their final 
products when teachers posted their work in the classroom or 
hallway.
When our consultant came back for the second round of 
training in the late fall, she did an environmental walk of the 
school. Only the final products were visible. “Where are the 
plans?” she asked. The teachers looked nervously at one another, 
not sure what to say. She continued, “We need to communicate 
to the entire school community that writing does not come out 
of thin air.” After that, we regularly shared the entire journey 
students took to create their final products.
Prioritizing the process of learning does not mean devalu-
ing the final product students produce. It is about understand-
ing that learning outcomes are largely a result of the time and 
thought spent developing the knowledge, skills, and dispositions 
on display in the end product. If teachers want to truly promote 
a “growth mindset” in their classrooms, then we need to shift 

Making a Case for Digital Portfolios   •   39
our focus. When we take the time to visit with students, discuss 
the journey they took to achieve their goals, and celebrate their 
accomplishments along the way, we convey what we truly value 
as educators. Digital portfolios help with this shift.
Reason #5: Demonstrate Progress over Time
Too often, our lesson plans and units of study can serve as iso-
lated activities in the eyes of our students. Connections between 
what happened yesterday and what is to come are lost. Instead 
of a progression of teaching and learning that align with larger 
goals and objectives, students begin to view instruction as hap-
pening in silos, separated by disciplines, periods, and quarters. 
This fragmentation of teaching can leave students wondering 
about the importance of what they are learning and how it con-
nects with their lives and the world around them.
Digital portfolios can serve as an antidote to this type of edu-
cational compartmentalization. When teachers take the time  
to guide students’ focus on their past work, their current abil-
ities, and their future goals, their work becomes a seamless 
progression of learning. Consider the first example in this book. 
The teacher, Janice, started her writing conference by focusing 
on her student’s strengths as a writer. This prompted her stu-
dent, Calleigh, to think back about what she was already doing 
well, which connected her thinking to prior knowledge. Then 
Janice noticed and named skills and strategies that were being 
utilized. This was followed up by questions that helped Calleigh 
reflect on possible areas of growth. Finally, the conference con-
cluded with goals to work on and document within a digital 
portfolio tool.
This vignette describes what can be facilitated within a class-
room when the teacher values learning as a continuous journey 
over time. Assessment in these types of classrooms is not an 
event; it serves to guide students toward a meaningful end that 

40   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
will showcase their potential and achieve their personal goals. 
The journey is revealed when portfolios are utilized to capture 
those pathways toward success. Teachers have to give students 
the tools, time, and feedback to help them self-assess their prog-
ress and unpack the process.
Reason #6: Guide Students to Become  
Self-Directed Learners
Teacher-directed assessments can be useful for highlighting stu-
dents’ strengths and areas for growth. This leads to more respon-
sive instruction and a better understanding of a child’s abilities. 
By moving the role of assessor from teacher to student, schools 
can see even greater gains in learning. When students are put in 
charge of their own learning journey through reflective question-
ing and goal setting, they have more ownership in the process. 
They put themselves on the hook for achieving at higher levels 
and are therefore more likely to experience success.
I observed this process with my own daughter when she was 
in 1st grade. Using a built-in tablet camera, her teacher recorded 
their writing conference, which began with my daughter reading 
her own writing aloud. (The topic was her upcoming birthday 
party.) Next, they panned the camera over to the rubric used to 
guide the assessment.
Her teacher asked, “How do you feel you did on this writing?” 
My daughter pointed to the smiley face that served as a self-rating 
symbol on her reflection sheet.
“What about your writing are you really proud of?” The 
teacher motioned toward a bank of phrases from which my 
daughter could select (which also served as criteria for high- 
quality work at the 1st-grade level). After they identified a 
strength, her teacher asked her to highlight an area in which 
she had grown. My daughter replied that she had started using 
more spaces between words. Finally, she was asked to select a 
goal to work toward for next time.

Making a Case for Digital Portfolios   •   41
“I want to try sound spelling more when writing.”
This process is important for developing self-directed learn-
ers for a couple of reasons. Beyond the trust built by building 
on strengths together, the student is leading the assessment 
through thoughtful questioning by the teacher. He or she may 
be more likely to make improvements because areas for growth 
are clearly identified. By watching videoconferences with stu-
dents, families can hear how they can talk to kids in a way that 
promotes learning. Subsequently, parents and other caregivers 
are more likely to emulate that language after hearing or seeing 
a teacher model it. In addition, by letting students know that the 
teacher will be checking on their progress at a later date, they 
are held responsible for the learning.
When my wife and I met with our daughter’s teacher at the 
spring parent-teacher conference, one of the first things we asked 
was how she was doing with sound spelling.
The teacher responded, “Much better!” She then showed us 
a recent example as evidence. Observing how students’ goals 
lead them to success is, unfortunately, an uncommon experi-
ence for many parents. With all of the tools available to teachers 
today, there is little reason why digital portfolio assessment 
is not being used more regularly in classrooms and schools. I 
attribute a lot of the growth our daughter made to her teacher’s 
willingness to give her more responsibility in the assessment 
process—and to make that process more visible to us.
Reason #7: Maximize Formative Assessment
Invariably, time spent administering summative assessments 
means time taken away from working with students more for-
matively. I’m not suggesting we put a stop to all summative 
assessments (although the standardized tests currently in use 
for evaluating teachers and schools is more than questionable). 
Summative assessments can be a final product of a unit of study, 

42   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
such as a performance task to gauge whether students can 
transfer what they know to another context. However, what we 
are attempting to accomplish by embedding portfolio assessment 
within instruction is to maximize formative assessment and min-
imize summative assessment.
As already discussed, formative assessment should take place 
prior to summative assessment. It is the information communi-
cated between teacher and students—and sometimes between 
students—that describes how well they are doing on the pathway 
toward success. This information, which is sometimes referred to 
as data, can take many forms, including classroom discussions, 
reading or writing conferences, feedback on various pieces of 
work, and self-assessments of current abilities against specific 
standards of excellence. In other words, formative assessment is 
a journey to the final destination.
W. James Popham, in his book Transformative Assessment 
(2008), offers a helpful visual that illustrates the spectrum of for-
mative assessment inclusion in classrooms (Figure 2.1). Teachers 
maximize formative assessment in classrooms through carefully 
prepared instruction around essential understandings. The more 
we prepare, the more likely it will occur.
The planned aspect of formative assessment might be a shift  
for some teachers. That’s why, in Chapter 4, the concept of back­
ward design is addressed. This approach to curriculum and 
instruction gives teachers the tools to better leverage formative 
assessment to drive instruction.
We often associate formative assessment with basic exam-
ples, such as a “thumbs up/thumbs down” signal after a les-
son. Yes, this is a form of formative assessment, but the value 
to the teacher is limited. When students only give a thumbs 
up or thumbs down to show how well they believe they under-
stand a concept or skill, we have to ask if they truly under-
stand the criteria for success for the given task. Are students’ 

Making a Case for Digital Portfolios   •   43
responses to this quick check a valid indicator of learning, or 
does it reveal an unwillingness to admit what they don’t know 
or cannot do?
By structuring time for digital portfolio assessment in the 
classroom, students and teachers can have conversations that 
better reveal each learner’s true level of understanding. There is 
no way for students to “fake it.” They cannot game the system. 
Through purposeful talk and an authentic audience, teachers 
can capture data that are often hidden within a more basic 
assessment tool, such as multiple-choice questions or short- 
answer responses. This approach is also more valuable for future 
instructional plans and more meaningful to students. As a teacher, 
I know this is how I would prefer to spend my time.
Figure 2.1
Illustrative Proportions of Formative Assessment  
in Classrooms
No
Formative
Assessment
Legend:
= Classroom Activities
= Formative Assessment
Token
Formative
Assessment
Moderate
Formative
Assessment
Near-Total
Formative
Assessment
Source: From Transformative Assessment (p. 12), by W. J. Popham, 2008, Alexandria, VA: ASCD. Copyright 2008 
by ASCD.

44   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
Reason #8: Integrate Speaking and Listening
The Common Core State Standards include fewer speaking and 
listening standards than those for reading and writing. This is a 
concerning imbalance, considering that today’s employers fre-
quently prioritize prospective candidates’ “soft skills,” including 
communication and teamwork (Davidson, 2016). When I am in a 
position to hire new teachers or support staff, I place great stock 
in their ability to articulate their thinking and respond effectively 
to new situations. All other areas being equal, those skills usually 
win the position for one person over another.
Erik Palmer (2014) believes that teachers’ expectations are 
too low when teaching speaking and listening. More of a focus 
will enhance our efforts in other academic areas. “Everything you 
do in your class would improve if students spoke better. Students 
would be more engaged and learn more from one another, dis-
cussions would be more productive, and groups would function 
more smoothly because students would be better able to express 
their ideas” (p. 24). There is a cumulative effect on learning when 
this often-neglected aspect of education is given more attention.
Using the tools that accompany digital portfolios provides a 
natural opportunity to embed speaking and listening skills with 
almost any type of performance task. For example, if students are 
writing original stories, then they can also be expected to record 
themselves reading those texts aloud and embed that audio to 
create a shareable audiobook. If the assignment involves a nota-
ble person from history, then students can record themselves 
and one another delivering that person’s famous speeches or 
reading excerpts of that person’s writing. They can then upload 
those recordings for families to watch and listen to online. There 
are so many possibilities.
The benefits of incorporating speaking and listening into the 
core areas of instruction are not limited to improving students’ 
abilities to communicate. In my own observations, I have noticed 

Making a Case for Digital Portfolios   •   45
how students’ work tends to improve when we add this type of 
performance to their tasks. In the case of the audiobook example, 
students can play back an audio recording of themselves reading 
their own writing, question whether it is their best offering, and 
then rerecord themselves. They might also return to their texts 
and make revisions after realizing that the language lacked the 
proper prosody or enunciation when they read it aloud.
In addition to speaking and listening, digital portfolios offer 
more opportunities for students to convey their understanding. 
New and exciting tools for this work are regularly introduced to 
the marketplace. For example, Educreations (www.educreations.
com) is a whiteboard application that allows users to create inter-
active screencasts. Drawings, animations, and narration can be 
combined to explain concepts from a student’s point of view. 
This original content can be uploaded to or linked within almost 
any digital portfolio system.
This is authentic work. Future employers and organizations 
will expect their employees to be able to communicate effectively 
and listen actively to others. Speaking and listening are skills 
that need to be embedded within instruction today to prepare 
students for the future. Digital portfolios can serve as a conduit 
for this integration.
Reason #9: Advocate for Every Student
The use of computer-based standardized testing in the area of  
writing has been shown to widen the gap between students 
living in poverty and students who do not (Barshay, 2016). A 
main reason for this is the lack of familiarity with how to use 
a computer. Students living in poverty may not have access to 
the technology at home. Conversely, students from middle- and 
upper-class homes, on average, have more exposure to these 
tools. They perform better on these types of assessments ver-
sus paper-and-pencil tests.

46   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
In other words, schools with higher levels of poverty may start 
out at a disadvantage when using computer-based standardized 
tests. When we allow these circumstances to exist, we do a dis­
service to the very students who most need our support. So what 
is the answer?
One possibility is to offer an alternative for students who 
may not fare well on traditional tests. This can take the form of a 
best work portfolio: students can go back through their litany of 
saved work—online and off—and determine what best represents 
their knowledge, skills, and understandings over the course 
of the school year. This portfolio could follow the student’s growth 
throughout the school years if, for example, his or her family 
chooses to opt out of standardized testing on an annual basis. It 
may be more meaningful for students in the long run—and more 
likely to improve their learning outcomes.
Our first priority as educators is to ensure that all of our stu-
dents have access to the same high level of instruction. This is 
what we mean by equity. Schools cannot achieve equity if they do 
not provide every student with the same opportunity to be suc-
cessful in school. Through the use of digital portfolios, students 
can make visible the level of success they truly experienced and 
how they arrived at that point.
Reason #10: Work Smarter as a Teacher
I once overheard a teacher talking about a book that her district 
had assigned as part of her role on an assessment committee. 
“It’s called Grade Harder, Not Smarter . . .” she shared. Realiz-
ing her error, her team had a good laugh together, both at her 
mix-up and in the truth just under the surface of her statement.
Teachers have so many mandates and expectations from 
their districts, state, and school. The high level of attrition in  
our profession should not come as a surprise. Making matters 

Making a Case for Digital Portfolios   •   47
worse, fewer individuals are going into the profession. I’ve 
personally seen this in my decade as a building principal. The 
amount of bureaucracy that now seems to accompany our jobs 
as educators is a major stressor. To retain effective teachers, 
what needs to give?
What students’ digital portfolios can do for the teacher, given 
the right tools, time, and support, is an ability to collect data 
worth collecting. This includes actual student work, their reflec-
tions, the goals they set for the future, and the conversations 
they have about their growth over time. Because something is 
not quantified does not mean it lacks value. In some situations, 
limiting the translation of learning to numbers or symbols can 
make teaching more efficient and effective for both teachers 
and students. It is data-driven instruction within an authentic 
context.
This approach to responsive instruction may look differ-
ent at various grade levels. At the elementary level, a teacher 
might be working on a reading strategy throughout the week. 
Within her students’ progress portfolios, she creates an activ-
ity that highlights the goal for the week and the standard(s) it 
addresses. After teaching a minilesson on Monday, she uses 
Tuesday through Thursday to conference with students during 
independent reading time, which she documents through a 
digital conferring tool. These conversations elicit information 
necessary for the teacher (and student) to determine how well 
the skills were applied. On Friday, she has her students join her 
for a whole-class debriefing, using the progress portfolios to 
discuss the strengths and next steps she sees for the class. As 
an additional data point, the teacher has her students reflect on 
their reading in their response journals.
At the secondary level, students can be put in charge of 
their own curation of learning with the right amount of modeling 
and guidance. For example, a science teacher expects all of her 

48   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
students to use their personal mobile devices to curate their 
work from the day’s lab. Students are also asked to record video 
of the teacher’s demonstrations and audio of their group-work 
conversations. These artifacts provide a repository of informa-
tion to review for the upcoming performance tasks. The teacher 
facilitates collaboration by hosting an online space, such as  
Google Classroom, in which all students can upload their 
learning artifacts for everyone in the course to see and hear. 
Feed­back is expected and welcomed, and learning becomes a 
community-based activity.
The Biggest Benefit
Maybe the biggest benefit with digital portfolios for teachers 
is how their relationships with students change. The teacher- 
student dynamic transforms from a hierarchy to a partnership. 
We learn not only about students’ academics but also about 
their lives, their motivations, their concerns, and their goals 
in life. We learn about who they are as people. This could be 
considered data, especially if we know how it affects learning. 
Yet the goals remain the same: student growth and success. It’s 
how educators arrive at this point that we can alter our mindset 
about assessment.
For all of the benefits of digital portfolios, I have still observed 
apathy and resistance when educators try to apply more authen-
tic assessment practices. The following three scenarios describe 
challenges teachers may confront in the implementation process.
Scenario #1: Your Principal Won’t Allow You  
to Use Digital Portfolios
This is an unfortunate—yet not uncommon—circumstance 
for teachers. As a principal myself, I fail to understand why an 
administrator would not want his or her teachers to improve 
home-school communication and empower students to own 
their learning. Yet these situations do exist. The most prevalent 

Making a Case for Digital Portfolios   •   49
reasons include the perceived cost for facilitating digital port-
folios, concerns about student privacy, and the possibility that 
other teachers will also want to implement digital portfolios in 
their classrooms.
With regard to cost, digital portfolios can be facilitated with 
minimal costs to the school. Most buildings already own many  
mobile and stationary digital tools. With efforts by local, state, 
and federal organizations, reliable wireless has become a mainstay 
in many schools. Many students also already have the necessary 
technology to manage digital portfolios, including smartphones 
and tablets. The tools that are highlighted in the next chapter 
are all free to use or affordable.
Student privacy is and should be a concern for all educa­
tors. It is so easy to share content—images, video, audio, text— 
without taking time to consider whether it should be online in the 
first place. This is actually another strong rationale for implement-
ing digital portfolios. Consider when we take a piece of represen-
tative student work and post it online for an authentic audience 
to view and comment on, we are modeling digital citizenship. 
Students see firsthand how to evaluate online content for appro-
priateness and usefulness. We are demonstrating the importance 
of letting others see us as real people—as humans who view 
errors and mistakes as a necessary part of becoming better at 
something. This concept stands in contrast to the typical online 
offerings that only highlight ourselves at our best.
As for other teachers wanting to emulate what you are doing 
in your classroom, all I can say is, “Why not?” This is the epitome 
of professionalism—teachers sharing and adopting great instruc-
tional ideas to improve the experiences of all students. Never-
theless, there are administrators who might want to squash the 
spread of more authentic assessment. Reasons may include less 
time focused on more formal assessments, such as screeners 
and tests, or an inability to quantify student learning outcomes 
with a portfolio assessment process.

50   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
How do we handle this? My suggestion is respectfully and 
confidently. Teachers can make appointments with their super-
visor to discuss the benefits and concerns regarding digital 
portfolio assessment. Be a good listener while making a case 
for maximizing classroom assessment that drives teaching and 
learning. If we’ve done our homework and taken a respectful 
approach to advocating for these practices, then it is more likely 
that a supervisor will also see the benefits. In fact, he or she may 
become your biggest champion for this approach in the future, 
once the inevitable success stories start to present themselves.
Scenario #2: Your Students Are Resisting Portfolio Assessment
This situation might come as a surprise, especially if you 
have not yet tried out digital portfolios. However, it is a common 
occurrence in classrooms when teachers start to engage their 
students in this alternative approach to assessment.
The biggest reason for this situation is because we have 
trained our students to be reliant on our judgment of their learn-
ing. Grades, test scores, and vague interpretations that attempt 
to describe their progress—such as a number of points assigned 
for reading a book—give few opportunities for learners to gauge 
their own work. Students can become overly dependent on 
teachers telling them how they are progressing toward essential 
learning outcomes that they don’t know what to do when asked 
to be their own assessors in the classroom.
Even if students resist right away, I suggest teachers stay 
on this pathway. They will eventually come around. Students 
might need a period of “assessment detox” before we start to see 
success. I would begin by having a conversation with students 
about making this shift from teacher-directed to student-driven 
learning. We can start by simply asking a few questions:
•	 Why do schools give tests and quizzes?
•	 Do grades provide you, your families, and me with a good 
understanding of who you are as a student?

Making a Case for Digital Portfolios   •   51
•	 What if teachers were no longer allowed to give scores for 
student work?
•	 How might school work in a world where numbers and sym-
bols aren’t used to assess your learning?
It’s important to have an authentic discussion in your class-
room about the need to shift to a better way of showing what 
we know and are able to do. Students’ responses at every level 
(K–12) will be thoughtful, honest, and full of insights that we 
may never have considered. This activity also gives ownership 
to students, who now feel part of the direction that their com-
munity of learners is taking together. They will become more 
invested in the process because they finally have a say in it. 
Once students have had time to process this change in what 
learning looks like, I recommend starting small and leading with 
their strengths. Start capturing, reflecting on, sharing, and cele-
brating student work in an area where success has already been 
experienced.
Scenario #3: Your District’s Mandated Curriculum  
Makes Digital Portfolios a Challenge
This scenario may actually be more common than a building 
administrator not allowing a teacher to implement digital port-
folios. It’s not that district leaders are directly denying the use 
of these connected and authentic assessment practices. When 
a curriculum director or superintendent sets the expectation 
that a certain commercial program be implemented at all grades 
“with fidelity,” too often the program becomes the curriculum. 
In fact, some programs promote this as a benefit for teachers.
District leaders, legislators, and education reformers struggle 
to find the one tool that will address all students’ needs. That’s 
not a surprise. The one perfect model does not exist. Any pro-
gram or curriculum that comes from the outside will not fit  
perfectly with every classroom in every school. Best practice is 
not exclusive to one approach. “If there were one best practice,” 

52   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
notes education professor Mark Dziedzic, “everyone would be 
using that program, and education would be fixed” (personal 
communication). This is probably why large-scale change has 
been such a challenge in education. There is no one-size-fits-all 
solution when implementing school-level initiatives for increasing 
student learning. Yet districts continue to push through expen-
sive and expansive programmatic initiatives that leave teachers 
and school leaders with less autonomy and fewer resources.
In these situations, teachers really have only one option—
make the best with what they do have, and get creative with how 
to acquire what they don’t. To start, teachers can take stock of 
available resources within their classroom and building. It might 
be surprising to discover what is hiding within unused spaces 
and storage bins. Talking to the most veteran staff members 
about what might be available can also be effective. For exam-
ple, at my former school, I was looking to purchase some staff 
development resources that addressed classroom management 
strategies. When I mentioned this offhandedly to our special 
education teacher, she asked, “Have you looked in the lockers by 
the second grade wing?” Sure enough, an entire library of manu-
als and videos were stacked in multiple lockers, collecting dust.
In creating a digital portfolio assessment system, teachers 
should also consider the access that’s already available. For exam-
ple, most students at the secondary level have fairly powerful com-
puters in their pockets, in the form of their smartphones. How can 
we teach them to use these mobile devices for capturing, reflect-
ing upon, and sharing their learning? By using this technology to 
promote metacognition and self-assessment, we model what it 
means to be a learner in today’s world. Students are making their 
work visible, which is possible within any curriculum mandate. 
They also see their smartphones and other digital devices as more 
than just a tool for communicating with peers.
At the elementary level, students need more direction and  
support when implementing a digital portfolio assessment pro­

Making a Case for Digital Portfolios   •   53
cess. What they do not necessarily need is more devices. In my 
previous school, we had four or five iPads in each of our K–3 
classrooms. Screen time at that level should be limited. Teach-
ers can write microgrants or request funding through web-
sites such as www.donorschoose.org to acquire resources and 
devices that provide access for students. If more devices are 
required to upload artifacts into portfolios, consider investing 
in a schoolwide cart of tablets or laptops.
Linked Activity: Assessment Audit
Consider all of the assessments that take place in your class-
room. List and place each assessment in one of three categories: 
formative, interim/benchmark, and summative. (See Figure 2.2.) 
Then circle the assessments that rely on quantitative (sym-
bolic) results to reveal student information, including grades, 
levels, and scores.
Figure 2.2
Three Types of Assessments
Formative
Interim/Benchmark
Summative

54   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
Once completed, analyze the table. Where is most of the 
assessment happening in your classroom? Why? How does this 
affect your instruction? This visual can serve as an assessment 
audit and help make the case for adding digital portfolios into 
your instructional toolbox so you can address the needs of the 
whole child.
Learner Profile: Karen Fadum
Karen Fadum is a helping teacher in British Columbia, 
Canada, who previously taught 1st and 2nd grade. It 
was during her time as a classroom teacher that Karen 
started using digital portfolios to capture student learn-
ing and communicate it with families.
Why did you introduce digital portfolio assessment in 
your classroom?
I started using FreshGrade because I was approached as one 
of eight teachers to pilot this tool, more as a digital gradebook. 
The portfolio part took off, and that was not expected. After 
the pilot was over, I continued using it but not because of the 
technology—I am more about the pedagogy.
Kids are often told that they are not capable of being in charge 
of their own learning. But they are really powerful little beings. 
Portfolios started to help me have more conversations with my 
students. This led to how we talked about our learning and them 
owning it. Pretty soon, they were telling me what they wanted to 
document: “What I think I just built is really a good example of my 
number sense.” The language in our classroom changed.
Once you start documenting students’ pathways toward 
their goals, it is hard to go back to the more traditional way of 
doing things. After the pilot, the district offered a choice in how 

Making a Case for Digital Portfolios   •   55
teachers could communicate learning with families. Many more 
teachers started using FreshGrade once it became an option.
In what way(s) were the effects of implementing digital 
portfolios in school unique or unusual?
My portfolio experience started with reading, both as a 
teacher and as a parent. Besides my classroom, watching my own 
children in school helped me rethink my assessment process. 
Knowing that each student is very different led me to believe 
that this type of assessment process—one that celebrated their 
strengths and looked at next steps—was much better for all 
students. Portfolios allow students to progress at their own rate 
instead of achieving a predetermined destination.
Allowing students to determine their own learning pathway 
through documentation, reflection, and goal setting helps stu-
dents at all levels. We purchased iPod Touches and then taught 
students how to capture and upload their learning artifacts. 
Having these small devices for little hands allowed them to be 
independent with this portfolio assessment process. When they 
select their best work from the past month or so to upload to 
their digital portfolios, they are reflecting on their learning and 
they don’t even know it.
How would you describe the characteristics of the prod-
ucts from the digital portfolio work and of the educa-
tors who were involved?
One characteristic of a successful digital implementation is 
that the technology needs to be easy to use yet robust enough 
to inform learning and future instruction. Another characteristic 
for successful digital implementation is working on these inno-
vative practices as a team. If a school is known for strong learn-
ing communities and stability, it tends to be selected by district 
administration for trying something new. We would have been 
considered “edge players” since we were connected educators 

56   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
who had led district initiatives before and had the confidence to 
explore new ideas.
What resources were used to support the use of digital 
portfolios?
A change we have noticed because of this innovation is how 
other schools are embracing these new practices. This has been 
greatly helped by the district’s decision to upgrade the curricu-
lum to a more competency-based format. Students have to show 
what they know and are able to do. Teachers started hearing 
about our work and reached out for more information. In addi-
tion, the district facilitated a website hub where teachers could 
post questions and ideas in online communities. We could reach 
out together through that forum and on social media. Also, hav-
ing a leader who’s available to support this initiative was critical 
in getting the ball rolling.
What specific outcomes do you attribute to the use of 
digital portfolios?
One of the bigger changes we observed is the level of engage-
ment boys had with books, especially at the elementary level. 
Allowing boys to show their learning in different ways values 
their learning preferences and allows them to share their under-
standing in different ways. This comes from the teacher knowing 
his or her students and using the digital tools to their advantage.
We saw a specific increase in reading confidence. Reading 
levels are not always accurate for younger students. When we 
were able to engage with them where they were and where 
they were going, they started to more regularly recognize their 
strengths—and not just in reading. For example, one of my for-
mer students who was pretty transient came to me without a lot 
of skills, either academically or socially. He was living with his 
grandmother, so she and I started a conversation about where 
to start. That is what we did; we highlighted that student’s ini-
tial successes and shared them with home. At the end of the 

Making a Case for Digital Portfolios   •   57
year, his grandmother commented about how much he grew 
over the year.
In your opinion, what other factors contributed to the 
achievement of these outcomes?
A critical factor contributing to the success of important 
student outcomes was the evidence-based assessment process. 
Kids need specific feedback about how they are doing as learn-
ers and what they need to work on for the future. Saying, “This 
is an A” does not tell them their strengths. When the teacher and 
student are able to show a progression of learning, starting with 
the learning intentions and criteria at the beginning of the year 
and setting the goals together, this is more effective.
Our portfolios are somewhat minimal. We are focused on 
quality versus quantity. How many writing samples would I need 
to show proficiency for this learning intention? More important, 
it’s about how much we are involving the kids in the assessment 
process. How do students perceive these quizzes and checks for 
understanding? If it is about getting good grades, then they are 
not focused on learning. This has been a real shift for students 
who have come from a more traditional learning environment.
The curriculum needs to be strengths-based and kid-friendly. 
In addition, teachers need to be intentional about setting those 
checkpoints of when to assess learning with each student. Add-
ing activities to the gradebook helps remind the teacher not to 
miss any regular portfolio conferences.
What problems did you encounter when developing or 
introducing digital portfolios?
A main problem is the actual technology, both in the wire-
less access and in the hardware. If it doesn’t work, then teachers 
are less likely to use it during instruction. Also, there has to be a 
purpose to the digital tools. We have to know why we are using 
it. You cannot just drop off technology into the classroom and 
expect these innovations to happen.

58   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
Related to this is the lack of knowledge about technology 
in general. People might not know there is a camera on a tablet 
or what the term web browser means. What we have done that 
has been effective is working with other innovative educators 
who are ready and willing to learn how to use the digital tools. 
They can then guide more resistant staff to embed technology 
in their instruction.
What else do you think a teacher or school should know 
before implementing digital portfolios?
We need to have lots of conversations about promoting digital 
citizenship. That means, for example, whether or not we need to 
post images of student faces or if we can highlight the learning 
with them included. A question that often comes up is “Can I post 
a picture of students if other families are going to see?” What we 
have pointed out is we are celebrating our students’ learning in 
the hallways, so doing so on the website is not a whole lot differ-
ent. Taking that approach of highlighting student successes has 
been helpful.
Parents and families also need to be educated about the 
history of grades, understand student privacy policies, and have 
their questions answered. If they understand that teachers will 
be using these new digital tools with intention, they seem to be 
very supportive. Explaining that mistakes will be made early on 
also gives everyone some latitude in trying it out and learning 
together. These initial conversations have led to rethinking grad-
ing and possibly not using traditional assessments. It is the cur-
riculum that drives the assessment—not the grades.

59 
3
Getting Started 
with Digital Portfolios
“Children must be taught how to think, not what to think.”
—Margaret Mead
This chapter offers one approach for how we can introduce digital 
portfolios into the classroom in a manner that does not require 
a significant shift in classroom instruction. Beyond the technol-
ogy, we are simply uploading a finished piece of student work 
that is accompanied by a reflection, self-assessment, and goal set-
ting. If you have ever posted an image or a video to social media, 
and then added a caption or message that relates to it, then you 
have all the technology training you need to get started with 
digital portfolios.
The focus of this chapter is on highlighting work that stu-
dents are already producing during the school year. Through 
this approach, we learn to appreciate the process of student learn-
ing along with the outcomes. Chapter 4 digs deeper into designing 
lessons, building a learning progression, and planning with the 
end in mind. In this chapter, we are looking to take that first step 
in integrating digital portfolios by celebrating student work in an 
online forum.

60   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
Develop a Yearlong Plan for Instruction
A yearlong plan of instruction is a flexible projection of concepts, 
knowledge, and skills to be taught and learned. This plan is bro-
ken up into discrete units of study, and each unit is generally 
four to eight weeks long, depending on students’ developmental 
levels. It is not a prescriptive approach for teaching. Rather, it 
provides grade levels or departments with an overview of what 
to prepare for when teaching. In short, we are not trying to cover 
it all as much as we are guiding students to uncover the big ideas  
to be learned.
The following steps provide a roadmap for preparing instruc-
tion from September to May. This approach is adapted from a blog 
post written by Elizabeth Moore (2015).
Step 1:  Determine the planning time and discipline for a year-
long plan for instruction.
Step 2:  Bring in assessment data, including samples of stu-
dent work, to identify strengths and areas for growth within 
the discipline of focus.
Step 3:  Determine a digital portfolio tool with which to post 
student work.
Step 4:  Schedule publishing dates on which performance tasks 
will be uploaded to students’ digital portfolios, along with 
reflections, self-assessment, and goal setting.
A template for preparing a yearlong plan for instruction 
is provided in Appendix B. It is recommended that teachers do 
this work together before the school year starts. It can be espe-
cially beneficial when teachers from different grade levels or 
departments get together for this work. As Moore notes, “When 
you look at how kids in your own classroom have grown, [you 
can] compare with your colleagues to decide what makes sense 
for next year” (2015, para. 8). Housing student work in digital 
portfolios over time makes student growth visible for everyone 
involved in the learning.

Getting Started with Digital Portfolios   •   61
Step 1
Determine the planning time and the discipline for a 
yearlong plan for instruction. When getting started with dig-
ital portfolios, developing a plan for instruction should start 
with an overview of one year’s worth of teaching. This work can 
take place during the summer, preferably in June just after the 
school year has ended. Student assessment results are readily 
available and fresh in our mind. Getting this work completed ear-
lier in the summer gives us the rest of our time away to recharge. 
We can also share out the draft with faculty and colleagues—
many of whom will likely have lots of suggestions before Sep-
tember arrives.
The easiest way to begin the task of drafting a yearlong plan 
for instruction is by focusing on one discipline. My personal 
suggestion is to focus on literacy for this work. Reading, writing, 
speaking, and listening are typically the hardest areas to assess 
with traditional tools such as grades and scores. Integrating 
digital portfolios and literacy, with their ability to capture 
student learning in an authentic context, makes for a natural 
combination. If classroom time is a challenge for implementa-
tion, consider incorporating literacy with the content areas of 
science and/or social studies. Math and the arts also work well 
with digital portfolios, provided educators are not overloading 
students and staff with too many technology initiatives. If we 
try to assess everything with digital portfolios, then these tools 
become unwieldy and may be at risk of collapsing under their 
own weight.
The template for drafting a yearlong plan for instruction can 
be as simple or as complex as we want it to be. It all depends 
on the resources available and on which form of instruction is 
used. If a school has a selected (commercial) program, then it 
becomes a matter of placing the prescribed units in a preferred 
order, or at least outlining the scope and sequence. If a teacher 
or team does not use predeveloped units of study, then the 

62   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
process can be an opportunity to develop curriculum from the 
ground up.
Including students’ interests and needs, along with the pride 
of creating robust instructional opportunities, are benefits of 
this approach. The challenges of building a yearlong plan for 
instruction in this way include the time required and a possi-
ble lack of professional resources available for this work. (See 
Chapter 4 for more guidance on locally developed curriculum.)  
Whatever approach you take, keep in mind that curriculum 
should closely resemble the learning that happens in real life 
to ensure relevance in the tasks.
Step 2
Bring in assessment data, including samples of student 
work, to identify strengths and areas for growth within the 
discipline of focus. Whether the yearlong plan for instruction 
is based on commercial resources or is developed locally, it 
should be aligned with students’ strengths and needs in mind.
Standardized tests, screener scores, and benchmark data 
are helpful in identifying larger trends in student achievement, 
yet they don’t allow teachers to really glean specific areas of 
knowledge or skills in which students might be struggling or 
excelling. This is important. If students are showing mastery in a 
certain area of instruction, why would teachers spend six weeks  
teaching a unit on that topic? A more cursory overview of this 
part of the curriculum might be all that is needed. Likewise, 
students who are not showing strong gains in a particular area 
would benefit from more instruction.
I recommend keeping in mind the following three data points 
when planning for yearlong instruction.
1.	 Classroom Formative Assessment: These measures of learn-
ing include checks for understanding through short-answer 
responses, teachers’ observational notes, and anecdotal 
records during individual and small-group conferences. 

Getting Started with Digital Portfolios   •   63
These data drive day-to-day instruction. Housed in a digital 
format (preferably), they can be retrieved and studied when 
planning future instruction.
2.	Samples of Student Work: This can include a variety of 
examples of what students produced during the school year. 
Though it might be time intensive to look at student work 
versus analyzing quantitative results, this practice guides 
teachers to view students beyond a score. Using this more 
authentic approach, “student work has become the center 
of education, [offering] an undistorted image of student 
effort and achievement” (Evans, 1993, p. 71).
3.	Teacher and Student Surveys: How students view their 
learning experiences in the classroom can have a positive 
impact on future instruction. Teacher surveys can reveal how  
students feel about learning in general, whereas student 
surveys typically focus on a learner’s disposition toward a 
specific discipline. As an example, Figure 3.1 shows a sam-
ple reading engagement survey for early readers (Marinak, 
Malloy, Gambrell, & Mazzoni, 2015).
All of this information should serve as a guide for the type 
of learning in which students will engage during the school year. 
Determining what is essential for students to know, be able to 
do, and feel about learning helps teachers ensure the technology 
integration supports the learning experience.
Step 3
Determine a digital portfolio tool with which to post stu-
dent work. Once a teacher or a team has devoted time to select-
ing a discipline in which to integrate digital portfolios—and has 
evaluated students’ strengths and needs in this area through 
assessment results—the technology for housing and sharing 
student work can be selected. Saving this step until we have 
a purpose for the tool is important. It ensures that pedagogy 
is a priority.

64   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
When first selecting technology for digital portfolios, teach-
ers should determine what will best share and celebrate their 
students’ work. If the focus is on writing, for example, will a blog 
or a website be the most conducive to collecting and commu-
nicating their learning? Does the technology allow for this with 
ease? It’s also important to remember that any artifact of learn-
ing should be accompanied by reflection, self-assessment, and 
goal setting. In addition, consideration needs to be given to how 
the tool allows for students to upload and embed audio, images, 
and/or video, either for reflection or for the final product itself.
With that in mind, let’s now look at three different types of 
technologies for celebrating students’ best work. As already 
shared, performance portfolios are repositories of artifacts 
Figure 3.1
Reading Engagement Survey
Name: 
Date: 
My Reading Profile
Teacher: 
What grade are you in?
2.
First grade
3.
Second grade
I am a _____. 
2.
girl
Do you like to read books all by yourself? 
1.
Kindergarten
1.
boy
1.
Yes.
2.
It’s OK.
3.
No.

Getting Started with Digital Portfolios   •   65
and reflections of students’ best work. They are summative in 
nature and serve as a permanent digital presence of students’ 
mastery over time. These three tools are ideal for performance 
portfolios:
•	 Blogs
•	 Dedicated Portfolio Applications
•	 Websites
They are listed in alphabetical order since the effectiveness 
of any one tool is dependent on the context for learning. The 
technology must fit the pedagogy, and pedagogy is heavily influ-
enced by the type of learning in which students are asked to 
engage within their community and culture. I can’t recommend 
one tool over another, but I can provide a description of each, 
along with the pros and cons of the three technologies.
Blogs
When blogs first started appearing, their original purpose was 
(and largely still is) to provide an online space where anyone can 
publish their work. Blogging was one of the first forms of digital 
media that allowed for two-way communication between content 
provider and audience. It leveled the playing field in terms of who 
could be considered an “expert.”
Today, it’s never been easier to start blogging with multiple 
forms of media, including video, images, and audio embedded 
within the text of a post. If a teacher decides to use a blog as a 
tool for digital portfolios, students will have the opportunity not 
only to collect, curate, and reflect on their schoolwork but also 
to engage in an authentic experience as a digital citizen. Students 
are forced to ask themselves, “Who might read this? Should I 
allow for comments? How do I promote my work with a broader 
audience?” These types of questions come up as students con-
sider the authenticity of the activity and the seriousness of dis-
playing their work for all to see.

66   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
So what does this mean for students’ digital portfolios? For 
young students, blogging tools including Kidblog and Edublogs are 
good choices. For older students, Wordpress has the most robust 
features, is easy to use and write with, includes countless opportu-
nities to individualize and customize one’s site, and is free to use. 
Blogger, a Google product, is also readily used.
Blogs have features that allow users to organize their work, 
a prerequisite for digital portfolios.
• Blogging: The actual publishing that takes place happens 
within the writing tool of the blog. These published pieces 
are called posts and are the centerpiece of the blog. Writers  
can share their current thinking and update readers on 
projects.
• Pages: Bloggers can build as many pages as they want, along 
with subpages under each page. Pages can have many pur-
poses, such as links to prior work, a short biography of the 
user, or a list of awards and recognitions.
• Categories and tags: When writing a post, users can cate-
gorize the post and add tags. Categories within the content 
of digital portfolios could include standards addressed or 
type of learning shared, such as “work in progress” or “final  
product.” Tags are the main terms that are associated with 
a post. If the user posts a science report on the environ-
ment, for example, tags might include climate change or 
life cycle.
• Comments: The comments feature is usually located at the 
end of a post or page. The choice is up to the teacher and/or 
students whether they want to allow for others to comment 
on their posts. Benefits include providing and receiving feed-
back from others and developing an active audience. Chal-
lenges include depending on comments for feedback and  
possibly receiving negative responses (although the teacher 
can choose to monitor submitted comments and approve 
them before they appear online).

Getting Started with Digital Portfolios   •   67
There are many more components to blogging beyond this 
basic list. For instance, users can monitor blog statistics to see 
the number of views and how many times their posts were 
shared on social media. These features should be reserved for 
more advanced blogs or for students at the secondary level. 
Overall, blogs might be the easiest digital portfolio for students 
to use in a classroom, at least when looking to get started in the 
process.
Dedicated Portfolio Applications
Dedicated portfolio applications are programs specifically 
built for documenting and sharing evidence of student growth 
and best work. They include multiple ways for teachers and stu-
dents to capture learning and reflect on their work. For example, 
FreshGrade (www.freshgrade.com) is a web-based portfolio tool. 
FreshGrade allows teachers to upload lesson plans, link teaching 
resources, and select which types of assessments will be used to 
document and evaluate student learning. The software includes 
many options for the type of assessment to be used, including 
letter grades, total points, mastery, and anecdotal. Authentic arti-
facts of learning, such as video, audio, images, and text, can be 
uploaded from any device with an Internet connection, through 
either the teacher app or a web browser.
In full disclosure, we used FreshGrade in my previous school 
to communicate learning between home and school. We heard 
overwhelmingly positive responses from parents. I’ve also 
engaged in some work with FreshGrade, including writing, speak-
ing, and training on their behalf. That said, I know that many 
educators utilize other tools, such as Seesaw (web.seesaw.me), 
for their digital portfolios. Seesaw is free to use for individual 
teachers. It allows students to capture their learning and share 
it with families through a web browser or dedicated app.
What FreshGrade, Seesaw, and other dedicated portfolio 
applications seem to have in common are two features. First, 

68   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
there is a mobile application for capturing and sharing student 
learning. Typically, there are different app versions for teach-
ers, parents, and students. Notifications appear on your mobile 
device when a student artifact has been uploaded into the port-
folio. The advantage here is how quickly family members can be 
informed by their smartphone or tablet. Second, these platforms 
do a remarkable job helping teachers monitor student mastery 
and growth. Apps such as FreshGrade and Seesaw give teachers 
choice in how learning will be measured, from traditional grades 
to competencies (actions and behaviors of students that are 
indicative of success in school).
Websites
Websites have some of the flavor of the first two portfolio 
tools in that students and teachers can differentiate the types 
of learning artifacts they display online. Learners can keep a log 
of their academic experiences alongside their more permanent 
pieces of work. I’ve found that the most commonly used website 
tool for digital portfolios is Google Sites (sites.google.com), which 
is also part of Google’s larger G Suite for Education family of ser-
vices (formerly known as Google Apps for Education). Before 
getting started, a template has to be selected. There is a wide 
range of designs among the choices offered, but students should 
be guided to select a relatively minimal template. This allows 
their work to be the focus, rather than the site itself.
Once students have selected a template, they can take one 
of two approaches as they get started with their digital port-
folios. The first (and probably easier) approach is to create 
pages within Google Sites that are based on subject areas or 
disciplines. This might include mathematics, reading, writing, 
science, social studies, or any other relevant subject areas, such 
as physical education, art, and music. Each page is then ded-
icated to posting and reflecting on the artifacts selected from 

Getting Started with Digital Portfolios   •   69
within that area. The second approach is to take a more specific 
focus on how artifacts are shared within the digital portfolio. It 
can be focused on the anchor standards of one discipline—say, 
writing. Website portfolios might also document students’ pur-
suits of lifelong skills, such as “Design an Experiment,” “Create 
Something Original,” or “Build a Model.” This is a more complex 
approach, yet it might offer greater rewards in the type of learn-
ing valued.
If a district uses the G Suite for Education, then it makes a lot 
of sense to utilize Google Sites for digital portfolios. First, stu-
dents can take learning artifacts they’ve already developed and 
stored on Google Drive and embed them into appropriate pages. 
Slides, documents, and graphs are easy to select and insert into 
a dedicated Google Site. There are also other ways to document 
performance tasks, such as through an original video posted to 
YouTube or a personalized map created with Google Maps. The 
integration of these applications naturally lends itself to using 
Google Sites as a performance portfolio.
That said, Weebly (www.weebly.com) is also a powerful tool  
for leveraging technology to authentically assess student learn-
ing. This is the digital space that John Spencer used with his 
students. Weebly has much of the same functionality as Google 
Sites. Students can embed audio, video, images, and text within 
dedicated pages in their digital portfolios. For example, students 
can drag a photo or image right from their computer desktop 
into their portfolio. If your district isn’t already taking advan-
tage of the Google ecosystem, then Weebly might be an option 
to consider.
The biggest advantage to using a website versus a blog or 
dedicated portfolio application for housing digital portfolios is 
that it can stay with students beyond their K–12 career. Whether 
you use Google Sites or Weebly (or something else), students’ 
learning artifacts and reflections have a permanent space for as 
long as they want. With a bit more polishing and updating, they 

70   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
can become professional portfolios. Using a website for portfo-
lio assessment also gives students an immediate and positive 
digital footprint.
Using a website for housing students’ digital portfolios is only 
as effective as how well teachers guide their students to select 
important work, reflect on their learning, and set goals for future 
studies. With that in mind, use the chart in Figure 3.2 to help 
make a decision as a school or district team about which tool is 
the best fit for your students, faculty, and families. There is no 
perfect technology here, so educators should select the tool that 
meets their learners’ needs.
Step 4
Schedule publishing dates on which performance tasks will 
be uploaded to students’ digital portfolios, along with reflec-
tions, self-assessment, and goal setting. This is the most straight-
forward part of the process. Teachers select one-week windows 
during which students will publish a piece of their work in their 
portfolios. When we put these dates on the calendar—and share 
the dates with students, families, and colleagues—we help ensure 
that we will follow through on these actions.
Publishing student work within prescribed windows during 
the school year can work one of two ways. One option is to allow 
students to select their best work from a collection of pieces. 
This approach might work best in the literacy classroom, such as  
reading/writing workshop. Janice and Calleigh provide an example 
of this approach at the beginning of this book. The other approach 
is to plan for predetermined products students will produce at the 
end of each unit of instruction. These performance tasks can still 
offer students choice and voice, such as in how they will present 
their knowledge and skills. All subject areas, especially those with 
prescribed programs, would align well with this approach. The 
upcoming vignette of a 3rd grade teacher, Dani, using Book Creator 
for a social studies project offers one example.

Getting Started with Digital Portfolios   •   71
Figure 3.2
Portfolio Application Comparisons
Technology
Advantages
Disadvantages
Blog  
(e.g., Kidblog, 
Edublogs)
•  A common tool used 
by many people 
around the world.
•  Allows for a wide 
audience to view 
and comment on 
student work.
•  Lends itself well to 
chronicling student 
learning, especially 
writing.
•  Harder to organize and 
view learning artifacts; 
must use tags or  
categories.
•  Involves possibly too 
much visibility for 
students, especially 
younger ones.
•  Tools used are not read-
ily transferrable beyond 
K–12.
Dedicated 
Portfolio 
Application 
(e.g.,Fresh-
Grade,  
Seesaw)
•  Easiest to use of all 
portfolio assess-
ment tools.
•  Social media design 
engages parents via 
mobile devices.
•  Strong security 
measures to ensure 
student privacy.
•  With ease of use, 
students may not be 
learning essential digital 
skills.
•  Student learning entries 
can become lost in all 
of the posts.
•  Dedicated portfolio 
applications have  
limited life beyond 
K–12.
Website 
(e.g., Google 
Sites,  
Weebly)
•  Most relevant digital 
presence a student 
can have in the 
future.
•  Students learn the 
ins and outs of 
maintaining a  
digital presence.
•  Integration with 
other applications 
can be beneficial.
•  Learning curve with 
maintaining a website.
•  Harder to communicate 
learning artifacts with 
families (versus blogs or 
apps).
•  Not necessarily built 
with education in mind.

72   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
Figure 3.3
OWN Protocol
Observe: Take a step back from the work, and notice and name qualities of 
student work.
Possible prompts for reflection:
• Why are you including this piece in your portfolio?
• What makes it stand out among your body of work?
• To what extent does this work best represent your understanding?
Goals: affirmation and celebration
Wonder:  Take a closer look at student work with a constructive and  
critical eye.
Possible prompts for self-assessment:
• What might a friend or classmate say about this work?
• How does this work compare to the previous pieces you included?
• If you had to change one part of this piece, what would it be? Why?
Goals: self-critique and deeper understanding
Next Steps:  Take a look forward in order to build on current knowledge, 
and set goals for the future.
Possible prompts for goal setting:
• In what area(s) do want to improve?
• How will you grow as a learner?
• What do you need to continue learning in this area?
Goals: habit building and appreciation for lifelong learning
Whichever approach is used, reflection, self-assessment, and 
goal setting is an essential part of the publishing process with 
digital portfolios. Without it, we are merely posting student 
work online. That’s great for communicating with families, but it 
probably won’t make an impact on student learning. It is helpful 
to have protocols for this type of work. Protocols help stream-
line the assessment process and allow students and teachers to 
focus on the work and themselves as learners. I developed one 
protocol, OWN (Observe, Wonder, and Next Steps), as a way to 
complete this work (Figure 3.3). Each step corresponds with 

Getting Started with Digital Portfolios   •   73
reflection, self-assessment, and goal setting, respectively. The 
metacognition facilitated through the OWN protocol is critical 
for making this a deeper learning experience. We value the pro-
cess of learning—and so do students.
Janice and Calleigh’s conference followed this process some-
what. Younger students are going to need more modeling and 
guidance with reflection, self-assessment, and goal setting. 
Shared demonstrations, with one student sitting with the teacher 
in front of the class as they conduct a public conference, is an 
effective way to model this process. By contrast, older students 
should be able to take the reins of this process. They can have 
access to this protocol and respond to it through audio, video, or 
in writing to provide context for the associated piece of work. It 
bears repeating: all students should be submitting some form of 
reflection, self-assessment, and/or goal setting that is attached to 
the work being uploaded. It can be in any media, but should give 
context and meaning to the work students are sharing.
Figure 3.4 illustrates a general progression a classroom may 
take in terms of releasing the responsibility of who is facilitating 
the reflection, self-assessment, and goal setting during a portfolio 
assessment window. There is no right way to do this. The goal is 
on guiding students to achieve independence.
Four Shifts to Anticipate  
When Implementing Digital Portfolios
As educators get started with this work, it is worth noting that 
this is a change in how we do business. Many teachers say they 
are “doing” digital portfolios, but more often than not, they are 
merely capturing and sharing student activities with families 
online. There’s nothing wrong with this, but we also shouldn’t 
kid ourselves into thinking that this is portfolio assessment. A 
teacher should experience some level of challenge with imple-
menting digital portfolios in their classrooms. With that, the next 

74   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
part explores four shifts to anticipate when implementing digital 
portfolios within the classroom.
Shift #1: Making Mistakes Publicly
Using technology in classrooms is challenging enough on its 
own. Mobile devices demand a strong wireless connection, long 
battery life, and properly working hardware and software. High-
lighting student learning via digital portfolios raises the expec-
tations for using technology, at least if it is done with intention. 
The assessment process is not as easy as taking a weekly trip 
to the computer lab and having students play an online game or 
respond to a prompt on their blogs.
When we throw more variables into the teaching equation, 
mistakes are bound to happen. This is not a judgment of the qual-
Figure 3.4
Releasing Responsibility for Portfolio Assessment
Spring
Winter
Fall
A Year at a Glance
modeling and 
shared 
demonstration 
of portfolio
process
guided practice with 
portfolio process 
(including peers and 
older/younger 
students)
student-led 
conferences for 
family
members on 
Portfolio Night 

Getting Started with Digital Portfolios   •   75
ity of teaching. Rather, the capacities of today’s technology have 
yet to meet the expectations and demands of today’s classroom. 
It will get there. In the meantime, teachers should be ready for 
things to not always go as we might hope.
Having a solid lesson plan when modeling technology use 
for students is critical. Specifically, it’s important to have a list 
of steps for creating digital content and a plan for capturing and 
communicating this learning online. Having these procedures in 
place helps teachers mentally prepare and anticipate any prob-
lems in the process. Developing a comprehensive lesson plan 
when first introducing technology to students also gives teach-
ers the opportunity to identify how they will gradually release 
responsibility for the activity to students.
Regie Routman (in press) offers a helpful visual, called The 
Optimal Learning Model (Figure 3.5), for teachers to guide stu-
dents to become independent learners and thinkers.
As noted, teachers should start with modeling and then 
quickly bring in students to help demonstrate the work. In addi-
tion, teachers should be encouraged to have a backup plan if the 
technology goes awry. For example, reflection can be taught with 
or without technology. Educators should not let the digital tools 
get in the way of the learning outcomes. It should be conveyed  
to students that mistakes will happen, and that is okay. Learning 
without errors isn’t really learning anyway.
Eventually, those who are most involved in the process—
teachers and students—have to be active participants. They 
should be the leaders of their own learning.
Example of Practice: Modeling Technology in the Class-
room. Dani, a 3rd grade teacher, wants her students to go beyond 
the traditional informational report for their world geography 
unit. Their past performance tasks were fine, yet they did not 
align with how information is conveyed in the 21st century. Spe-
cifically, audio, video, and images are primary tools for commu-
nicating information in today’s connected world. As such, Dani 

76   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
feels that her students are ready to incorporate these types of 
media with their informational reports.
With advice from a colleague, she decides to use Book Cre-
ator (http://bookcreator.com/) for this performance task. Book 
Creator is an application that allows students to create digital 
books that include images, drawings, audio, and text. These texts 
can then be uploaded to YouTube, exported into iBooks, or saved 
as a PDF file if audio is not necessary.
Dani has access to a cart of iPads for this work. She takes one 
of the iPads home with her to try creating a multimedia text. This 
time devoted to using the technology helps her develop a compre-
hensive lesson plan (Figure 3.6). Dani also incorporates student 
Figure 3.5
The Optimal Learning Model
Celebration and Review
Independent Practice
leading to self-determining
learners
Guided Practice
with supportive, actionable feedback
Demonstration/Explanation
of concepts, processes, texts, tasks
Continuous Assessing 
and Adjusting 
Throughout Process
Emphasis on Self-
Checking and Learners 
Becoming Independent
Shared Experiences
“Hand Holding”
• Trying it out together
• Sharing ideas and asking
   questions
• Scaffolding conversations
• Charting what was
   demonstrated/explained
Noticing and Naming
Learner’s Strengths,
Efforts, and Next Steps
Source: From Literacy Essentials: Engagement, Excellence, and Equity for ALL Learners, by R. Routman, in press. 
Copyright © 2017 by Stenhouse. Used with permission.

Getting Started with Digital Portfolios   •   77
Daily Lesson Plan
Teacher: Dani	
School: Howard Elementary	
Date: 1/17/17
Lesson: Introducing Book Creator	
Grade: 3	
Time: 1 hour
Objectives: To understand tools available for creating original digital  
content for world geography report.
Skills: (from 1d: ISTE Student Standards)
• Understand the fundamental concepts of technology operations.
• Demonstrate the ability to choose, use, and troubleshoot current  
technologies.
• Transfer knowledge to explore emerging technologies.
Materials: iPad; Book Creator app; Reflector mirroring app
Instructions:
1.	 Explain that students will create an original digital book about a 
country of their choice using Book Creator.
2.	 Display iPad screen on whiteboard, and model for students how to 
open up Book Creator and use basic tools.
3.	 Pair up students and distribute iPads for partners to explore.
4.	 After a short time exploring, have a student come up to front. 
Together, develop a short story that incorporates all four types of 
media (image, audio, drawing, and text).
5.	 Have partners work together to create their own original story.
6.	 At the end of the lesson, have a few groups mirror their iPads to share 
their stories with the class.
Evaluation: By the end of the lesson, all students should be able to create 
an original story that incorporates all four types of media.
Figure 3.6
Book Creator Lesson Plan
standards from the International Society of Technology in Edu-
cation (ISTE). The standards are designed to empower student 
voice and ensure that learning is a student-driven process (2017).
To ensure that she gives students an opportunity to take the 
lead in this learning, Dani allocates the majority of her lesson plan 
time to have students explore this tool. During the beginning  

78   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
of the lesson, however, the technology that allows her to mirror 
her iPad screen to the projector and whiteboard doesn’t work. 
Fortunately, Dani has confidence in using the tool and doesn’t 
panic. After realizing that she needs to have her iPad on the same 
wireless frequency as the mirroring software, her iPad screen 
pops up on the whiteboard. Students are involved in the activity 
throughout the lesson, thanks to the shared demonstration and 
guided practice. The assessment at the end of the lesson gives 
Dani concrete evidence of whether her students are ready for the 
next step of the project.
Shift #2: Changing How We Teach
No amount of technology will affect student learning and 
achievement unless teachers change their practice. In fact, the 
introduction of technology into a classroom not currently experi-
encing success with student learning might actually make things 
worse. According to a survey at my prior school, we experienced 
only small improvements in student learning outcomes. Class-
rooms were using technology largely for consumption, with few 
opportunities for students to create original content. This was 
despite an abundance of available digital devices, including tab-
lets and laptops.
When implementing digital portfolios and related technolo-
gies, we should expect complex work. What seems like a simple 
act—documenting and reflecting on student learning over time—
introduces more variables into the teaching equation than we 
might anticipate. For example, when we record a student reading 
aloud and reflecting on his or her own writing, what are we now 
unable to do as a teacher? The use of digital tools to capture and 
share our best work and progress over time changes what we 
prioritize as teachers. There is only so much time in the school 
day. Maybe what gets cast by the wayside should have happened 
sooner. For instance, some worksheets and low-cognitive-level 
activities would be pushed out of instructional time.

Getting Started with Digital Portfolios   •   79
These instructional changes may also influence the physical 
design of the classroom. If authentic practices such as multimedia 
creations and digital portfolios become a major part of this pro-
cess, how we as teachers set up the learning space needs to allow 
for this to take place. For example, a teacher could create a port-
folio booth, in which students can scan a QR code to call up their 
digital portfolio application on a tablet and take a picture of their 
finished work. The teacher would also expect students to write or 
record a reflection and self-assessment of their final product as 
they upload the image to their digital portfolio. He or she would 
provide an assessment protocol at the booth.
Example of Practice: Developing a Rubric with Students. In 
Dani’s 3rd grade classroom, pairs of students are busy collect-
ing information about a country they selected from a choice of 
four. They are using both print and online resources to engage 
in this research. As Dani walks around observing her students, 
she notices that information being gathered is pretty basic: pop-
ulation, the country’s flag, and location on a map are the most 
common.
She wants her students to go deeper. By understanding other 
cultures, we come to understand our own a little bit better. This 
results in an increased appreciation for the world in which we 
live—a critical competency for globally connected citizens. Dani 
decides to guide students in developing a rubric that reflects 
this deeper understanding about their chosen countries. Using 
the essential questions of the unit—“What can we learn about 
other countries and cultures?” and “Why is understanding our 
global neighbors important?”—she and her students brainstorm 
a list of criteria for an excellent digital book (Figure 3.7).
This process takes longer than just handing students a pre-
made, teacher-designed rubric. Time spent codeveloping the 
expectations means less time for other classroom activities. 
However, the conversation they have about the expectations is 
lively and smart. For example, when Dani asks the class, “When 

80   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
Student’s Name:	
Teacher’s Name:
Country Report/Digital Book
Content
Advanced
Proficient
Basic
Minimal
Notes:
• Information is accurate and based on multiple sources.
□
□
□
□
• Information is interesting.
□
□
□
□
• Details help audience appreciate culture.
□
□
□
□
• Digital book helps audience better understand home country.
□
□
□
□
Digital Integration
• Audio, images, drawings,  and text are included.
□
□
□
□
• Original music from country is incorporated.
□
□
□
□
• Audience can interact with text (e.g., press audio button to play narration).
□
□
□
□
Delivery
• Students clearly explain process for developing digital book.
□
□
□
□
• Audio, images, and drawings support understanding of text.
□
□
□
□
• Digital book is accessible for a variety of audiences.
□
□
□
□
• Students understand benefits of using multimedia with writing.
□
□
□
□
Figure 3.7
Book Creator Rubric

Getting Started with Digital Portfolios   •   81
you state, ‘The information is interesting,’ what do you mean by 
interesting?” Students offer a variety of responses:
•	 “It makes me want to read more about the country.”
•	 “Because I read that book, I might want to visit that place.”
•	 “The book made me laugh; I had fun reading it.”
“Is that okay?” Dani thinks aloud. “Should reading an infor-
mational text be fun?” They consider some of the nonfiction books 
they read consistently. A number of them take an unusual, some-
times even humorous, stance to a piece of history or geography. 
For example, the You Wouldn’t Want to Be a . . . series provides 
information about people and cultures from our past through 
the hardships they encountered and why we are fortunate to 
be alive in today’s world. With this knowledge in mind, the class 
decides to keep interesting in the rubric but flesh it out with 
specific indicators. Dani also makes a mental note to bring more 
high-interest informative texts in the classroom so students can 
continue to immerse themselves in the genre. A goal is for stu-
dents to translate this genre of reading to their digital writing.
Shift #3: Handing Over More Responsibility to Students
Digital portfolios provide a better way not only to document 
and share student learning but also to own it. Like a stamp or 
baseball card collection, kids can and will ruminate over what 
they have curated with a specific purpose. What students 
keep, what they discard, and what they want to showcase to 
the world—and why—are at the heart of portfolio assessment. 
Teachers should provide the time, resources, and guidance for 
students to engage in this deep process in order to become 
more self-directed learners.
As students start to become the lead assessors of their own 
learning, we release a part of a role that has long resided with 
the teacher. This is not an easy process. Whether we feel like 
students won’t learn without our direction or that the classroom 

82   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
will become a bit messier than we are used to, these feelings are 
warranted. Our practices are personal; we are who we become 
in education.
The benefits of releasing to students more of the responsibility 
of assessment outweighs the costs. Students become invested in 
the outcomes of their own learning and take pride in the jour-
ney they took to get to a point of success. When they start to 
own their learning, they are more motivated to do it right and to 
do it well. This typically leads to increased achievement. Once 
we witness the joy that students and families experience when 
they are engaged in portfolio assessment with digital tools, the 
shift feels worth it.
Example of Practice: Showcasing Student Work in Digital 
Portfolios. Students have already storyboarded their writing and 
found images related to their country of choice. They are now 
ready to pull this all together as a digital text within Book Creator. 
Dani hands out the iPads and lets them go. She walks around the 
classroom, quietly noticing the pairs at work. Because they devel-
oped the rubric together and discussed as a class what a success-
ful project might resemble, Dani is pleased to find that she doesn’t 
need to remind her students to avoid spending too much time on 
the nonessential aspects of what Book Creator has to offer.
In a few situations, students have to be encouraged to do the 
best they can and not worry too much about making it perfect. 
One pair is trying to capture the best audio narration possible. 
They record their voices for one page of text, play it back, decide 
it’s not to their satisfaction, delete the recording, and try again. 
After the fourth try, Dani directs the two students to look back 
at the rubric they created together: How important is the audio 
recording to the entire project? After a short reflection through 
discussion, they decide to move forward.
After a couple class periods working on this project, stu-
dents are feeling good about the digital books they are creating. 
Once they agree that the project is ready for publication, Dani 

Getting Started with Digital Portfolios   •   83
helps each pair upload their work to YouTube. This allows their 
books to be “watched” along with their narration, images, draw-
ings, and text. The YouTube link is then pasted into the students’ 
digital portfolios where they add reflection, self-assessment, and 
goal setting to their linked work. Their parents receive a noti-
fication on their smartphones or tablets to view the content at 
their leisure.
Shift #4: Working More Collaboratively with Colleagues
We cannot expect to change assessment practices and then 
not subsequently change instruction. When the definition of suc-
cess takes on a new meaning, and students are no longer defined 
solely by a test score or grade, multiple avenues toward excel-
lence are also created. Our job as a teacher transforms into a 
knowledgeable, student-centered coach who can guide each 
student toward collaboratively determined goals along a more 
personalized pathway.
As these changes in practice become visible for students, 
they also become visible to our colleagues. They start to notice 
the difference—especially in their conversations with students, 
peers, and parents.
“Did you see the project we finished in class?” says a student.
“I was impressed with how the students did on this task and 
their enthusiasm for posting it online,” comments a teacher.
“Wow, I love how I can see my son’s work in real time!” shares 
a parent.
Responses by colleagues usually fall into one of two camps: 
concern or interest. The concerned colleague—one who ques-
tions the use of digital portfolios with students—might be a 
manifestation of the school’s current culture. The phrase “That 
is not how we’ve done things in the past” reflects the beliefs of a 
teacher who does not value risk taking or innovation. It reveals 
an aversion to anything different. This type of educator values 
the status quo, which is a safe place to be but rarely benefits 

84   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
students. Seeking better practices is a threat to this type of 
educator. The best response to concerned colleagues is to listen, 
thank them for expressing their thinking, and continue to engage 
in this authentic form of assessment for students. Continued 
comments that discourage innovation should be directed to the 
building principal, who should be supportive and protective of 
this important work.
Conversely, interested colleagues seek understanding. They 
see the enthusiasm displayed by students, their family members, 
and the innovative teacher—and they want to learn more. These 
educators embody the concept of professionalism: one who con-
tinuously seeks better ways to improve their practice, because 
it is about the student. Teachers need to connect with these col-
leagues and engage in common assessment practices. Working 
in isolation—without a coalition of support—while developing  
digital portfolios can pose problems. Through this collective 
work, teams of teachers can redefine the culture of a building 
as an institution of learning.
Working more collaboratively with colleagues also provides 
accountability. When we change the way we teach, there is a period  
of time when what we’re doing doesn’t feel natural or comfortable. 
The temptation to revert to simpler practices is strong. That is 
why having a team involved in the process is important. Portfolio 
windows are set with colleagues for uploading, reflecting, and 
sharing student work. Dates are selected in which said work will 
be discussed with teams to find patterns and trends regarding 
students’ strengths and areas for growth. Having this positive 
peer pressure makes the implementation of portfolio assessment 
a more likely reality.
Example of Practice: Collaborating on an Integrated Unit of 
Study. The country project now completed, Dani can’t help but 
share the results with another grade-level teacher.
“I’ve never seen the students more engaged in their work! 
They were so diligent about creating the best digital book for this 
unit. I don’t know if it was using Book Creator as a way for them 

Getting Started with Digital Portfolios   •   85
to represent their learning, or if it was knowing that their work 
would be shared online with their families through their digital  
portfolios. Maybe it was both? The families left lots of positive 
comments on their work in their portfolios.” The other teacher is 
already aware of the project, having brought her students in to 
watch Dani’s students present their projects. She has been sup-
portive of her work the entire time.
The music teacher, John, overhears their conversation. His 
interest is piqued by Dani’s enthusiasm, and John informs her 
that he is looking for better ways to incorporate culturally diverse 
music in his classroom.
“Next year, what if we collaborate on this world geography 
project? The music they learn would connect with the four coun-
tries they research.” Excited about the connections students 
could make between social studies and music, they agree to 
move forward with this plan. In their combined approach, stu-
dents would still present reports to their classmates and upload 
them into their digital portfolios, but John would also upload 
video of students performing dance demonstrations represen-
tative of their countries. Authentic instruments and accurate 
language would be incorporated into their performances. Ulti-
mately, students and families could experience documentation 
of this connected learning experience all in one digital space.
Conclusion
With digital portfolios in the classroom, the outcomes of instruc-
tion become more than just an end-of-the-unit test. Teaching 
becomes more cyclical and responsive when the essential under-
standings, questions, and tasks are made clear. Coverage is 
replaced with deep understanding. You see the data you collect 
as information for your current and future planning, instead of 
simply documenting a score in the grade book. This type of work 
is the starting point for students to become the primary assessors 
of their own learning.

86   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
Linked Activity: Rethinking Classroom Design
Designing a classroom with both students and their learning 
needs in mind takes imagination, creativity, and a sense of advo-
cacy. If you are not sure what’s “right,” then imagine your own 
child, grandchild, niece, or nephew in the classroom. That’s my 
litmus test whenever I supervise learning in a school. Consider 
the following steps to rethink your learning space.
1.	Visualize what your classroom looks like at the moment. 
On a separate piece of paper, draw it as well as you can.
2.	Now imagine what you would need to change to allow for 
digital portfolio assessment to take off in your classroom. 
Consider your own yearlong plan for instruction along with 
the following issues:
•	 Access to technology.
•	 Different methods of instructional delivery.
•	 Available resources and what is still needed.
•	 Opportunities for teacher-student partnerships and peer 
collaboration.
•	 Developmental needs of students.
•	 Space to allow students to reflect on their work.
3.	Sketch how your classroom might need to change to accom-
modate this new way of assessing and learning. Ask students 
to offer their ideas for what’s possible. Don’t worry about 
costs or permission at this time. Just create what you and 
your students want to see.
Learner Profile: Lisa Snider
Lisa Snider is a high school journalism teacher/adviser 
in Duncan, Oklahoma. She teaches digital communi-
cations and introductory journalism, and serves as 
adviser for student publications.

Getting Started with Digital Portfolios   •   87
Why did you introduce digital portfolio assessment in 
your classroom?
It all started with a conversation I had with my personal learn-
ing network, or PLN. Specifically, I joined the Teachers Throwing 
Out Grades Facebook group, facilitated by Mark Barnes and Starr 
Sackstein. I learned a lot about the importance of student reflec-
tion and teaching them how to collect their personal work for 
assessment. In the past, I had students blog, but we needed a more 
private space for their works in progress before publishing.
I also learned through my connections, reflections, and experi-
ence that no one tool works for everyone. As I implemented a port-
folio assessment process, I discovered that it was important to put 
part of this process for selecting tools in the students’ hands.
In what way(s) were the effects of implementing digital 
portfolios in school unique or unusual?
Portfolios, especially when utilized through digital tools, gave 
me another way as a teacher to assess students’ levels of under-
standing. What a score couldn’t tell me, often the actual student 
learning artifact could. I had to model this process a couple of 
times for the students. Some kids caught on right away, while 
others needed more support, which was fine.
As digital portfolios became a part of my regular practice, 
I started using strong portfolio examples of past and present 
students for my instruction. In terms of the tool, WordPress is 
what we use for publishing our posts in the digital communica-
tions classes. In my intro to journalism class, we keep a Google 
Drive folder of students’ works-in-progress. With Google Drive, 
students share their work with me and I offer feedback. The work 
kept in that folder is more of a progress portfolio versus the per-
formance portfolio the digicomm students use with WordPress.
How would you describe the characteristics of the prod-
ucts from the digital portfolio work and of the educators 
who were involved?

88   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
At this time, I am the only teacher using digital portfolios 
in my school. Also, I do not assign grades but ask students to 
decide what grade they feel they earned. They make their case 
to me, using artifacts they produced during the school year to 
support their position.
What resources were used to support the use of digital 
portfolios?
My classroom is the journalism lab. It has 12 iMacs and 
4  MacBooks for the publications staff to produce the news­
paper and yearbook. If I have classes with more students than 
equipment, we have to be flexible.
What specific outcomes do you attribute to the use of 
digital portfolios?
Reflection has been a key to student success. When I ask 
students to justify the grade they feel they earned, they have 
to pore through all of their past work they have put together 
and published. They look at the entire process and reread work  
samples of their writing. What they come to realize is that 
they have had control of the outcomes (and their grades) the 
entire time.
In your opinion, what other factors contributed to the 
achievement of these outcomes?
Providing time for students to redo their work or seek help 
is important. Kids learn at different rates. At the same time, not 
having any type of deadline is also a problem. I am constantly 
tweaking this part of my practice and trying to make it better for 
me and for the students.
What problems did you encounter when developing or 
introducing digital portfolios?
One problem has been the lack of support for my new 
approach in assessing student learning. I have permission to 

Getting Started with Digital Portfolios   •   89
explore this type of work, such as self-assigning grades, but I have 
not heard any positives or received any feedback. Permission is 
not the same as support.
Also, technology can always be an issue. Students will often 
want to take home their work and finish it, so I let them check 
out one of our MacBook Pros. Unfortunately, they may not have 
wireless at home, so they have to find a public location to work. 
Also, and this is a surprise, some students are still confused 
about Google Drive and how more than one person can work on 
a document.
What else do you think a teacher or school should know 
before implementing digital portfolios?
As teachers, we need to be connected in online spaces. There 
is so much support from other educators through social media. 
I regularly visit Facebook groups, such as Teachers Throwing 
Out Grades. Twitter is also a great source of information. I follow 
#jerdchat (journalism nerds) and engage in their chats about 
this subject in education.
We have to be willing to share our own work and thoughts 
online, through blogging and other publishing tools. Admit mis-
takes publicly and discuss solutions you tried. Most important, 
find other educators who share your same passions for digital 
portfolios and other topics of interest.

This page intentionally left blank

91 
4
Digging Deeper 
into Digital Portfolios
“If you don’t understand yourself, you don’t understand anybody else.”
—Nikki Giovanni
If a teacher were to stop at Chapter 3—and be content with that 
level of digital portfolio work—he or she would likely find posi-
tive results. Students will feel more involved in the assessment 
process, and families will appreciate knowing how their children 
are doing during the school year. There may even be larger 
gains in your students’ achievement levels. I’ve experienced these 
results, including a 19 percent increase in students’ writing abili-
ties from fall to spring after implementing digital portfolios in our 
writing curriculum (Renwick, 2016). This was almost double what 
we previously saw with respect to writing growth.
However, there is more potential in leveraging technology 
not only to showcase student work but also to document learn-
ing growth and reflection. Capturing the more formative pieces 
of evidence that informs teaching and learning through digital 
tools can elevate instruction to new levels. In this chapter, we 
explore how technology can be used to facilitate progress and 

92   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
process portfolios to support student learning and outcomes. 
Designing instruction with the end in mind helps facilitate this 
successful technology integration.
Three Types of Portfolios
We’ve already learned about the following three types of  
portfolios:
• Performance portfolios are collections of a student’s best 
work, with the student taking the lead in the selection of the 
work and providing an explanation for why they should be 
included.
• Process portfolios contain several versions of a selected 
work. Such a portfolio might hold early drafts of a paper or 
poem to show how the piece developed over time.
• Progress portfolios are often managed by teachers. They 
hold collections of work intended to illustrate children’s 
development over time.
It should be noted that process portfolios in the context of 
digital tools may also help reveal student thinking during longer 
learning experiences, such as maintaining an online journal via 
a blog during a project. Using any one of these approaches to 
authentic assessment would likely yield better student learning. 
So why try to incorporate multiple digital portfolios into instruc-
tion? How might these different approaches work in concert? 
What would be the cumulative effect of a multifaceted approach 
to digital portfolios?
Why incorporate multiple digital portfolio approaches into 
instruction? Showcasing student work six to eight times a year in 
a discipline of choice, along with reflection, self-assessment, and 
goal setting, is a formidable practice. Yet we still wonder: Where 
did the journey for this student’s work begin? What trials did 

Digging Deeper into Digital Portfolios   •   93
he or she experience? What successes did he or she celebrate to 
get to excellence?
People live through stories. They are their own protagonists 
in their personal endeavors. Using digital portfolios to capture 
student growth gives context to their best work. They start to 
attend to the processes they used to achieve success. This builds 
lifelong learners because students learn how to learn. The veil is 
lifted for everyone involved on how students arrived at essential 
learning outcomes.
How might the different approaches work in concert? To get 
some context for this question, let’s go back to the initial exam-
ples from Chapter 1. If you recall, Barry is a high school language 
arts teacher. He found his students’ writing lacked both skill and 
voice, so he made the decision to use technology not only to 
increase his students’ writing skills but also to give them more 
ownership in their work. For example, students were taught how 
to create folders for their writing projects within Google Drive. 
Barry showed them how to organize their writing based on what 
was published and what was still a work in progress.
Because the classroom has access to one cart of Chrome-
books, every student can access their writing and projects as 
needed. They can check out the Chromebooks if they want to 
continue working on a piece at home. Barry demonstrated how 
to separate their published pieces in one folder and their works 
in progress in another. He also recommended never throwing 
away a piece of writing that didn’t work. He tells students, “They 
might be useful to you down the road, either as a revised stand-
alone piece or as part of a new piece.” Students are taught how 
to share their unpublished drafts with peers and how to provide 
feedback for each other both in person and online.
The performance portfolio is the published work in the folder 
and on Google Sites. The process portfolio includes those com-
ments and suggestions made by the teacher and peers before the 

94   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
work was published. These pieces of evidence should be docu-
mented in (or at least inform) the reflection, self-assessment, and 
goal setting of the published piece as commentary. The progress 
portfolios rest in Barry’s hands, possibly through a digital con-
ferring tool that also leverages Google. For example, he might 
utilize a template created in Google Docs or Google Forms to 
document where each student is at in his or her writing projects, 
along with a list of minilessons he might teach in the future based 
on the feedback he gets when conferring with students.
While the level of independence will change with students’ 
age and abilities, using multiple digital portfolios for authentic 
assessment helps students connect their growth as a learner 
with learning itself. It moves the assessment work from “the 
teacher assigned it so I have to turn it in” to an ongoing process 
of starting, drafting, getting feedback, revising, and eventually 
publishing authentic work in real contexts. It is a comprehensive 
approach to digital portfolio assessment, where one part of the 
work directly supports the other two (Figure 4.1).
What would be the cumulative effect of a multifaceted 
approach to digital portfolios? The answer to this is generally 
one of two things: a highly responsive approach to instruction, 
or a big mess.
Why a mess? Because we are asking ourselves as teachers 
not only to have students upload artifacts of finished work online 
with commentary but also to maintain works in progress (a pro-
cess portfolio) while we also keep our own digital files of student 
growth (a progress portfolio). These are a lot of plates to keep 
spinning at the same time. Capturing formative assessment is crit-
ical for informing today’s instruction. Yet expecting to do this well 
without more support may serve to be too much of a challenge 
for any teacher.
To facilitate a multifaceted approach to digital portfolios that 
ensures highly responsive instruction, developing curriculum 
with the end in mind—or backward design—can be effective.

Digging Deeper into Digital Portfolios   •   95
Backward Design
This concept for curriculum development is the basis for almost 
all contemporary instructional design methodologies, includ-
ing Understanding by Design (Wiggins & McTighe, 2005) and 
Project-Based Learning (Larmer, Mergendoller, & Boss, 2015). 
Planning instruction with the end in mind follows three essential 
steps:
1.	Identify desired results.
2.	Determine acceptable evidence.
3.	Plan learning experiences and instruction.
Figure 4.1
Comprehensive Digital Portfolio System
Performance
Portfolio
Reﬂection on Learning
Growth Over Time
Best Work
Process
Portfolio
Progress
Portfolio
Comprehensive
Portfolio
System

96   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
Because this book is focused on digital portfolios in the class-
room, we’ll take a more basic approach to curriculum devel-
opment. Readers are encouraged to explore more formal methods 
of instructional design, described in the resources already shared. 
Figure 4.2 shows a template that can be used for basic curriculum 
development with the integration of digital portfolios.
Using backward design to integrate digital portfolios in the 
classroom has several benefits. First, by identifying the big goals 
for a unit of instruction, teachers ensure that teaching and learn-
ing are the priority. Technology is secondary. Second, the possi-
bilities for performance tasks with digital tools expand greatly.  
Students can utilize and combine audio, images, video, and text to 
create a unique representation of their understanding that is not 
possible without technology. Finally, the access to digital tools to 
capture formative assessment results can make developing the 
learning progression a more student-centered experience that 
honors their best way of showing what they know and can do.
Another advantage of basic backward design (versus a more 
formal curriculum development approach) is that the plans are 
more accessible to students and teachers. Instruction that inte-
grates digital portfolios should be written using classroom-friendly 
language. For example, a basic draft of a unit of study is presented 
to students from the beginning. Dialogue and questions follow, 
which inform the pathway toward excellence as the unit pro-
gresses. There is a fluidity to the process. Students are partners 
in the learning trajectory, including how they will be assessed with 
progress and/or process portfolios. Nothing is determined for sure 
before students begin engaging in instruction. This naturally leads 
to the curriculum becoming more relevant and meaningful, which 
should lead to higher levels of learning made evident through a 
performance task shared online in a performance portfolio.
As an example, Cathy from Chapter 1 adopted CCPensieve as 
her digital conferring tool. She uses this application when meet-
ing with her 1st grade students about their reading growth. This 

Digging Deeper into Digital Portfolios   •   97
Figure 4.2
Backward Design Template
#1: Identify Desired Results
#3: Plan Learning Experiences and Instruction
#2: Determine Acceptable Evidence
Theme/Concept:
Entry Event:
Summative Assessment:
Standard(s):
Learning Target:
Learning Experience:
Formative Assessment:
“As a _____ (role), _____ (verb) . . .”
Big Questions:
Learning Target:
Learning Experience:
Formative Assessment:
Expert Understanding:
Big Ideas:
Learning Target:
Learning Experience:
Formative Assessment:
Amateur Understanding:
Vocabulary:
Learning Target:
Learning Experience:
Formative Assessment:
Resources:
Learning Target:
Learning Experience:
Formative Assessment:
Media for Performance Task:
□  Audio
□  Video
□  Image
□  Text

98   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
progress portfolio facilitates goal setting developed through the 
teacher and student and is based on current assessment data. 
As the year progresses, Cathy realizes that students need oppor-
tunities to show what they know independently and to monitor 
their own growth as readers.
Cathy decides to formally introduce digital portfolios to her 
classroom in order to provide this purpose and audience. She 
signs up for Seesaw and creates an account for each student. 
Cathy uses the gradual release of responsibility/Optimal Learning 
Model (Routman, in press) to teach students how to reflect on 
their reading within the blog feature of Seesaw. She selects this 
tool because of the access it provides for younger students to 
draw, type, or upload digital media and express their thinking 
and themselves as readers. Cathy also shows students how to 
post a blog to their permanent portfolios and how their work will 
serve as an artifact of their learning that should be celebrated.
As Cathy continues to confer with students after introduc-
ing Seesaw, she notices a greater sense of purpose in their read-
ing. One student asks, “Can I post a review of the book I read 
on Seesaw?” Cathy begins to understand how audience affects 
purpose in student learning experiences, given the appropriate 
level and amount of digital access. She starts thinking with the 
end in mind and planning for authentic products and projects 
that students can complete to showcase their literacy knowl-
edge and skills.
Next, we explore the three stages of backward design and 
how digital portfolios might be integrated.
Stage #1: Identify Desired Results
To determine what is essential for students to know and be 
able to do, educators almost need a crystal ball. Jobs that are 
here today may be gone tomorrow. Likewise, occupations that 
do not exist now may be popular—even essential—by the time 
our students graduate. This is why schools need to think beyond 
the Common Core State Standards and consider what is “life­

Digging Deeper into Digital Portfolios   •   99
worthy” for a dynamic future. The concept of lifeworthy learning 
comes from David Perkins’s work at Harvard’s Graduate School 
of Education. In his book Future Wise: Educating Our Children 
for a Changing World (2014), Perkins asks a big question: “What 
did you learn during your first twelve years of education that 
matters in your life today?” (p. 10). This wondering segues into 
Perkins defining lifeworthy learning in six different ways:
•	 Beyond basic skills: 21st century skills and dispositions.
•	 Beyond the traditional disciplines: renewed, hybrid, and less 
familiar disciplines.
•	 Beyond discrete disciplines: interdisciplinary topics and 
problems.
•	 Beyond regional perspectives: global perspectives, problems, 
and studies.
•	 Beyond mastering content: ability to think about the world 
with the content.
•	 Beyond prescribed content: much more choice of what to 
learn.
This shift in focus on what it means to be “educated” or “lit-
erate” in the world calls for different approaches to teaching and 
learning. The Common Core State Standards, even though they 
provide more clarity about expected student outcomes, do not 
adequately address the needs for a changing world. Digital port-
folios, with their ability to house and share artifacts of learning 
that convey many ways of being smart, allow for this shift. The 
first step in identifying lifeworthy learning is looking at standards 
beyond the Common Core that consider what else students may 
need to know and be able to do.
•	 ISTE Student Standards (www.iste.org/standards/standards/
for-students-2016): The standards created by the Inter­
national Society for Technology in Education (ISTE) address 
several lifeworthy tenets for a more modern educational 
experience, including being a digital citizen, knowledge con-
structor, innovative designer, and creative communicator. 

100   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
Much of the media that people consume and create today 
exists online in various multimedia formats. It therefore 
makes sense to give our students these experiences before 
they graduate.
•	 Partnership for 21st Century Learning Framework (www.
p21.org/our-work/p21-framework): There are common threads 
that run between ISTE’s standards and this framework. The 
Partnership for 21st Century Learning is most well-known 
for its focus on the four Cs: critical thinking, communication, 
collaboration, and creativity. This framework was developed 
in partnership between the educational and business worlds. 
The goal is to create a better alignment between what schools 
are teaching and what employers are looking for.
•	 Habits of Mind (www.habitsofmindinstitute.org): The found-
ers of this framework, Art Costa and Bena Kallick, have 
discovered and developed 16 dispositions that learners 
exemplify in their pursuit of knowledge and truth. These 
habits include persisting, managing impulsivity, questioning 
and problem posing, and finding humor. Their vision with this 
work is to “create a more thoughtful, cooperative, compas-
sionate generation of people who skillfully work to resolve 
social, environmental, economic and political problems” 
(Institute for Habits of Mind, n.d., para. 2).
In reviewing these different expectations, a few things stand 
out. First, students are asked to be creative producers of new 
information. For example, they aren’t merely asked to write a 
persuasive essay; they should also be able to identify the media 
that will best persuade a specific audience and then pursue that 
project. This requires knowledge about both the medium and 
the message. Second, and this follows from the first point, stu-
dents are positioned as problem finders, instead of only problem  
solvers. With current frameworks for curriculum and instruction, 
students may be limited to a few options to demonstrate their 

Digging Deeper into Digital Portfolios   •   101
understanding. Student voice and choice should exist within 
each option for a performance task. Finally, these indicators 
for what it means to be a learner in the 21st century are hard—
maybe even impossible—to capture with traditional assessment 
tools. This alone makes a strong case for implementing digital 
portfolios in the classroom.
What the desired results look like in the context of a unit 
of study depends largely on the discipline and grade level. An 
example of the desired results, from Lori’s middle school math-
ematics example in Chapter 1, is provided. The unit of study is 
“Bridges,” a project-based unit of study in which students apply 
principles of three-dimensional geometry to an authentic prob-
lem (see Figure 4.3).
The integration of a 21st century learning skill, a habit of mind, 
and a CCSS writing standard demands a different way to doc-
ument students’ understanding in the summative assessment. 
Technology supports the performance task.
Stage #2: Determine Acceptable Evidence
There should be a tight weave between what students are 
expected to know and be able to do and how the summative 
assessment will allow students to showcase their understanding. 
One of the most important parts of any summative assessment 
is ensuring that the performance task is authentic. Students 
should be engaged in real work for an actual audience. Even if 
the task students are asked to do is engineered by the teacher, 
it should closely resemble the learning and work that would hap-
pen beyond the classroom. We want students to almost forget 
they are in school when they are engaged in their work.
One way to ensure authenticity is by having students role-
play actual occupations such as scientist, mathematician, author, 
blogger, website developer, reporter, engineer, environmentalist, 
or any other occupation that appropriately connects to the focus 
of the unit. Wiggins and McTighe (2005) have pioneered this 

102   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
Figure 4.3
Identify Desired Results
Theme/Concept: Bridges
Standards:
• Mathematics: Solve real-world and mathematical problems involv-
ing area, surface area, and volume. (CCSS.MATH.CONTENT.6.G.A.1, 
A.2, A.3, A.4)
• 21st Century Skills: Communication and collaboration
• Habits of Mind: Persistence
• Writing: Write arguments focused on discipline-specific content.  
(CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.WHST.6-8.1)
Big Questions:
• How are bridges built?
• When were the first bridges developed?
• What different types of bridges are there?
• How do engineers decide on the type of bridge to be built?
• Why do we need to know geometry?
• When are bridges necessary?
Big Ideas:
• Bridges connect people from one land mass to another.
• Purposes for and styles of bridges change over time.
• Bridges depend on sound mathematical principles.
• Bridges can serve as a metaphor for relationships.
Vocabulary:
area, perimeter, angle, vertices, surfaces, polygon, coordinate plane,  
parallelogram, triangle, trapezoid, communication, collaboration,  
persistence, opinion, persuasion
approach to performance tasks. The role should also be comple-
mented by an authentic task that addresses several criteria and 
reveals student understanding at a deep level.
•	 The task should require students to transfer what they 
learned to a new situation.
•	 The task should reveal what each student knows and is able 
to do, even if it involves working with partners or in teams.

Digging Deeper into Digital Portfolios   •   103
•	 The task should focus on deep understanding of the big 
ideas described in the unit.
•	 The task should have a specific description for what excel-
lence looks and sounds like.
Of all the criteria, the most important is that there is a close 
alignment between the goals and objectives of the unit of study 
and the summative assessment (performance task). The other 
criteria support and deepen the work students are asked to do.
Assessing performance tasks can be a challenge. Because they 
are embedded in authentic work, a paper-and-pencil test alone is 
not going to suffice because there is no transfer, although a tra-
ditional summative assessment could be used as an additional 
piece of evidence. This is why digital portfolios work so well with 
performance tasks. Student learning conveyed in writing, audio, 
images, and/or video provides an unfiltered look at what students 
know and can do. It is learning made real.
There are three technologies—screencasting, podcasting, and 
video creation—that work well for a variety of such performance 
tasks. Keep in mind, though, that the digital tools should serve 
the purpose and audience for the learning. Access to these tools 
without intent is a mindless integration of technology.
Screencasting
Screencasts are captured media that contain audio and video 
of a presenter’s annotations and animations. They can also be  
narrated and presented on a desktop computer or mobile device. 
Screencasting is often used to provide educational tutorials. They 
came into prominence when Salman Khan made his online lessons 
public through YouTube and then Khan Academy. Using nothing 
more than a digital scribing tool and an audio recorder, he pro-
vided original online tutorials in mathematics for a relative, which 
branched out into almost every academic area. Today, education 
uses screencasts in Khan Academy fashion as a way for students 
to teach one another the skills and knowledge they desire. Next 
are three tools that are up for this task.

104   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
•	 Educreations (www.educreations.com): If you are looking 
for an easy way for students to share their knowledge 
and ideas with others—both locally and globally—then 
this tool should be considered. Educreations allows users 
to record their drawings, images, text, and voice, save it 
online, and then share their final products with others. Edu-
creations can be an opportunity for students to assess their 
classmates not only on what they learned but also on how 
they delivered the content. Speaking and listening become 
an integral part of the performance task. For students who 
struggle with this part of school, technology can provide 
a necessary scaffold. Teachers have also found this tool to 
be helpful in delivering lessons to students when they are 
away from school. The substitute teacher receives the link 
to the screencast, presses play, and the lesson commences. 
In addition, Educreations can be an essential resource in a 
blended learning environment where students return to a 
specific lesson to review the content.
•	 Explain Everything (https://explaineverything.com): Like 
Educreations, this screencasting tool allows users to visually 
convey information in an engaging manner. What Explain 
Everything has over Educreations are several bells and 
whistles. For instance, with a site license, multiple users can 
collaborate on a single project, adding images, drawings, 
text, and audio to develop a presentation. The ability to work 
with others in a digital environment is an essential skill in 
today’s world. Explain Everything also works intuitively  
with many storage and file sharing platforms available online. 
If your students are ready for a robust tool when completing 
a performance task, this whiteboard application would be a 
wise choice.
•	 Screencast-O-Matic (https://screencast-o-matic.com): 
When the task does not demand a high level of production  
value—say, in a quick tutorial on how to use a computer 

Digging Deeper into Digital Portfolios   •   105
application—then Screencast-O-Matic might be the best 
tool. I use this one frequently when there is a request by 
professional colleagues for a step-by-step approach to nav-
igate the features of online software. Teachers can return 
to various screencasts, saved to YouTube, as many times 
as they need. These quick and easy screencasts can also 
have a place in a performance task. For example, students 
who are providing basic tutorials for community members 
on how to use a computer can use Screencast-O-Matic to 
develop those tutorials. Students will learn the importance 
of brevity, clear directions, and content developed with a 
specific audience in mind.
Multiple performance task ideas can be incorporated with 
screencasting:
•	 Create math tutorials for peers.
•	 Explain a complex science concept.
•	 Post a book trailer.
•	 Communicate directions to school visitors.
•	 Teach younger students school expectations.
Podcasting
Podcasting is captured audio that is accessible online. Files 
can be housed on digital devices or streamed directly from the 
Internet. Podcasting might be simple in theory, but the power of 
this medium should not be underestimated. (I speak in terms of 
audio-only podcasts; there are also video podcasts.) Podcasters 
can easily attach introductory music and a summary of the con-
tent. That’s all that is necessary to produce an episode. It’s also 
why podcasting is an excellent tool for allowing students to con-
vey their knowledge about a topic of study.
In small groups, students could summarize content to create 
a script. They rehearse their show, listen to their audio record-
ing on a mobile device, make revisions, and then create their 

106   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
podcast. Podcasting might provide the easiest access for stu-
dents and teachers who are considering embedding digital tools 
within their performance tasks. The limitations of an audio-only 
environment can benefit the learning by spurring creativity and 
innovation in how students can communicate their understand-
ings and skills to an authentic audience. That they can upload 
their final products to the world only makes these types of tasks 
that much more purposeful.
•	 audioBoom (https://audioboom.com): If you are looking for 
the easiest experience in creating podcasts, this may be 
the tool for you. audioBoom does one thing really well—it 
records your audio and posts it online. This is the essence 
of a podcast. What I appreciate about this type of technol-
ogy is the limitations it brings to students. They cannot get 
too fancy with the fonts or transitions between slides like 
they might with written reports or slide presentastions. 
The focus is on producing a high-quality presentation that 
represents student learning. All of the extraneous details 
fall by the wayside.
•	 GarageBand (www.apple.com/mac/garageband): This pro-
gram is almost like having a recording studio on your mobile 
device. Students can record their audio and play it back to 
assess their performance. What differentiates this technol-
ogy from audioBoom is the robust set of creative tools 
available. For example, after recording audio of a conver-
sation, students can layer in music they produced within 
GarageBand. This includes keyboard, guitar, percussion, 
bass, and string instruments. They can even plug in an instru-
ment to record their own music and create a track. Once 
everything is ready, students can upload their finished  
product to SoundCloud, iTunes, audioBoom, or other ser-
vices that publish audio files online.

Digging Deeper into Digital Portfolios   •   107
•	 Skype (www.skype.com/en): For creating podcasts with par-
ticipants from across the country and around the world, 
Skype is it. At first glance, you might not associate this tool 
with podcasting. When we Skype someone, we generally 
think of having a video chat with that person. What I’ve dis-
covered is that many professional pod­casters prefer Skype 
for facilitating conversations for their podcasts. The sound is 
clearer, especially when speaking with some­one in another 
location. With the help of third-party applications, Skype can 
capture audio and save it for later use as a podcast. It is quite 
impressive technology. Of these tools, Skype is the only one 
that works on any platform.
Multiple performance task ideas can be incorporated with 
podcasting:
•	 Broadcast an investigative report.
•	 Document a field trip.
•	 Record an interview with an important subject.
•	 Create book reviews.
•	 Develop advertisements for local businesses.
Video Creation
Video creation offers the broadest opportunities for integrated 
media: video, audio, text, and narration all within one tool. There 
are many sensible connections between educational video produc-
tion and how it is used in the world today, including commercials, 
documentaries, and newscasts. Even though kids are watching 
less television does not mean they have slowed down their media 
consumption. YouTube, for example, has become the go-to media 
source for many kids, and smartphones and tablets are becom-
ing the primary access point. It makes sense to tap into students’ 
interests when developing performance tasks through the use 
of video.

108   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
One note of caution when allowing students to use technol-
ogy for performance tasks: students may engage too much in 
the bells and whistles when using these digital tools. It’s fine to 
let them play with the technology to better understand it, yet 
teachers only have so much time during the school day. This is 
a reason why units of study should be developed ahead of time. 
Educators should ensure that the performance task is closely 
aligned with the standards, goals, and essential understandings 
for instruction. Criteria can be developed that highlight student 
expectations during a performance task. Teachers should make 
sure that expectations are clear from the outset.
The following three tools are recommended for this type 
of activity, depending on the hardware that is available in your 
school.
•	 iMovie (www.apple.com/imovie): When it comes to video 
production, there is iMovie and there is everything else. 
No other piece of software comes close to matching the 
benefits that this application offers. Users have a choice 
between developing an informative movie with videos, 
photos, and music, or they can create a trailer that follows 
a Hollywood-style movie trailer template. An informative 
movie would be useful for summarizing content learned 
during a history unit or for documenting change over time 
as it relates to a scientific concept. Students might make 
trailers to develop a commercial for a book they read or a 
product they developed. They could also apply persuasive 
writing with this format in order to advocate for a commu-
nity cause or make a special request to the school princi-
pal. One of iMovie’s best features is how all of the media a 
student has captured can be saved across multiple devices 
(multiple Apple devices via iCloud). The editing tools in 
iMovie are also easy to learn and teach. Completed videos 
can be uploaded to YouTube or watched on an Apple device.

Digging Deeper into Digital Portfolios   •   109
•	 Camtasia (www.techsmith.com/video-editor.html): Camtasia  
began as a screencasting tool but developed into a formidable 
video studio. For schools that have access to Windows prod-
ucts, Camtasia is a sensible choice. Like iMovie, Camtasia 
offers users a landing page to import different forms of media, 
along with an editing bar to organize and create informa-
tive, narrative, or persuasive content. Eric Marcos, a middle 
school mathematics teacher, routinely asks his students to 
create video tutorials for their peers about essential under-
standings from the curriculum. Marcos notes the importance 
of peer explanations and the impact they have on student 
learning: “Maybe some students just like that it’s a kid who’s 
explaining it, and it makes them think, ‘Oh, I should be 
able to handle this and understand it too; it’s no big deal’ ” 
(November, 2012, p. 29).
•	 TouchCast (www.touchcast.com): If access to digital hard-
ware is more limited, TouchCast might be your answer. It is 
available both through the web and as an app. TouchCast 
provides users with many templates for newscasts and 
video reports. One of the best features is the greenscreen 
technology. Purchase a greenscreen cloth, hang it up in the 
classroom, find an appropriate image for the background, 
and students can record themselves “delivering the news” 
from anywhere around the globe. This makes TouchCast 
a go-to application when students want to create reports 
about a geographical location or a specific time in history. 
All they need is an appropriate and relevant image and 
they’re ready to go. Also worth noting is the interactive 
nature of the videos produced with TouchCast. Students 
can create questions that appear during the video, which 
allows the viewer to answer and provide feedback. Social 
media feeds and digital maps are also available to showcase 
while students’ presentations are playing. TouchCast offers 
a vision for the future of video creation.

110   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
Multiple performance task ideas can be incorporated with 
video creation:
•	 Produce a public service announcement for a nonprofit 
organization.
•	 Write and publish a digital story.
•	 Create an end-of-the-year montage.
•	 Communicate information with global peers to broaden 
perspectives.
•	 Pose a question to crowdsource ideas.
To summarize, performance tasks need to be tightly aligned 
with the desired results to ensure that students can truly transfer 
knowledge, skills, and dispositions to a novel situation. How 
technology is selected for students to communicate their under-
standing should be an intentional process. If the digital tools 
are a distraction to the performance tasks, teachers are better 
off sticking to more concrete summative assessments. Even 
these can be documented with the features of a digital portfolio 
tool, such as a speech, presentation, or similar demonstration. 
In addition, any performance task should be accompanied with 
a written explanation and reflection of the work. This gives the 
teacher an additional source of information to gauge the level of 
students’ understanding.
Figure 4.4 is an example of what Lori’s performance task 
might resemble for the bridge project she assigned to her math 
students. She elected to stick with one standard of excellence 
and not offer students to strive for only an amateur understand-
ing of three-dimensional geometry.
The presentation could certainly be a screencast that is 
accompanied with a written report. Getting too specific in these 
directions might leave students feeling like the project was a 
contrived task. Class discussions can be facilitated regarding 
the technology that would best serve the purpose for learning. 
Considerations include the best way to communicate students’ 

Digging Deeper into Digital Portfolios   •   111
findings with an authentic audience and the level of participa-
tion students might want from posting their bridge proposals 
online. Regardless, the performance task should allow the teacher 
to capture students’ work in a digital format that elicits infor-
mation about student understanding.
Stage #3: Plan Learning Experiences and Instruction
If the essential outcomes and performance tasks of a unit of 
study describe the destination, then the learning progression 
is the journey students take to get there. The planned learn-
ing experiences and instruction should identify the smaller, 
Figure 4.4
Determine Acceptable Evidence
Summative Assessment:
As a team of engineers, design a proposal for building a bridge over a 
local body of water. This proposal should include digital renderings of 
the bridge and a physical prototype that incorporates the major concepts 
learned in our geometry unit. The team should also create a multimedia 
presentation that persuades the city council to go forward with your plan.
Standards of Excellence:
• Prototype for bridge incorporates major concepts of three- 
dimensional geometry.
• Blueprints for bridge incorporate major concepts of two-dimensional 
geometry.
• Presentation leverages persuasive writing strategies and multimedia.
• Students share their thinking about their team’s process and 
progress, especially related to persistence and collaboration, in a 
growth digital portfolio.
Tool for Performance Task: Explain Everything
□
  Audio
□
  Video
□  Image
□
  Text

112   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
incremental steps that should lead to deeper understandings. 
In other curriculum frameworks, there can be coding or matri-
ces involved to help ensure alignment between standards and 
lessons. Although these can help teachers feel assured that 
they are “covering” the standards, this format may not be very 
student- or teacher-friendly. The goal with planning learning 
experiences at the classroom level is to unpack the standards 
and performance tasks into teachable lessons that address the 
necessary knowledge and skills.
The purpose for planning learning experiences within the 
work of building a pathway to success is to scaffold student 
experiences by creating learning objectives and to check for 
understanding with formative assessment.
Create Learning Objectives
To develop a learning progression that leads students to 
essential outcomes, the standards and expectations need to be 
broken down into manageable lessons. The learning objectives 
of these lessons need to describe the outcomes that the lesson 
is designed to produce. These objectives comprise the day-to-
day classroom instruction.
There are two critical parts for a successful learning objec-
tive: (1) what students are asked to do, and (2) the learning 
action. The focus for instruction should revolve around learning 
as an active process and not a passive activity. For example, 
instead of stating, “Students will practice drawing squares, trian-
gles, and circles,” a teacher would write, “Students will compare 
squares, triangles, and circles.” The first objective is focused 
on an activity and is not measurable. The second objective is 
focused on learning and can be assessed. Using digital tools to 
authentically assess student growth and achievement requires 
learning to occur.
When writing learning objectives, the verbs should be active 
and at an appropriate level of thinking. Active verbs describe 
what students will specifically do to attain knowledge or a skill. 

Digging Deeper into Digital Portfolios   •   113
The learning that is to occur and the verbs used to convey 
this action often come directly from the standards used. Con-
sider this 7th grade English Language Arts standard from the 
Common Core State Standards:
Determine two or more central ideas in a text and analyze 
their development over the course of the text; provide an 
objective summary of the text. (CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.2)
Examples of active and specific verbs include define, explain, and 
evaluate (as opposed to more passive verbs, such as understand, 
know, and appreciate). The verb within the learning objective 
should also describe the thinking involved for the learning expe-
rience. Lower-cognition verbs include list and identify; higher- 
cognition verbs include analyze and create. See Figure 4.5 for an 
example of how the specificity and complexity can be increased 
in objectives. Some of these ideas derive from the book Where 
Great Teaching Begins by Anne Reeves (2011).
Figure 4.5
Specificity in Learning Objectives
Students will 
understand that 
fractions are parts 
of a whole number. 
Students will use 
fractions to join and
separate parts of a 
whole.
Students will justify
decompositions of 
fractions with a 
visual model. 
Students will 
imagine the setting 
for the story. 
Students will predict
what may happen in
the story based on a 
picture walk.
Students will
compare and
constrast the settings 
from two diﬀerent 
stories.
Students will know 
spelling patterns for
reading text. 
Students will
categorize spelling
patterns in authentic 
texts. 
Students will
compose a story 
utilizing spelling 
patterns.

114   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
As you can see, there is a lot to learn here. Unpacking this 
standard into more manageable objectives, it might look like this:
•	 Determine two or more central ideas in a text.
•	 Analyze development of central ideas over the course of a 
text.
•	 Write a summary to synthesize ideas of a text.
Notice that the level of thinking increases with each objec-
tive. Students are asked to do more complex tasks as they engage 
more deeply in the learning. This is what teachers want to see as 
they guide students to understand the big ideas of a unit.
Design Formative Assessments
In a unit of study, every learning objective should have a 
formative assessment assigned to it to check for student under-
standing. The results should be used to inform future instruction 
and respond effectively to student needs.
There are two general types of formative assessments: class-
room and common. Classroom formative assessments are the day-
to-day and even minute-to-minute interactions with students, and 
they usually occur as teaching is happening. Typical classroom 
formative assessments include student questioning, observation of 
student dialogue, and informal conferences. The Optimal Learning 
Model is dependent on this type of assessment for moving stu-
dents toward independence. Classroom formative assessment is 
tailored to meet the needs of the individual.
For our purposes in using progress and process portfolios, we 
focus on common formative assessments, which are developed 
around the most important learning objectives. What makes 
these formative assessments “common” is that they are admin-
istered to every student in the classroom or across classrooms 
within a grade or department. They can include multiple choice, 
constructed response, or performance tasks. What makes them 
powerful is the close alignment between the assessment and the 

Digging Deeper into Digital Portfolios   •   115
objective. This helps ensure that the results from a common for-
mative assessment are reliable for adjusting instruction.
The goal in using any formative assessment is to elicit feed-
back about a student’s current knowledge or skill level. This 
feedback can be provided by the teacher, or it could come from 
the student looking at his or her own work with an understand-
ing of the criteria for success. Regardless of the source, the most 
important aspect of any form of feedback is that it helps the 
learner move forward and improve.
Facilitate Formative Assessment with Digital Portfolios
There is some reluctance in creating a digital portfolio dicho­
tomy in which there is only a progress portfolio or a process 
portfolio. That said, having a structure for administering formative 
assessments to measure growth over time (progress) and how 
students grow (process) is helpful for teachers when they are in 
the middle of classroom instruction. Consider the following digital 
tools for managing this work.
Progress Portfolio Tools
•	 CCPensieve: This conferring tool gives teachers a digital 
platform to focus on one of four reading strategies during 
independent reading: comprehension, accuracy, fluency, or 
vocabulary. The teacher and student together decide on 
goals around one of these four strategies. Anecdotal notes 
and other qualitative information can be documented within 
CCPensieve. This software also has the capacity to keep track 
of progress in writing, mathematics, and other content areas.
•	 FreshGrade: This digital tool, already discussed as a dedi-
cated portfolio application, has a robust assessment fea-
ture for measuring student learning progress. Teachers 
can enter learning objectives, connect them to standards, 
and determine the appropriate assessment for each task. 
When teachers enter results into FreshGrade, the software 

116   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
provides a visual representation of which students are above, 
at, and below proficiency for flexible grouping.
Process Portfolio Tools
•	 Google Drive: Using these free tools gives students a digital 
space to house their work. Work can be organized based on 
what stage they are at in the learning process. When stu-
dents are ready, they can publish their best work directly 
from their Drive accounts to a Google Site. The integration 
among all of Google’s programs makes it an effective tool 
for documenting the learning process over time.
•	 Kidblog: Blogging as a way of communicating current think-
ing for an authentic audience has been effective for quite 
some time. Because it is so closely related with word pro-
cessing, blogging can simplify the transition from a static to a 
dynamic approach to documenting learning. Kidblog offers a 
safe platform for students to share their thinking and receive 
comments from peers.
Figure 4.6 shows Lori’s progression of learning objectives, learn-
ing experiences, and formative assessments for the geometry 
unit of study. The digital tools, such as FreshGrade and KidBlog, 
are included within the formative assessments to best capture 
evidence of student learning. The objectives listed have specific 
verbs that are actionable and assessable. As the learning expe-
riences are presented, students are asked to participate in more 
complex tasks as they get closer to the performance task. This is 
how scaffolded plans can work to ensure students can success-
fully transfer knowledge to a new situation.
Linked Activity: Develop a Unit of Study
Use the template provided to develop curriculum that inte-
grates multiple digital portfolios. Get plans down on paper 
or digitally, and then try it in the classroom. The goal is not 

Digging Deeper into Digital Portfolios   •   117
Figure 4.6
Plan Learning Experiences and Instruction
(continued)
Entry Event
Watch video of Tacoma Bridge and read The New York Times article on 
2007 bridge collapse in Minneapolis.
Learning Target
Find area and perimeter of various two-dimensional shapes.
    Learning Experience
    Lessons from mathematics textbook
    Formative Assessment
    Constructed-response quiz, documented in FreshGrade
Learning Target
Find area and perimeter of various three-dimensional shapes.
    Learning Experience
    Lessons from mathematics textbook
    Formative Assessment
    Constructed-response quiz, documented in FreshGrade
Learning Target
Compare and contrast different bridge types and purposes.
    Learning Experience
    Acquire knowledge about bridges from identified websites.
    Formative Assessment
    Multiple-choice quiz on essential understandings regarding bridges 
and application of geometry.
Learning Target
Draw and develop two- and three-dimensional shapes to design an 
acceptable proposal for a bridge project.
    Learning Experience
    Create designs and prototypes for suggested bridge.
    Formative Assessment
    Post designs in FreshGrade, self-assess work.

118   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
perfection but action. The feedback you receive from your 
students will inform future instruction, even during the unit of 
study itself. If you feel the need to get feedback from other edu-
cators, please share your work in our Digital Portfolios Google+ 
Community at http://bit.ly/dspinaction.
Learner Profile: Margaret Simon
Margaret Simon is a gifted and talented education 
specialist in New Iberia, Louisiana. She works with 
many students in several schools, specifically related 
to English Language Arts. Margaret is a strong propo-
nent for student blogging and has highlighted many 
benefits she has found in her work. Notably, blogging
•	 Opens the doors of the classroom to the world.
•	 Gives students an authentic voice.
•	 Encourages writing to become an everyday 
activity.
Figure 4.6
Plan Learning Experiences and Instruction (continued)
Learning Target
Communicate and collaborate on a team focused on creating a proposal 
for building a bridge in the local community.
    Learning Experience
    Work as a team member on the bridge design project.
    Formative Assessment
    Daily blog posts on Kidblog about the process for developing a 
bridge-building project.

Digging Deeper into Digital Portfolios   •   119
•	 Feeds and nourishes students through the com-
menting and feedback process.
•	 Provides automatic portfolios and student men-
tor texts at your fingertips.
Why did you introduce digital portfolio assessment in 
your classroom?
I first introduced digital portfolios because I teach the same 
students year to year. It is an academic pull-out from their class-
room. Through Kidblog, our process portfolio tool of choice, I 
can follow students’ progress from when they enter the program 
until they exit the school (6th grade). Often, I am assigned stu-
dents without any information regarding their writing abilities. 
That is why we use Kidblog. Once, when I went to ask a teacher 
for a writing sample for one student, the teacher mentioned that 
she never seems to get to the writing part. This was disappointing 
for me to hear, yet it did not deter me from getting this student 
started in regular writing habits. When I started working with this 
student, it was like a door was opened. She started blogging at 
least once a day.
In what way(s) were the effects of implementing digital 
portfolios in school unique or unusual?
Blogging is a focus for the program; it’s individualized for 
that student. All of the students from the other schools I work 
with are blogging together. They have readers who comment on  
their work as a real audience—peers at different grade levels 
and abilities. Gifted and talented students sometimes lack oppor-
tunities to connect with peers at their current cognitive level. 
To model this process, I also blog and help facilitate deep con-
nections between students and other educators and writers. 
For example, I have a student in 6th grade and have had her 
since 1st grade. She is a very good poet who lost her mother 
too soon. I wrote about her mother’s death when she was in 
4th grade. Amy Ludwig VanDerwater, a poet, saw this post and 

120   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
connected with the student via email. They communicated with 
each other quite a bit, exchanging poetry. Amy ended up send-
ing the student some of her published books.
How would you describe the characteristics of the prod-
ucts from the digital portfolio work and of the educators 
who were involved?
This sense of audience is a big driver in motivating students 
to write online frequently and make their process as writers 
visible. We’ve had other authors, such as Sharon Creech, Kate 
Messner, and Cynthia Lord, visit kids’ blogs. I’ve sent out their 
posts with the author included on Twitter to get their attention— 
authors whom I feel would be good connections. These connec-
tions with an authentic audience have benefited me directly. The 
relationship that developed between Amy Ludwig VanDerwater 
and my student has enhanced my practice. For example, Amy 
was working on an educational resource about poetry. She asked 
me for samples of my students’ work to highlight. In addition, I 
often feature my students’ work on my blog so they have a wider 
audience. With this approach, the line between school and real 
world is often blurry.
Each Tuesday, my students engage in Slice of Life. This 
initiative comes from the blog Two Writing Teachers (www.
twowritingteachers.org). Each week, students are challenged to 
write about what’s going on in their lives. It is an exchange of 
stories from and between classrooms. Students connect with 
peers through Kidblog who are also doing the Slice of Life chal-
lenge. With permissions in place, kids can see a stream of peer 
bloggers who are also participating in this activity. They are 
expected to leave constructive comments on other students’ 
blogs from all across the United States.
What resources were used to support the use of digital 
portfolios?
Regarding resources, my students do not have 1:1 access to 
computers. Instead, they have a rotation system of who gets a 

Digging Deeper into Digital Portfolios   •   121
computer on certain days. For celebrating student work, they 
have Promethean boards to project a piece of student writing, 
notice what’s good and needs work, and use the student’s writ-
ing as a model. Once it is on the student’s blog, I do not have 
nearly as many papers. Print resources are also a mainstay in 
my practice, including titles from Amy Buckner, Ralph Fletcher, 
Georgia Heard, Katherine Bomer, and all of the connections avail-
able online. In addition, I use Voxer a lot (a walkie-talkie-like app). 
We meet as a small group of writing friends and just talk with 
one another about what we are doing. This is really nice, as I live  
in a smaller community, so I get the opportunity to communi-
cate within a teaching network via social media such as Twitter 
and Voxer.
What specific outcomes do you attribute to the use of 
digital portfolios?
Not every student in our gifted and talented program is a 
natural writer. Motivation and persistence are not uncommon 
challenges. For a while, documenting word count has been some-
thing I was resistant to. However, the previous year (during the 
Slice of Life challenge), another gifted teacher’s students were 
producing amazing work. I asked, “How do you get these kids 
to write so much?” She shared that she tracks word count. Now 
I require a word count minimum of 250 words. Students have 
met my expectations and then some. They will even compete 
with themselves, pushing themselves to write as much as they 
can. One student who was barely writing 100 words is now 
writing 400 words at a time. The word count forces them to 
elaborate on their writing and dig deeper into their work.
In your opinion, what other factors contributed to the 
achievement of these outcomes?
One of the best outcomes of blogging through the Slice of 
Life initiative and other blogging opportunities is that my stu-
dents no longer fear writing. It’s comfortable for them. I require 
three blog posts a week: Slice of Life, Wonder Wednesday, and a 

122   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
reader’s response. Just that practice, that daily writing, is crit-
ical. I have to remind my students that blogging is writing, just 
like using paper and a pencil. Some of my students, especially 
boys, have a harder time coming back to handwriting after blog-
ging for a while. With gifted students, and really all students, 
their opinion is not a trivial matter in their minds. When they 
participate in writing digitally for an audience, their thoughts 
are important. What they share makes a difference. It’s empow-
ering to them. Writing online goes beyond just what we are 
teaching them. It builds them up as a person.
What problems did you encounter when developing or 
introducing digital portfolios?
My students would not always have access at home. That 
is why I usually do not require them to complete a blog post 
beyond school. When I do expect some work from home, a few 
come up with excuses. Some of my students without a home 
wireless connection will find ways to access the Internet, such 
as at the public library. The conditions are changing, just not 
very quickly. Another issue is that many students’ parents are 
not yet attuned to this new way of writing. They think, “Oh, 
my kids are on the computers and they are just playing games 
and stuff.” They haven’t quite come to the understanding that 
students writing online is something important. The parents 
are sometimes not letting their kids on. They get nervous about 
letting them on the Internet or having a phone.
What else do you think a teacher or school should know 
before implementing digital portfolios?
Teachers should not be afraid of the technology and allow-
ing students to have access to that technology. There is a lot of 
misunderstanding about the safety of blogging. Kidblog is a very 
safe space for students to write online. There isn’t any hacking 
or inappropriate comments. Some teachers are hesitant to give 

Digging Deeper into Digital Portfolios   •   123
students that freedom. However, we have to provide for them 
the opportunities to take risks in a safe environment.
That is something that I have learned in this process. For 
example, an older student blogged about some friendship trou-
bles she was having. Another student read this and shared it 
with peers. This led to the class having a heart-to-heart con-
versation about the situation. In reflection, there was a lot of 
learning that came from this experience. We can provide that 
safety net so students can apply their skills and learn from their  
errors.

This page intentionally left blank

125 
5
Going Schoolwide 
with Digital Portfolios
“The single most important thing you could do tomorrow for little  
or no money is have every student establish a digital portfolio 
where they collect their best work as evidence of their skills,  
where they’re working with their teachers and other adults  
to present their best work, to iterate their best work, so that  
they actually have real progress they can show.”
—Dr. Tony Wagner
Leadership Is Essential
In this chapter, we change the audience to focus on school 
leaders. The importance of understanding the tenets of a school­
wide approach to implementing digital portfolios cannot be 
overstated. By “school leader,” I mean not only the principal but 
also instructional coaches, technology coordinators, curriculum 
directors, superintendents, and teacher leaders.
Many educators with whom I spoke in preparation for this 
book were leading on their own, or—at most—had the support 
of a small team of colleagues. Although their work was making 
a visible impact on their students, I wondered about the other 

126   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
students in their respective schools who did not have access 
to those practices and processes. Inequity is fostered when 
there is a lack of agreement about what better practice is and 
looks like.
One of the best benefits of going schoolwide with digital 
student portfolios is the coherence that is developed when all 
teachers are on the same page. If each grade level or department 
is facilitating the portfolio assessment process with fidelity, then 
all students should have access to equally high levels of instruc­
tion. The focus of educators resets from what is taught to what is 
learned, and results have more of a priority than before. Equity 
can become a reality.
As teachers and students consistently engage in the port­
folio assessment process, I have found that the culture of learn­
ing changes with it. When we place value on our students as 
learners and mistake makers, the journey is celebrated along 
with the destination. Our collective understanding of the role of 
assessment expands beyond grades and test scores. As David 
Niguidula (2010) notes, “The process of teaching is about far 
more than checking standards off a list or ‘getting through’ a 
curriculum. It’s about getting to know students as individuals 
and as groups; it’s about recognizing that Olivia’s interest in 
science fiction lights up her interest in writing or that Mario’s 
skill at assembling (and disassembling) indicates that he prefers 
hands-on experiments” (p. 153). A school becomes a true learning 
community when this shift in priorities happens.
I have advocated for multiple practices and possibilities 
educators can adopt in their approach to authentic formative 
and summative assessment. However, let me be clear about the 
steps in going schoolwide with digital student portfolios. Without 
principal and superintendent support, it will not happen. You 
can count on change stagnating in unsupported situations. In this 
chapter, I share specific steps school leaders can take to make 
this change a reality.

Going Schoolwide with Digital Portfolios   •   127
Going Schoolwide
Getting to a point where teachers needs minimal support in 
integrating technology into their classroom instruction takes 
time and persistence. Teaching and learning are incredibly com­
plex processes on their own. Throwing technology into the mix 
can further complicate things if the necessary pieces are not 
in place to make it work. School leaders need to bear in mind 
that adding technology to the school day should be preceded by 
addressing outstanding issues regarding curriculum, instruction, 
and assessment.
Integrating portfolio assessment within teaching and learn­
ing will have its challenges even when the academics of a school 
are strong. Necessary integration steps include looking at your 
school’s assessments and level of access, having interested 
teachers start the process on a small scale, and developing a 
purpose for digital portfolios that goes beyond merely being 
connected. The purpose for this type of initiative should be 
about improving and transforming current educational prac­
tices. An initiative such as this should not be an attempt to close 
an existing instructional gap but rather an effort to support a 
current school initiative.
Even with a strong instructional system in place, there will 
need to be a lot of modeling, shared demonstrations, and guid­
ance to ensure that the technology is used to its full potential. 
Leaders should consider instituting the training as schoolwide 
professional development; otherwise, some teachers might dis­
miss the initiative as just “one more thing to do.” That is why it 
is imperative that leaders understand the purpose exactly and 
how it will positively affect student learning. Professional devel­
opment that connects back to a bigger purpose for the work 
helps the parts connect with the whole.
Let’s explore some strategies a school leader can take for 
successfully going schoolwide with digital portfolios.

128   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
Start with Assessments
By starting with assessments, we place value on what we 
measure. People identify priorities through leaders’ actions more 
than their words. This means taking the focus off standardized 
testing and reframing our perspectives on day-to-day learning 
interactions. It’s not that we are ignoring our state and district 
mandates; we are instead choosing to shine a light on a different 
part of the assessment spectrum.
When we engage in a conversation about the many types of 
assessments used in school, invariably someone will associate 
the word assessment with high-stakes testing and grades. People 
are quick to generalize this concept. It helps as a leader to have a 
conversation with faculty about the rich array of possible ways 
to assess student learning and get students more involved in 
the process. As discussed throughout this book, teachers can 
use audio recordings, anecdotal notes, observations of group 
conversations, pictures, video, self-assessments, daily journal 
entries, short-answer written responses, and exit tickets as 
powerful assessment pieces. Any of these options would serve 
students well within a progress, process, or performance port­
folio, depending on the context.
Where the leader comes into the process is when he or she 
acknowledges that there is a problem with how assessments are 
currently being used. We have so many ways we can measure 
students about their achievement. Yet how many of these can 
be used to drive our work and inform our instruction? If they are 
summative, are we celebrating each student’s accomplishments, 
or merely documenting results we pretty much knew would be 
the outcome all along? These questions can lead to authentic 
conversations about finding balance in our students’ learning  
lives and developing ways for everyone to recognize their impact. 
This is an opportunity to revisit basic concepts about assessment 
literacy, such as the difference between formative and summa­
tive assessments, and reinforce the importance that almost all 

Going Schoolwide with Digital Portfolios   •   129
assessments can be formative if we use them in way that informs 
instruction.
To begin, a school leader can start expecting qualitative 
learning results to be assessed and submitted periodically. For 
example, teachers can collect and analyze writing samples at 
selected intervals throughout the year.
Assess Your Level of Readiness
There are few things more frustrating than when a teacher 
is trying to teach a lesson and the technology fails. Maybe the 
wireless signal is not strong enough for uploading multimedia 
content, or there are not enough devices for students to docu­
ment their learning at the same time. Whatever the situation, 
making sure that the technology is working is imperative to the 
success of any digital initiative.
I have experienced this firsthand. In our initial forays into 
digital portfolios, I asked all teachers to try out an application 
with our newly acquired iPads. Unfortunately, the application was 
not designed for K–12 students (it was for professional artists). 
Subsequently, teachers struggled to document student learning 
and upload it for an authentic audience. This led to a lot of frustra­
tion and an eventual cancellation of our first attempts at using 
digital portfolios in the classroom.
To help leaders assess their school’s readiness for a tech­
nology integration initiative, a basic checklist is located in 
Appendix A. It can help school leaders reflect on the level of 
access and gauge the purpose and audience needed to suc­
cessfully implement digital portfolios. I recommend completing 
this checklist as an instructional leadership team to ensure that 
many perspectives are considered and staff feel like they have 
input into the process.
Once the digital portfolio readiness results are available, 
they can be shared with the faculty. Starting with what is going 
well and then moving into areas that require more growth helps 

130   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
ensure feedback is heard. At some point, a decision will need to 
be made about how the school wants to proceed. It’s important 
to start small in order to develop buy-in and to test out new tools 
and ideas. However, if a school is ready to move forward with 
adopting technology in a thoughtful and meaningful way, then 
there is no reason to wait. Working with technology specialists 
to help facilitate this assessment is critical for success.
Start Small
This point cannot be overstated. Leaders have to be patient 
and allow change to move forward organically, preferably with 
teachers in the lead. Otherwise, it can be seen as a top-down 
initiative. Positive outcomes are worth the wait.
Right now, I am living out my beliefs. I am a relatively new 
principal in my current school district. After 16 years in one 
organization, it was time to move toward different opportunities. 
Within a few months of getting hired, a couple of teachers were 
already inquiring about using digital portfolios. They were inter­
ested in trying out two specific tools to see what worked best for 
them and their students. I was all for that.
This desire to adopt technology immediately is tempting.  
I am just as susceptible as anyone. However, until we can identify 
a purpose for the digital integration, these initiatives often fall 
flat. By posing the following three questions in this particular 
order, the focus likely remains on student learning:
1.	Why do we want to use digital portfolios with students?
2.	How might this look in our classroom or context?
3.	What tools and support will we need to be successful?
This logical progression allows our beliefs and practices to 
drive the acquisition of resources. Schools and districts become 
less susceptible to “initiative du jour” because they now have a 
set of steps and criteria in which to assess the possible effective­
ness of the new tools. Teachers can also experience initiative 

Going Schoolwide with Digital Portfolios   •   131
fatigue if we constantly ask them to change up their habits with­
out time to truly learn and use the technology.
One approach for starting small is engaging in a develop­
mental pilot. Most educators are familiar with the pilot process, 
in which a small group of educators sign up to try out a resource 
or approach to instruction in their classrooms. They cover the 
ground rules for the pilot and agree to reconvene periodically 
to share their findings. The difference between a full pilot and 
a developmental pilot is that the developmental pilot has fewer 
expectations or strings attached. In my experience, the focus is on 
finding out what we don’t know. No decisions are made in these 
engagements. It is about learning what works and what doesn’t—
and really exploring the technology to discover its possibilities. 
The freedom to play keeps the focus less on the tool and more 
on the process of learning itself.
In starting small, it might also be wise to create a table of 
contents for expected artifacts to upload into digital portfolios. 
This can give direction to a pilot without creating too many con­
straints. These artifacts can be related to one discipline, such 
as literacy. The focus can also be around a set of dispositions 
or values, such as service learning. Figure 5.1 is an example of 
an authentic writing portfolio table of contents. The digital tool 
would serve as the access point for housing students’ writing 
and literacy-based projects. Student learning could travel from 
grade to grade. The purpose is specific to the discipline of writing; 
the audience might be other students and family members who 
could leave positive comments.
What the focus should be when starting small with digital 
portfolios is dependent on what the school is working toward 
as a community. In my prior school, we wanted to increase 
parent engagement. We used a dedicated portfolio application 
(FreshGrade) because of the ease with which families could 
receive notifications on their smartphones when a new artifact 
of learning was uploaded. In my new school, we might adopt a 

132   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
Figure 5.1
Reading-Writing Portfolio Table of Contents
This document serves as a guide for students and teachers to build a portfolio 
of their work and authentically document their literacy skills. It is aligned with the 
Common Core State Standards. The goal is for students to present their portfolios 
at the spring conference (student-led conferences).
Introductory Letter
□  Student biography; a description of their personal learning experience;  
summary of contents; importance of artifacts
Persuasive/Opinion Writing (CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.CCRA.W.1)
□  Book review (CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.CCRA.W.9)
□  Letter to the principal about a school issue
□  Advertisement for a local business
Informative/Explanatory Writing (CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.CCRA.W.2)
□  Research report (CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.CCRA.W.7, CCSS.ELALITERACY.CCRA.W.8)
□  How-to essay
□  Biography of historical figure or personal hero
Narrative/Imaginative Writing (CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.CCRA.W.3)
□  Poetry
□  Real narrative (e.g., small-moment writing, memoir)
□  Fictional narrative
Process of Writing (CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.CCRA.W.4, CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.CCRA.W.5)
□  Evidence of the different stages of the writing process (i.e., brainstorming, 
drafting, revising, editing, publishing)
□  Evidence of ability to provide and accept feedback on writing
Digital Publishing (CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.CCRA.W.6)
□  Blogging (e.g., slice of life, math journaling, science notebook)
□  Digital storytelling (e.g., iMovie, YouTube)
□  Multimedia creations (e.g., Little Bird Tales, Book Creator)
Range of Reading (CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.CCRA.R.10)
□  List of books read including genre, rating, and review
□  List of books on to-read list
□  Reading conferences/fluency checks (audio recording)

Going Schoolwide with Digital Portfolios   •   133
Speaking and Listening (CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.CCRA.SL.1, CCSS.ELALITERACY.CCRA.SL.4)
□  Podcasting (e.g., audioBoom, GarageBand)
□  Storytelling
□  Readers Theater
□  Video tutorials (e.g., Educreations, Explain Everything)
Note on the reading-writing portfolio: Students would not be expected to 
include everything listed in this document every year. These ideas serve as 
suggestions for writing pieces, although book reviews and research reports 
do have anchor standards aligned with these activities. Each artifact should 
also be accompanied with a reflection. Consult your grade-level standards at 
www.corestandards.org for more information. This literacy assessment should 
travel with students from year to year. Students are expected to update their 
portfolios when they have produced a better piece or artifact. They should retain 
prior artifacts of learning to serve as evidence of growth over time. Primary 
students’ reading-writing portfolios would be paper based with some digital 
artifacts posted for families to view periodically. Intermediate students would 
maintain a digital portfolio of their work over time. Digital portfolios would remain 
with students during their secondary career.
table of contents and use a digital tool that we feel best show­
cases student writing, such as Google Sites/Google Drive or 
Kidblog. If the pedagogy drives the decision making, then the 
choice regarding technology is more likely to be aligned with 
effective instruction and assessment. Starting small makes this 
messy process more manageable.
Attend to the Culture
The culture of a school relies heavily on the beliefs and actions 
the faculty exhibits in their instruction and collaboration. School 
leaders should consider how the introduction of digital portfolios 
entails more than just a change in resources. It is also a change 
in educators’ practice. This type of change can be very personal 
and will require some attention.

134   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
One step to take when getting started is to revisit the school’s 
mission and vision statements. Taking some time to unpack and 
discuss this language will remind everyone why they serve in 
schools. Leaders can also use this activity to segue into develop­
ing building norms, which are guidelines for how faculty members 
will conduct themselves when working with students and col­
leagues. They should be positively framed and general enough 
to apply to anyone. Examples include “Be prepared for teaching 
and learning,” “Keep an open mind,” and “Look for consensus on 
complex issues.” Teachers and school leaders should come back 
to these norms when conversations about this change get heated.
When going schoolwide with digital portfolios, it is also 
helpful to tap into the emotional side of our role as educators. 
Leaders must attend to teachers’ hearts as well as their minds.  
I have found that sharing a metaphor or a story is a great way to 
facilitate dialogue about better ways to assess student learning. 
For example, consider the message in the following Chinese folk­
tale (Rodrigues, 2009):
There was once an elderly Chinese woman who had two 
large pots, each hanging on the ends of a pole which she car­
ried across her neck.
One of the pots had a crack in it while the other pot was 
perfect and always delivered a full portion of water. At the end 
of the long walks from the stream to the house, the cracked 
pot arrived only half full.
For a full two years this went on daily, with the woman 
bringing home only one and a half pots of water.
Of course, the perfect pot was proud of its accomplish­
ments. But the poor cracked pot was ashamed of its own imper­
fection and miserable that it could only do half of what it had 
been made to do.
After two years of what it perceived to be bitter failure, it 
spoke to the woman one day by the stream: “I am ashamed of 
myself, because this crack in my side causes water to leak out 
all the way back to your house.”

Going Schoolwide with Digital Portfolios   •   135
The old woman smiled, “Did you notice that there are 
flowers on your side of the path, but not on the other pot’s 
side? That’s because I have always known about your flaw, 
so I planted flower seeds on your side of the path, and every 
day while we walk back, you water them. For two years I have 
been able to pick these beautiful flowers to decorate the table. 
Without you being just the way you are, there would not be this 
beauty to grace the house.”
Questions after the story can lead to deep discussions about 
the role of assessment in schools:
•	 How many of our students have been viewed through the 
lens of their deficiencies—of what they are not capable of 
instead of what’s possible?
•	 What does a deficit approach do for a student’s self-esteem? 
Their future?
•	 How can we address this situation with our assessments as 
a faculty?
Conversations such as this will more likely lead teachers to 
realize that they have some level of control over these circum­
stances. Staff might associate these types of stories with their 
students’ own personal narratives, especially those with chal­
lenges and special needs. If this were my meeting, I might close 
out the discussion with the following to make the point clear: 
“Like the old woman, as teachers, we can create the conditions 
in which all of our students, regardless of their challenges, can 
succeed and even flourish as learners and as people. That’s 
the rewarding part about teaching: designing the context for 
students to achieve and watching it happen. I believe portfolio 
assessment, with the help of digital tools, can make that happen.”
Also consider the benefit of having protocols in place. Proto­
cols are structures for facilitating professional conversations. 
In other words, rules and expectations are described ahead of 
time. The power of using protocols when attending to school 

136   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
culture is it provides a safer space for everyone to share their 
thinking—especially critical ideas. Most faculties tend to have 
a few more outspoken members. Although their ideas should 
be recognized, more reserved educators may have just as many 
beneficial things to share. In addition, protocols force people to 
listen when others are speaking. In my experience, people tend 
to wait to speak instead of actually hearing what someone else 
is saying. By using protocols, we maximize the potential that 
professional conversations can have on shifting a school culture 
in the right direction.
Recommended resources that contain useful protocols 
include Data Wise: A Step-by-Step Guide to Using Assessment Results 
to Improving Teaching and Learning (Boudett, City, & Murname, 
2013) and The Reflective Educator’s Guide to Professional Devel-
opment: Coaching Inquiry-Oriented Learning Communities (Dana 
& Yendol-Hoppey, 2008).
Develop a Plan
Although culture is critical, clarity on the direction a school 
or district is taking is equally important. Developing an action 
plan helps create this clarity for staff, students, and families. 
(See Figure 5.2 for an example.) The plan should be created 
with a group of teacher leaders who will ensure that multiple 
perspectives are considered and honored. This document should 
explain what the initiative is; how it connects with the school’s/
district’s mission, vision, and current curriculum; benefits for 
students and the school; specific tools and resources needed 
for the work; a budget that considers software, hardware, and 
professional development; and a detailed timeline for imple­
mentation, including who is responsible for what and by when. 
Keeping the plan brief and visual in nature helps ensure that 
teachers will read and understand the details and purpose for 
implementing digital portfolios.

Going Schoolwide with Digital Portfolios   •   137
Figure 5.2
Digital Portfolios Action Plan
Grade/Discipline:
Team Members:
Prepared by:
Overview and Purpose:
Mission, Vision, and  
Curriculum Alignment: 
Anticipated  
Completion  
Date
 
Person(s)  
Responsible
Rationale for digital 
portfolios (Identify  
benefits for students, 
staff, families; Select  
content/discipline focus)
Resources needed 
(software,  
hardware,  
professional 
development):
Initial implementation 
steps (Assign classrooms 
to pilot; Evaluate tool[s] 
and approach)
Development of  
program (Create  
procedures; Specify  
content; Set standards)
Budget for 
resources:
Full implementation 
(Communicate plan; 
Provide training, time  
to implement)
Regular portfolio  
evaluation (Convene 
leadership team to review 
and analyze portfolios)
Additional notes:

138   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
This action plan should be a work in progress. As unexpected 
situations arise, such as technical or technological challenges, 
there needs to be a way to adjust the timeline, tools, or approach 
to implementation. Just as important is aligning this technology 
initiative with the school’s current curriculum and instruction. 
It is hard enough to make one change as an organization; trying 
to “fix” teaching with digital portfolios is not recommended. 
Instead, school leaders would be wise to approach this initiative 
with the goal of enhancing the high-quality practice already 
occurring in the school.
For example, if a school has experienced success in writing, 
then it might make sense to implement blogs as digital portfolios.  
This type of tool brings an authentic audience that might have 
been missing prior. Writing and blogging as a combination makes 
sense; this happens in the real world, especially with the post­
ing and commenting features that tools such as Kidblog and 
Wordpress provide. The linked activity at the end of this chapter 
directs school leaders to the planning template in which they 
can create their own action plan based on the specific context 
of their building.
Offer Opportunities to Learn and Collaborate
Once a strong rationale for embedding digital portfolios and 
a plan for implementation have been established, leaders must 
allocate time and resources toward professional learning. Inte­
grating technology at a deep level is a tall order for most teachers, 
regardless of their instructional ability.
To get everyone on the same page regarding digital portfolio 
assessment, it is essential to find time for basic training with the 
technology. I recommend creating and distributing an agenda 
ahead of time that requires teachers to come prepared (e.g., have 
apps downloaded and an account created). The agenda should 
also describe the goals for the initial training, who will be facili­
tating, and what roles everyone will play. With technology train­

Going Schoolwide with Digital Portfolios   •   139
ing for teachers, I also recommend having additional support 
on hand, such as technology staff and the teachers who initially 
piloted the initiative. They can walk around and assist teachers 
while the lead facilitator is demonstrating the tool.
It would be wise to expect some guidance and training from 
the technology provider itself. They are the experts on the 
product. Why not tap into their knowledge? In my prior school, 
we used Skype to video conference with a trainer to learn about 
FreshGrade, our tool of choice. She was the expert we did not 
have in house, aware of the ins and outs of the product plus the 
features that would be available soon. If a technology provider 
does not offer some type of support or training, then it’s worth 
inquiring as to why, as well as where and how faculty could 
become fluent in using the digital tools.
After the initial whole-faculty training is complete, school 
leaders should develop a calendar of follow-up trainings and 
refreshers throughout the school year. Sharing these dates out 
ahead of time allows teachers to plan and make themselves 
available. Before each training session, send out a digital survey 
to solicit questions teachers might have about the digital port­
folio tool. Their responses often serve as the agenda for the time 
together. Start by addressing these inquiries, and then pro- 
vide time for teachers to use the technology and converse with 
one another. Feedback from these personalized training sessions 
can be collected through an online survey to improve future 
sessions.
Include Families in the Process
The home-school connection that can be facilitated with dig­
ital portfolios is essential. For many of our students, families 
will be their primary audience once they start sharing their 
best work and growth over time online. As already discussed, 
having an authentic audience for their work increases students’ 
motivation to do their best. The feedback parents might leave 

140   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
on an online learning artifact also reinforces for teachers that 
they are paying attention to their children’s work and care about 
their efforts. For some families who struggle to stay connected 
with their child’s teacher and learning experiences, digital port­
folios offer another pathway to facilitate communications. Rela­
tionships that are initially formed through online means can lead 
to developing a deeper connection with the school.
As a school looks into implementing digital portfolios  
en masse, it’s wise to offer family members the opportunity to 
provide input into the process. This can take many forms. One 
approach is to invite families to after-school sessions to learn 
more about the technology. Some parents simply need to learn 
how to download the appropriate app or create login credentials. 
Once family members understand the basics, the educators facil­
itating the training can ask what they like and do not like about 
the tool and the school’s approach to using it. This information 
can then be shared back with the faculty. Another idea is to 
create a digital survey and send it out to families via email or text 
message. Both approaches involve families in the process, which 
can increase ownership in any decision to move forward with 
the technology and assessment initiative.
Another reason to include families in the process of imple­
menting digital portfolios is because they might bring additional 
resources to your efforts. The most obvious benefit is the funds 
that a parent group could raise to support hardware purchases 
or software subscriptions. If financial support is not an issue, 
some parents or family members might have a background in 
technology. Consider tapping them for advice or even as tech­
nology support. Family members can also provide insights about 
what they would prefer to see posted in their children’s digital 
portfolios and how often.
One final benefit to allowing families to be a part of the 
implementation process is the community support that will 
naturally develop. Many parents are still nervous about allow­

Going Schoolwide with Digital Portfolios   •   141
ing their child to be online. They have reasonable anxieties. 
This may cause some conflict if a few family members try to 
resist the initiative. If, however, there are enough families who 
believe that student learning artifacts should not be sequestered 
to the school, they can become your greatest area of support.  
I have found that parents and other family members carry much 
more political clout than I or any other educator might have 
with district leadership. They can be integral in getting this type 
of change to move forward. Making families our allies from an 
educational, financial, and political stance will help ensure this 
initiative is successful.
Be Willing to Pay
The idea that some technologies are “free” still perpetuates 
the educational dialogue, especially online. The fact is, nothing is 
free. Even if there is no cost to the school to use certain software, 
the companies that develop it might use student information and 
data for their own purposes. For example, one of Google’s big­
gest revenue producers is the advertising they sell within their 
search engine and related applications. Our search inquiries 
and the websites with which we engage provide information for 
Google to tailor what we see in terms of ads and pop ups. Even 
through Google’s G Suite for Education—which is not supposed 
to use student information to sell advertising—we’re immersing 
students in a product the developer certainly hopes kids will 
continue using in the future.
I am not suggesting that schools avoid accessing Google or 
any other digital tool that is “free” to use. But I do believe that we 
need to understand—and help students understand—that we do 
pay in some form or fashion when we use these tools and tech­
nologies. Another concern regarding the use of “free” digital tools 
is that only the largest companies can actually afford to offer  
this policy. This means that schools might overlook software or 
hardware that could possibly lead to better outcomes in student 

142   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
learning. Related, smaller technology companies are typically 
focused on doing one or two things really well. For example, 
Kidblog is about one thing: blogging. Within their ecosystem, 
teachers can connect with other classrooms also using Kidbog, 
set preferred privacy levels, and know that student data are most 
likely being maintained with integrity. I also find that smaller 
technology companies typically provide better customer support.
When it’s time to move forward from a technology pilot to 
the adoption of a schoolwide solution or tool, it’s a good idea 
to talk with a company sales representative first. Consider the 
following questions:
•	 Where do you store your data? Where are the servers 
located? (security)
•	 How long would we be under contract for your service? 
(transparency)
•	 What type of support will you provide for teachers when 
they need help? (customer service)
•	 Who “owns” the data? Does student information belong to 
students and their families? (rights)
•	 How is your company funded: by subscriptions or through 
investments? If you rely on investors, what are their origins? 
(integrity)
If the representative is able to answer these questions— 
or similar ones—without a lot of dancing around or avoidance, 
then chances are good that the technology provider has devel­
oped the digital portfolio tool for the right reason: to improve 
student learning outcomes.
Summary
As previously stated, there is more than one pathway a school 
leader can take in implementing digital portfolios at a schoolwide 
level. Every school has a different culture and climate. Having 

Going Schoolwide with Digital Portfolios   •   143
completed this type of change before and becoming more familiar 
with the literature and research on organizational change, I am 
confident that school leaders who follow these general steps will 
likely experience success.
•	 Start with assessments. This includes expanding the types of 
assessments being used and developing assessment literacy 
with faculty.
•	 Assess your level of readiness. Without available and robust 
technologies—both hardware and software—we risk running 
any digital initiative into the ground.
•	 Start small. Instead of pushing every teacher to adopt digital 
portfolios, allow faculty who are ready for this initiative to 
run a pilot.
•	 Attend to the culture. Introducing digital assessments into 
instruction is a cultural change as well as a technical change. 
Teachers need to believe in the importance of this type 
of work.
•	 Develop a plan. Create a committee of interested staff (and 
even students) to develop a process, timeline, and formal 
action plan for implementing digital portfolios schoolwide.
•	 Offer opportunities to learn and collaborate. As school 
leaders, we are only one person. Let others facilitate the 
professional development and training whenever possible.
•	 Include families in the process. Parents and students have 
insights that are essential as a school moves forward with 
technology integration. They will become your champions 
for change if you let them have a voice in the process.
•	 Be willing to pay. There is no such thing as “free” technol­
ogy. Do your homework about the technology company you 
are interested in and allocate funds on a yearly basis for 
these resources as needed.
Above all, enjoy the journey in upgrading your assessment 
practices with the help of digital tools. Learning should be an 

144   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
exciting and rewarding experience for everyone involved in the 
process.
Linked Activity: Develop an Action Plan  
for Digital Portfolios
Use the templates provided in this chapter to assess your school’s 
readiness and start creating a plan for implementing digital port­
folios schoolwide. Use online collaborative software and share 
out this process with all stakeholders to ensure transparency 
and garner feedback. Make sure this work is tightly aligned with 
the school’s mission, vision, beliefs, and values to ensure that 
pedagogy is driving the effort. Take this process as slowly as it 
needs to go. With digital portfolios, and technology integration 
in general, doing it well is better than getting it done.
Learner Profile: Josh Beck and Chris Haeger
Josh Beck is a high school English teacher at Cudahy 
High School in Cudahy, Wisconsin, not far from 
Milwaukee. Chris Haeger is the building principal. 
Josh and Chris share their journey in adopting a more 
authentic and continuous approach to student assess­
ment with digital tools.
Why did you introduce digital portfolio assessment in 
your classroom?
Chris: Our focus was on developing a growth-minded assess­
ment with kids, following the research available that supports 
this work. We wanted to move beyond just a grade—to give kids 
an opportunity to see their growth over time. The advent of 
the Common Core State Standards helped in providing us with 
direction.

Going Schoolwide with Digital Portfolios   •   145
Josh: As teachers, we knew the standards were coming. We 
wanted to authentically assess students’ understanding of those 
standards and to measure our impact as educators. We decided 
that portfolios were a way to do this. It’s great how students can 
go back and see how they grew from semester to semester.  
As teachers, we could see how we have influenced our students’ 
work in literacy.
In what way(s) were the effects of implementing digital 
portfolios in school unique or unusual?
Chris: Twice a year, sophomores and seniors present their 
portfolios to a panel of adults. Businesspeople, community lead­
ers, college professors, members of the military, and members 
of our state’s department of public instruction have all served 
on this board. This experience has been tremendously positive. 
Students have to come in front of all these people and present 
what they have learned and done and tell us how their work has 
displayed their understanding. Putting themselves out there, 
wearing suits and dresses, is a great experience for them. Kids 
will come back and tell us how this experience is tangibly depen­
dent on the academic expectations.
Josh: One student did not come prepared to the panel. She 
had to explain to everyone why she did not do any work that 
semester. The next time, she was dressed up and had work to 
present that addressed all 10 ELA standards. The portfolio pro­
cess was what motivated her to move out of a fixed mindset due 
to her situation. Now I just ask the kids, “What are you going 
to present at the panel?” These experiences also lead to real 
opportunities. After one presentation, a student was asked by a 
local employer if she wanted to apply for a position.
How would you describe the characteristics of the 
products from the digital portfolio work and of the 
educators who were involved?
Josh: Other content areas and departments have joined us 
in this process. We put together a list of the standards in plain 

146   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
English, shared them with the other teachers, and asked, “What 
assignments are aligned with these expectations?” We have sat 
down with social studies teachers, government teachers, and 
talked about the work they do with kids and how they might 
connect with one another. For example, when students study 
the U.S. Constitution and we read The Kite Runner, we compare 
the different constitutions between Afghanistan and the United 
States, especially after 9/11 and how our country was involved. 
Conversations about how to include minorities and females in 
our own county’s constitution are more frequent and deep.
What resources were used to support the use of digital 
portfolios?
Chris: We use Chromebooks to access many of these resources. 
High school students all have one of these devices. Also, it was 
critical that there was teacher willingness to move from binders 
on a shelf to something electronically based. Our technology 
integration specialist was able to help teachers support this 
initiative and solve any glitches. He has been instrumental. Kids 
all now have a Google Site that maintains their portfolios.
Josh: After they graduate, students will come back and con­
nect their personal emails to keep those portfolios. One student 
who went to college used her high school template to develop 
another one for her English coursework. The panelists have also 
liked this digital component. The ability to quickly click on a link 
and show four years’ worth of work is very convenient.
What specific outcomes do you attribute to the use of 
digital portfolios?
Chris: It has expanded kids’ understanding of technology. 
We have shown them how to use their phones beyond social 
media and texting. Even teaching kids how to create a website 
is important. We aren’t making any assumptions about kids’ 
“tech-savvyness.” Kids who transfer into our district are amazed 
at how technology is used and how applicable basic tools are, 

Going Schoolwide with Digital Portfolios   •   147
such as smartphones and copy machines. We are using all tools 
to allow students to learn. Other apps, such as voice recorders 
and video makers, are incorporated into their Google Site.
In your opinion, what other factors contributed to the 
achievement of these outcomes?
Josh: Again, the willingness of the staff is impressive. We are 
trying to connect with kids on a personal level—to be reflective 
and develop relationships. We talk about what they did well and 
what they want to work on next. We are constantly asking the kids 
for feedback and asking how our instruction helped them meet 
expectations. An added benefit has been how we have taught 
students to network and reach out to others to include them in 
the panel and process.
Chris: Also, the willingness of community members to come 
in and listen to the kids describe their learning is nice. The kids 
see the mayor here, other important leaders, and they take what 
is really their final exam, and it creates a different context. At 
least half of our kids show up in suits and ties. People are now 
calling us to serve on this panel and have taken an interest in the 
students’ learning. Another factor is panelists have told us it is 
easier to answer educational questions and have conversations 
with people about this topic in the community. The indirect influ­
ence of this process has brought in other leaders to our school.
What problems did you encounter when developing or 
introducing digital portfolios?
Chris: Students tell us that the first time through is a learning 
process regarding organization. Kids talk and discuss how differ­
ent teachers have different expectations regarding the portfolios. 
Also, staff members needed some time to adjust. “How is the 
portfolio connected to standards? Learning targets?” Portfolios 
point out many more areas of school that need to be addressed.
Josh: It was a slow process in the beginning because the 
seniors didn’t have a digital portfolio. So we had to transition. It 

148   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
was also a challenge to get everyone on the same page regarding 
academic expectations and how the standards are interpreted. 
What is acceptable and what is not, and defining what these 
standards are asking for—we as a faculty have to have a common 
understanding. Parents are involved in this process up to the 
presentation itself, preparing them for the event.
What else do you think a teacher or school should know 
before implementing digital portfolios?
Josh: The presentation is a celebration of their work. They 
come to the end of the school year with excitement and pride, 
smiles on their faces. “When do you present?” and “How did you 
do?” are common questions we hear in the hallways. Even stu­
dents with significant needs are expected to present. The panel­
ists can never tell which kids are in a special education program 
and which are not. One student who is autistic came up and 
delivered an amazing presentation without any echoing or other 
issues that he normally displays. We were so glad to have given 
him the opportunity to do this on his own and be independent. 
Everyone talked about it afterward from the panel. Successes 
like this—kids coming in like any other kid—it is amazing.

149 
6
Moving Beyond 
Digital Portfolios
“Uncertainty is the foundation for inquiry and research.”
—Peter Johnston
A family friend, Lisl H. Detlefsen, is a children’s book author. 
She has been persistent in her efforts to get to this point in 
her career. She received multiple rejections before publishers 
started saying yes to her work. I asked her if she kept a portfolio 
that was representative of her growth as a writer in addition to 
one that showed her best work. I assumed professional writers 
kept a collection of these artifacts to share and promote when 
pitching their next idea. Her response was surprising: “No,  
I work with an agent. When I have a new manuscript ready 
for submission, she knows which editors are most likely to be 
interested in it.”
She does have a website that highlights her publications, 
readers’ positive reviews, and upcoming events she is hosting 
(www.lislhdbooks.com). However, this web presence is a small 
part of how she represents herself as an artist to the larger 
world. The connections she has with editors, her agent, and other 
writers are more important than any digital presence she might 

150   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
have. It is about who she knows as much as who knows her and 
what she can do. These collaborators help bring her a broader 
audience and offer her helpful guidance to become better in her 
work. Without these relationships—mediated both online and  
offline—she might still be trying to get her first book published.
This example illustrates an important point about digital 
portfolios. In the real world, they don’t exist—at least, not as 
the formalized constructs educators create for classroom use. 
My writer friend does not publish a new piece of writing or art 
every six weeks and add reflective comments to it. Lisl does 
not have a teacher who checks in with her regularly to assess 
her progress and offer feedback and ideas for future goals. 
Yes, she does work with editors and mentors to improve her 
practice, and she does post highlights on her site, such as 
when her next book will be coming out. But it is her work that 
drives her presence, not the other way around. Also important  
is that what she produces is her own. Her website merely houses  
her work; she can take her content with her whenever the need 
arises.
In this brief chapter, we’ll take a closer look at the importance 
of all learners claiming their own digital domains during their 
K–12 careers. In addition, we’ll explore three areas—gradeless  
classrooms, self-publishing, and Genius Hour—as possible next 
steps in helping our students truly own their learning both today, 
tomorrow, and for the foreseeable future.
Claiming Our Domain
We have to take the long view when it comes to facilitating port-
folio assessment with digital tools. These are often not spaces 
that students can take with them once their K–12 careers are 
complete. With this in mind, what is the larger aim of this ven-
ture? What type of learning experiences can we facilitate on behalf 
of our students that will last for a lifetime?

Moving Beyond Digital Portfolios   •   151
Audrey Watters (2016) takes up this issue in her work regard-
ing modern learning. She poses several questions regarding 
ownership of student learning and the content that has been 
created and documented. “What happens now that schoolwork 
is increasingly digital (that is, schoolwork that isn’t paperwork 
but has been digitized as done directly on computers)? School-
work done on computers should prompt other questions too, 
such as: What counts as student work? Content? Data? What 
happens to that work, not just at the end of the school year but 
on a day-to-day basis?” (p. 2)
Data collection has become a high priority in schools. The 
question is: How might we define data today, especially as the tradi-
tional understanding continues to broaden with the abundance of 
new technologies accessible in schools? Audio, video, and images 
are all potential artifacts that can inform learning and teaching. 
However, the ephemeral nature of digital content, at least what we 
can see in front of us, demands a different approach to how we 
collect, curate, and share our work. “We must consider what stu-
dent data are being created, what student data are being collected 
(and by whom), how to protect that data, and how to preserve it. 
Furthermore, we must put the control of that data into the hands 
of the students themselves, in no small part because learning now  
happens beyond school walls (and school software)—at home and 
on the go, thanks to mobile devices” (Watters, 2016, p. 4). This is 
an issue of both student safety and learning legacy.
With this in mind, what is possible for our students today 
and in the near future? I believe that it’s critical for students to 
be able to take control of their learning histories. Let’s look at 
three opportunities to do just that.
The Gradeless Classroom
In my experience, once teachers start utilizing digital port­
folios to communicate student learning on a regular basis, one of 
the first school constructs they question is grading. As a former 

152   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
teacher asked me, “If I’m sharing their work online and then 
parents can see how they are doing, why is grading necessary?” 
This is a hard question to answer. We should not drop grades 
on a whim, yet we cannot deny the power of digital portfolios as 
a more effective assessment tool for documenting student prog-
ress and achievement (at least when implemented with fidelity).
Mark Barnes outlines an alternative approach to respond-
ing to and assessing student learning using feedback as the pri-
mary source of communication. He uses the acronym SE2R as 
a mnemonic device for remembering how to respond to work 
submitted from student to teacher (Barnes, 2013). It stands for
•	 Summarize
•	 Explain
•	 Redirect
•	 Resubmit
Using this systematic approach to feedback, teachers can be 
more consistent in their assessment practices and possibly stop 
the practice of formal/traditional grading. “The days of placing 
a number or a letter at the top of a student’s paper and blotting 
red ink all over the margins must come to an end if education is 
to move into the 21st century and beyond” (Barnes, 2013, p. 87). 
If the feedback is consistent, timely, specific, and moves learners 
forward, there is little reason why an approach like this could 
not be a better alternative to the somewhat arbitrary symbols 
and numbers that have represented student learning in the past. 
The absence of grades does not mean the absence of student 
ownership. By not associating a grade with student work, we may 
improve the feeling of authorship with the student, assuming the 
work is authentic and meaningful.
Barnes also offers some insights into his thinking as he works 
with a student:
I begin by telling students what they’ve done. This may 
sound inconsequential, but many students complete tasks aim-

Moving Beyond Digital Portfolios   •   153
lessly and never realize what they’ve actually accomplished. 
Further explanation of what was done and how it does or 
doesn’t meet learning outcomes or follow a specific set of 
guidelines is critical to the learning process. If something is 
missed, students are redirected to a specific lesson, presenta-
tion, or model so learning can be reemphasized. Sometimes, 
redirection can be as simple as “see me for clarification.” When 
redirection is given, students are always asked to resubmit  
the activity or project for further evaluation. (Barnes, 2013, 
pp. 75–76)
As already discussed, high-quality feedback is a pillar of effec-
tively utilizing formative assessment. The inclusion of digital 
tools such as progress and process portfolios can facilitate this 
approach. The comments and revisions that result from feed-
back offered by the teacher can be captured and shared within 
a portfolio platform. This information can serve as the neces-
sary evidence to gauge whether students have met the expec-
tations for learning and how deeply. When a family member is 
included in the learning trajectory on a regular basis, the need 
for grades and other arbitrary symbols is lessened. Instead, the 
process becomes simply about the learning.
A reality with gradeless classrooms is how graduation works 
once students meet all of the necessary credit requirements 
in high school. Some private high schools have addressed this 
situation by moving toward competency-based education. Many  
of the private high schools participating in this innovation to 
“embrace a new transcript” are attempting to measure profi-
ciency in what leaders believe are key areas for students’ future 
success, including “Complex Communication—Oral and Written” 
and “Integrity and Ethical Decision Making” (Jaschik, 2017). The 
model envisions that each credit earned would be backed up by 
examples of student work, so an admissions officer could see lab 
reports, essays, and so forth. Students curate their examples of 
work in “digital lockers”—another term for portfolios.

154   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
Student Self-Publishing
It is reasonable to expect students to internalize the quali-
ties and criteria for what good work looks like in any given sub-
ject or discipline. This is an essential step in guiding students 
to become independent, self-directed learners. When someone 
knows what success looks like and they have the tools to guide 
themselves toward that end goal, they can learn almost any-
thing they set their mind to.
One of the best opportunities for students to showcase their 
learning in an authentic way is through self-publishing. The 
concept of self-publishing itself is not necessarily new. If a pro-
spective author struggled to get a manuscript accepted, he or 
she would seek out independent opportunities to get the work in 
front of an audience. Yet even these opportunities can be fleet-
ing. A printing press had to be willing to take on the project, and 
the author had to be willing to take a financial loss if not enough 
people were to purchase the book. There was big risk with little 
assurance of reward.
In today’s digital world, however, the prospect of self- 
publishing has become a greater reality for any author-to-be, 
adult or student. One example of a digital self-publishing tool is 
CreateSpace (www.createspace.com). With CreateSpace, writers 
can upload their manuscripts, design covers, assign ISBN num-
bers, and review proofs to ensure accuracy of the text. Once 
everything looks ready, the final draft is uploaded and posted 
online for anyone to purchase. The price of each book is set 
based on what the author believes is reasonable. The final prod-
uct can be available for digital e-readers and in print.
Students have the opportunity not only to produce a real 
book but also to tangle with the details of sales, marketing, and 
profit sharing. Self-publishing becomes an opportunity for inte-
grating literacy with economics. Students are no longer develop-
ing a digital portfolio but rather a digital presence that can give 
them credibility for years to come. Another option, especially 

Moving Beyond Digital Portfolios   •   155
for younger students, is to use Book Creator to create original 
eBooks with embedded audio. This work can be published to 
YouTube or iBooks.
Genius Hour
Helping students own their learning should not be reserved 
for the content they produce. Ownership is also about how stu-
dents choose to spend their time at school, even if for a little bit.
Genius Hour, which is sometimes referred to as 20 percent 
time, has become more prevalent in education today. Google 
started this concept when they gave their employees the equiv-
alent of one day a week to work on their passion projects. What 
they worked on must be related to their mission as a company, 
but the specifics were entirely up to them. Some of their best 
ideas, such as the concept of collaborative writing via Google 
Docs, came out of this concept of 20 percent time.
National surveys continue to show that the longer students 
spend in school, the less engaged they feel with learning in gen-
eral (Busteed, 2013). This should be cause for alarm, yet we still 
deal almost exclusively with expected outcomes and meeting 
standards in the name of ensuring every student is successful. 
But successful at what? Are these successes on students’ own 
terms? Genius Hour is one way teachers and schools devote time 
for student choice and voice.
This can look different in every school. Some teachers have 
incorporated Genius Hour, in which kids are provided time, space, 
and resources to explore their interests and passions in a guided 
inquiry-based approach to learning. The authors of The Genius 
Hour Handbook: Fostering Passion, Wonder, and Inquiry in the Class-
room (Krebs & Zvi, 2016) highlight many benefits for students 
when effectively implementing Genius Hour in classrooms:
•	 They have autonomy and purpose.
•	 They are given time to master content.
•	 They make good learning decisions.

156   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
•	 They become fearless learners.
•	 They can stop playing the game of getting good grades.
•	 They develop curiosity, innovation, and creativity.
•	 They explore and wonder to discover their passions.
•	 They will be better understood by teacher and peers.
•	 They will be instructional leaders as they share their projects.
My wife, a former 2nd grade teacher, tried this out in her class-
room of very active students. She facilitated Genius Hour, which 
her students referred to as “project time,” at the end of the day. 
This was a time in which students could tinker and make things 
of their choosing. Resources such as building kits and creative 
art materials were provided with little direction. What she found 
was that choice affected each student in different ways. Some stu-
dents liked working with peers regularly, whereas others needed 
quiet time to read and write. For one student in particular, a half 
hour of tinkering every day led to a reduction in office referrals 
by 70 percent. Providing choice in school helped her better under­
stand her students and adjust her instruction.
The challenge with concepts such as Genius Hour—which 
allow for more student choice and voice—is how to document 
learning. For my wife, the answer came with the use of digital 
portfolios. Instead of instituting one specific type of portfolio, 
she captured students’ best work as well as the processes they 
used to achieve their goals. This process brought an authentic 
audience for students’ real work, and students felt like their ideas 
were validated through the use of digital tools to capture and 
celebrate their efforts.
Conclusion: Rethinking Assessment  
in the 21st Century
What the future holds for teaching and learning is hard to predict. 
Will all textbooks go digital, or will they even cease to exist? How 
will technology improve in its ability to provide feedback for stu-

Moving Beyond Digital Portfolios   •   157
dent learning as it happens and then adjust accordingly? What role 
will students’ interests and goals play in their educational experi-
ences? What is yet to come is both exciting and a cause for anxiety.
One area in which I feel comfortable making a prediction is 
how assessment will change. Really, it already has. Schools and 
districts are going gradeless. Learning management systems 
are putting students in the driver’s seat regarding growth and 
achievement. Parents can see how their children are doing in 
school at any given moment without the arbitrariness of grades 
and scores. As these practices become more widespread, the 
expectations for all schools will shift in this direction.
Digital portfolios are a way for teachers to explore a better 
approach to assessment in the 21st century. They celebrate student 
work in a visible way. Technology integration with a clear purpose 
helps students and teachers manage the multiple streams of infor-
mation flowing in the classroom. The audiences that digital port­
folio assessment can facilitate—both locally and globally—can be 
a main driver for students to produce their best work. Access to the 
relevant and appropriate tools become more available every day.
By understanding and acting upon the belief that students 
can lead their own learning, we realize true success as educators. 
Digital portfolio assessment, from celebrating best work to mea-
suring growth over time and eventually to students calling their 
digital presence their own, is one approach to this destination.
If you would like to continue this conversation, share your 
work, and interact with other educators who are also pursuing 
digital portfolios, then please join our vibrant Google+ commu-
nity: http://bit.ly/dspinaction. This approach to assessment in the 
21st century is just the beginning. Let’s come together and learn 
how to leverage technology in a way that honors the whole child.

158 
Directions: Rate your classroom/school/district on each compo-
nent for these domains. Celebrate where you are accomplished, 
and consider how to move forward in other areas.
Appendix A:  
Digital Portfolio Assessment 
Readiness Tool
Access
Accomplished
Getting 
There
Not 
Started
Availability (How many tools do students have 
available to connect with?)
Connectivity (What is the strength and breadth 
of your school’s wireless system?)
Compatibility (Are the selected tools compatible 
with the needs of the learners?)
Allocation (Is there adequate time, funding, 
and training devoted to learning about and 
using these tools?)

Appendix A   •   159
Purpose
Accomplished
Getting 
There
Not 
Started
Resources (What is the rationale for using 
the selected technology, both hardware and 
software?)
Content (How is technology connected to 
essential questions and understandings?)
Integration (Will embedding technology into 
your curriculum, instruction, and assessment 
augment learning?)
Agency (Do learners have the opportunity to 
self-assess and improve upon their work, and 
thereby perceive that their additional effort 
increases their ability?)
Audience
Accomplished
Getting 
There
Not 
Started
Visibility (Is the learning students produce 
shareable with a broader audience?)
Independence (Does an audience motivate 
students to self-assess their own work and 
produce learning aligned with their potential?)
Inquiry (Will new knowledge and skills lead to 
new questions and investigations?)
Empathy (Can students broaden their horizons 
by actively listening to others, engaging in 
conversations, and providing feedback in the 
classroom and beyond?)

160 
Appendix B:  
Planning Template for Digital 
Portfolios in the Classroom

Appendix B   •   161
Step 1: Determine the planning time and discipline for a yearlong plan for instruction.
When will we meet to prepare for next year? 
What discipline will we focus on in our planning? 
How will we know that we are successful? 
Step 2: Bring in assessment data, including samples of student work, to identify 
strengths and areas for growth within the discipline of focus.
Strengths
  •
  •
  •
Areas for Growth
  •
  •
  •
Step 3: Determine a digital portfolio tool with which to post student work.
  •  Choice A: Blogs (e.g., Kidblog, Edublogs, Wordpress, Blogger)
  •  Choice B: Dedicated Portfolio Applications (e.g., FreshGrade, Seesaw)
  •  Choice C: Websites (e.g., Google Sites, Weebly)
Step 4: Schedule publishing dates on which performance tasks will be uploaded  
to students’ digital portfolios, accompanied with reflections, self-assessment,  
and goal setting.
Publishing Date:
Unit:
Publishing Date:
Unit:
Publishing Date:
Unit:
Publishing Date:
Unit:
Publishing Date:
Unit:
Publishing Date:
Unit:
Publishing Date:
Unit:

162 
Allington, R. L., & Cunningham, P. M. (2006). Schools that work: Where all chil-
dren read and write (2nd ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Barnes, M. (2013). Role reversal: Achieving uncommonly excellent results in the 
student-centered classroom. Alexandria, VA: ASCD.
Barshay, J. (2016). Using computers widens the achievement gap in writing, 
a federal study finds. The Hechinger Report. Available: http://hechinger 
report.org/online-writing-tests-widen-achievement-gap
Black, P., & Wiliam, D. (1998). Inside the black box: Raising standards through 
classroom assessment. Phi Delta Kappan, 80(2), 139–144, 146–148.
Boudett, K. P., City, E. A., & Murname, R. J. (2013). Data wise: A step-by-step guide 
to using assessment results to improving teaching and learning (2nd ed.). 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press.
Boushey, G., & Moser, J. (2014). The daily 5: Fostering literacy independence in 
the elementary grades (2nd ed.). Portland, ME: Stenhouse.
Busteed, B. (2013). The school cliff: Student engagement drops with each 
school year. Available: www.gallup.com/opinion/gallup/170525/school-cli-
student-engagement-drops-school-year.aspx
Dana, N. F., & Yendol-Hoppey, D. (2008). The reflective educator’s guide to pro-
fessional development: Coaching inquiry-oriented learning communities. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
Davidson, K. (2016). These are the “soft skills” employers are looking for. 
The Wall Street Journal. Available: http://blogs.wsj.com/economics/2016/ 
08/30/the-soft-skills-employers-are-looking-for
Evans, C. S. (1993). When teachers look at student work. Educational Leader­
ship, 50(5), 71–72.
References

References   •   163
Institute for Habits of Mind. (n.d.) About us. Retrieved May 18, 2017, from 
www.habitsofmindinstitute.org/about-us/us
International Society for Technology in Education. (2017). ISTE standards for 
students. Retrieved May 18, 2017, from www.iste.org/standards/standards/ 
for-students
Isaacson, W. (2011). Steve Jobs. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Jaschik, S. (2017). A plan to kill high school transcripts . . . and transform 
college admissions. Inside Higher Ed. Available: www.insidehighered.com/
news/2017/05/10/top-private-high-schools-start-campaign-kill-traditional-
transcripts-and-change
Jenkins, C. B. (1996). Inside the writing portfolio: What we need to know to assess 
children’s writing. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Johnston, P. H. (2012). Opening minds: Using language to change lives. Portland, 
ME: Stenhouse.
Krebs, D., & Zvi, G. (2016). The genius hour guidebook: Fostering passion, won-
dering, and inquiry in the classroom. New York: Routledge.
Larmer, J., Mergendoller, J., & Boss, S. (2015). Setting the standard for project based 
learning: A proven approach to rigorous classroom instruction. Alexandria, 
VA: ASCD.
Marinak, B. A., Malloy, J. B., Gambrell, L. B., & Mazzoni, S. A. (2015). Me and my 
reading profile: A tool for assessing early reading motivation. The Reading 
Teacher, 69(1), 51–62.
Moore, E. (2015). Planning for the planning [blog post]. Retrieved from Two 
Writing Teachers at https://twowritingteachers.org/2015/05/11/planning-
for-june-planning
Moss, C. M., & Brookhart, S. M. (2012). Learning targets: Helping students aim for 
understanding in today’s lesson. Alexandria, VA: ASCD.
Moya, S. S., & O’Malley, J. M. (1994). A portfolio assessment model for ESL. 
The Journal of Educational Issues of Language Minority Students, 13, 13–36.
Niguidula, D. (2010). Digital portfolios and curriculum maps: Linking teacher 
and student work. In H. H. Jacobs (Ed.), Curriculum 21: Essential education 
for a changing world. Alexandria, VA: ASCD.
November, A. (2012). Who owns the learning? Preparing students for success in 
the digital age. Bloomington, IN: Solution Tree.
Palmer, E. (2014). Now presenting . . . Educational Leadership. 72(3), 24–29.
Perkins, D. (2014). Future wise: Educating our children for a changing world. San 
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Popham, W. J. (2008). Transformative assessment. Alexandria, VA: ASCD.
Reeves, A. R. (2011). Where great teaching begins: Planning for student thinking 
and learning. Alexandria, VA: ASCD.
Renwick, M. (2014). Digital student portfolios: A whole school approach to con-
nected learning and continuous assessment. Virginia Beach, VA: Powerful 
Learning Press.

164   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
Renwick, M. (2015). 5 myths about classroom technology: How can we integrate 
digital tools to truly enhance learning? Alexandria, VA: ASCD.
Renwick, M. (2016). Initial findings after implementing digital student port-
folios in elementary classrooms [blog post]. Retrieved from Reading 
by Example at https://readingbyexample.com/2016/06/27/initial-findings- 
after-implementing-digital-student-portfolios-in-elementary-classrooms
Rodrigues, D. (2009). The cracked pot. Retrieved from www.barry4kids.net
Routman, R. (in press). Literacy essentials: Engagement, excellence, and equity 
for ALL learners. Portsmouth, NH: Stenhouse.
Sagor, R. D. (2010). The action research guidebook: A four-stage process for 
educators and school teams. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
Spencer, J. (2016). Launch: Using design thinking to boost creativity and bring 
out the maker in every student. San Diego, CA: Dave Burgess Consulting.
Stefanakis, E. H. (2002). Multiple intelligences and portfolios: A window into the 
learner’s mind. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Tovani, C. (2010). So what do they really know? Assessment that informs teach-
ing and learning. Portsmouth, NH: Stenhouse.
Toyoma, K. (2015). Why technology alone won’t fix schools. The Atlantic. 
Retrieved from www.theatlantic.com/education/archive/2015/06/why-
technology-alone-wont-fix-schools/394727
Valencia, S. W., & Place, N. (1994). Literacy portfolios for teaching, learning, 
and accountability: The Bellevue Literacy Assessment Project. Authentic 
Reading Assessment: Practices and Possibilities, 134–156.
Watters, A. (2016). Claim your domain—and own your online presence. 
Bloomington, IN: Solution Tree.
Wiggins, G., & McTighe, J. (2005). Understanding by design (expanded 2nd ed.). 
Alexandria, VA: ASCD.
Wiliam, D. (2011). Embedded formative assessment. Bloomington, IN: Solution 
Tree.

165 
Index
The letter f following a page number denotes a figure.
access, 25, 26f
agency, 7, 14–15
assessment. see also digital 
portfolio assessment; forma-
tive assessment; summative 
assessment
agency and, 14–15
defined, 20
feedback for, 152–153
grades as, 88, 151–153
messiness of, 1
partnership approach to, 8
of performance tasks, 101–110
portfolios, history of, 22–24
qualitative, 24–25
in schoolwide implementation, 
128–129, 143
SE2R approach to, 152
21st century, 156–157
audience, 15, 25, 26f, 29–30
audioBoom, 106
authenticity, ensuring, 101–103
backward design
benefits of, 96
determine acceptable evidence 
step, 101–103, 111f
example, 96, 98
identify desired results step, 
98–101, 102f
plan learning experiences and 
instruction step, 111–115, 
117–118f
steps in, 95
template, 96f
Beck, Josh, 144–148
best-work portfolios, 10
blogs, 65–67, 71f, 116, 119, 
121–123
Camtasia, 109
CCPensieve, 18–19, 115
Children’s Online Privacy 
Protection Act (COPPA), 
30–31

166   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
citizenship, digital, 49, 58
classrooms, gradeless, 151–153
collaboration, collegial, 30, 56, 
83–85, 138–139
Common Core State Standards, 
98–99
communication, home-school, 
35–36
community involvement, 120, 
145, 147
costs, implementation, 141–142, 
143
CreateSpace, 154
culture, attending to in 
implementation, 133–136, 143
data
collection, control, and 
protection of, 151
qualitative vs. quantitative, 2f
for self-assessment, 16
dedicated portfolio applications, 
67–68, 71f
Detlefsen, Lisl H., 149–150
digital portfolio assessment
agency and, 14–15
benefits of, 3
building learning partnerships 
with, 8–9
introducing, purpose in, 27–28, 
54–55, 87, 119, 144–145
OWN protocol, 72–73, 72f
releasing responsibility for, 74f
success criteria, 15–16
vignettes, 11–19
digital portfolio assessment tools
blogs, 65–67, 71f
dedicated portfolio applica-
tions, 67–68, 71f
online, 18–19, 29, 68–70, 71f
digital portfolios
categorizing, 10–11, 10f
characteristics of, 28–29
community website, 157
defined, 8–9
framework for, 24–25
grading, 88, 151–153
home-school connection, 16, 
29–30
multifaceted approach to, 
92–95, 95f
in the real world, 149–150
digital portfolios, implementation
considerations prior to, 31, 58, 
89, 122–123, 148
costs, 49
leadership in, 56, 125–127
privacy guidelines, 49
successful, characteristics of, 
55–57
technology, selecting, 63–64
yearlong plan for instruction, 
60–65, 70–73, 160–161
digital portfolios, implementation 
challenges
changing pedagogical prac-
tices, 74–81
collaboration, 83–85
district mandated curriculum, 
51–53
handing over responsibility to 
students, 81–83
lack of support, 89, 125–126
making mistakes publicly,  
74–75
organization, 147–148
parents/families, educating,  
58, 122
principal won’t allow, 48–50
privacy guidelines, 30–31

Index   •   167
student resistance, 50–51
technological, 30–31, 57–58,  
89
universal access, 31, 89, 122
digital portfolios, outcomes
achievement, 91
authentic audience, 29–30, 
119–120
authors, connecting with, 
119–120
celebrating students equally, 
147
collaboration, 30, 56, 145–146
community involvement,  
145, 147
confidence, 56
digital citizenship, 49
empowerment, 28, 56–57, 
121–122
engagement, 56
for gifted and talented students, 
119
global connections, 120
goal setting, 28
home-school connection, 
29–30, 56–57
metacognition, 28
motivation, 120, 121, 145
peers, connecting with, 119
professionalism, 30
self-reflection, 28, 55, 87
student understanding of 
technology, 146–147
teacher-student relationships, 
48
digital portfolios, reasons for
advocate for every student, 
45–46
celebrate all students as 
learners, 34–35
demonstrate progress over 
time, 39–40
facilitate better feedback, 36–37
guide students to become 
self-directed learners, 40–41
highlight the process of 
learning, 37–39
improve home-school commu-
nication, 35–36
integrate speaking and listen-
ing, 44–45
maximize formative assess-
ment, 41–43, 43f
work smarter as a teacher, 
46–48
digital portfolios, resources 
when implementing
available, determining, 52
district website hub, 56
funding, 88
print resources, 121
Promethean boards, 121
social media, 121
technology, 29, 52–53, 63–64, 
88, 120–121, 146
digital portfolios, schoolwide 
implementation
action plans, developing, 136, 
137f, 138, 143
assessments in, 128–129, 143
benefits of, 126
collaboration, opportunities 
for, 138–139
costs, 141–142, 143
culture, attending to, 133–136, 
143
home-school connection, 
139–141, 143
mission statements, revisiting, 
134

168   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
protocols, using, 135–136
purpose of, 127
readiness, assessing, 129–130, 
143, 158–159
starting small, 130–131,  
132–133f, 133, 143
steps in, 143
training, 138–139, 143
vision statements, revisiting, 
134
Digital Portolio Assessment 
Readiness Tool, 158–159
digital self-publishing, 154–155
digital self-publishing tools,  
87, 154
district mandated curriculum, 
51–53
Dreamweaver, 29
Educreations, 104
empowerment, 28, 56–57,  
121–122
engagement, 56, 155
equity gap, 45–46
Explain Everything, 104
Fadum, Karen, 54–58
Family Educational Rights and 
Privacy Act (FERPA), 30
feedback
in assessment, 152–153
facilitating, 36–37
formative assessment
classroom, 114
common, 114–115
designing, 114–115
facilitating with digital 
portfolios, 115–116
feedback in, 153
goal of, 115
maximizing, 41–43
proportions of types used, 43f
summative vs., 20–22, 21f
FreshGrade, 11–15, 67–68, 115–116
Future Wise (Perkins), 99
GarageBand, 106
Genius Hour, 155–156
goal setting, 28
Google Drive, 87, 116
Google Genius Hour, 155
Google G Suite for Education, 
68–69, 141
Google Sites, 68–69
grades, 88, 151–153
graduation requirements, 153
growth portfolios, 10–11
Habits of Mind, 100
Haeger, Chris, 144–148
home-school connection
communication in the, 35–36
grades and the, 153
in schoolwide implementation, 
139–141, 143
sharing student work, 16, 
29–30
iMovie, 108
Internet
implementation resources, 
121
online digital portfolio 
assessment tools, 18–19,  
29, 68–70, 71f
ISTE Student Standards, 99–100
Jobs, Steve, 37–38
digital portfolios, schoolwide 
implementation, continued

Index   •   169
Kidblog, 116, 119, 122
learners
celebrating all students as, 
34–35
self-directed, developing, 
40–41, 154–155
learning
demonstrating progress, 39–40
highlighting the process of, 
37–39
lifeworthy, 98–101
relationships as a foundation 
for, 14
learning objectives, successful, 
112–114, 113f
listening-speaking integration, 
44–45
mission statements, revisiting, 134
motivation, 120, 121, 145
OWN (Observe, Wonder, Next 
Steps) protocol, 72–73, 72f
parents/families
communicating with, 35–36
educating, 58, 122
grades and, 153
in schoolwide implementation, 
139–141, 143
sharing student work, 16, 29–30
Partnership for 21st Century 
Learning Framework, 100
performance portfolios, 9, 64–65, 
92, 93, 101–103
performance tasks, assessment of
authenticity through role-play, 
101–103
podcasting, 105–107
screencasting, 103–105
video creation, 107–110
playing field, leveling the, 34–35
podcasting, 105–107
portfolio assessment, history of, 
22–24
portfolios
performance, 9, 64–65, 92, 93, 
101–103
process, 9, 92, 93–94
progress, 9, 92, 94
types of, 9–11, 10f, 92
pots, perfect and cracked, 
134–135
process portfolios, 9, 92, 93–94
process portfolio tools, 116
professionalism, 30
progress portfolios, 9, 92, 94
progress portfolio tools, 115–116
Project-Based Learning (Larmer, 
Mergendoller, & Boss), 95
protocols, using, 135–136
purpose, 25, 26f
relationships
as a foundation for learning, 14
teacher-student, 48
role playing, 101–103
screencasting, 103–105
Screencast-O-Matic, 104–105
SE2R approach to assessment, 
152
SeeSaw, 67–68
self-assessment, 16
self-publishing, 154–155
Simon, Margaret, 118–123
Skype, 107
Slice of Life initiative, 120
Snider, Lisa, 86–89

170   •   Digital Portfolios in the Classroom
social media, 121
speaking-listening integration, 
44–45
students
advocating for every, 45–46
celebrating equally, 34–35, 147
gifted and talented, 119
global connections, 120
handing over responsibility to, 
81–83
peers, connecting with, 119
resisting portfolio assessment, 
50–51
self-publishing by, 154–155
self-reflection, 28, 55, 87
technology, understanding, 
146–147
success, clear criteria for, 15–16
summative assessment
authenticity in, 101–103
formative assessment vs., 
20–22, 21f
teachers
collaboration, collegial, 30, 56, 
83–85, 138–139
professionalism, 30
training, 138–139, 143
working smarter, 46–48
teacher-student relationships, 48
technology
adoption considerations, 142
costs, 141–142
funding, 88
implementation challenges, 
30–31, 57–58, 89
implementation needs, 29, 
52–53, 63–64, 88, 120–121, 
146
inclusion of, purpose-related, 
19
leveraging, 8–9
modeling, 75–78
student understanding of, 
146–147
tenents of necessary use,  
25, 26f
training in, 138–139
universal access to, 31, 45–46, 
89, 122
The Genius Hour Handbook 
(Krebs & Zvi), 155–156
The Optimal Learning Model, 
75, 76f
TouchCast, 109
training, 138–139, 143
Transformative Assessment 
(Popham), 42
Understanding by Design (Wiggins 
& McTighe), 95
video creation, 107–110
vision statements, revisiting, 134
Voxer, 121
websites
artist, 149–150
portfolio applications, 68–70, 
71f
Weebly, 29–30, 69
WordPress, 87

171 
Matt Renwick is an elementary principal in Mineral 
Point, Wisconsin. He is married to Jodi and the 
father of Finn and Violet. Prior to this position, 
Matt was a teacher and school administrator 
in Wisconsin Rapids. He is the author of Digital 
Student Portfolios: A Whole School Approach to 
Connected Learning and Continuous Assessment (2014) and the 
ASCD Arias book 5 Myths About Classroom Technology: How Do 
We Integrate Digital Tools to Truly Enhance Learning? (2015). 
Matt posts frequently on his collaborative blog for literacy 
leaders, Reading by Example (www.readingbyexample.com), and  
tweets at @ReadByExample. He also writes for Discovery Edu­
cation and Lead Literacy. For more information about Matt’s 
work, go to his website, www.mattrenwick.com.
About the Author

Related ASCD Resources
At the time of publication, the following ASCD resources were 
available (ASCD stock numbers in parentheses). For up-to-date infor­
mation about ASCD resources, go to www.ascd.org. Search the 
complete archives of Educational Leadership at www.ascd.org/el.
ASCD EDge®
Exchange ideas and connect with other educators on the social 
networking site ASCD EDge at http://ascdedge.ascd.org.
ASCD myTeachSource® 
Download resources from a professional learning platform with 
hundreds of research-based best practices and tools for your 
classroom at http://myteachsource.ascd.org/.
Print Products
Advancing Formative Assessment in Every Classroom: A Guide for 
Instructional Leaders by Connie M. Moss and Susan M. Brookhart 
(#109031)
Checking for Understanding: Formative Assessment Techniques for Your 
Classroom, 2nd ed., by Douglas Fisher and Nancy Frey (#115011)
Five Myths About Classroom Technology: How do we integrate digital 
tools to truly enhance learning? (ASCD Arias) by Matt Renwick 
(#SF115069)
Grading Smarter, Not Harder: Assessment Strategies That Motivate Kids 
and Help Them Learn by Myron Dueck (#114003)
Great Performances: Creating Classroom-Based Assessment Tasks, 
2nd ed., by Larry Lewin and Betty Jean Shoemaker (#110038)
Peer Feedback in the Classroom: Empowering Students to Be the 
Experts by Starr Sackstein (#117020)
For more information: send e-mail to member@ascd.org; call 1-800-
933-2723 or 703-578-9600, press 2; send a fax to 703-575-5400; or write 
to Information Services, ASCD, 1703 N. Beauregard St., Alexandria, 
VA 22311-1714 USA.

1703 North Beauregard Street 
Alexandria, VA 22311-1714 USA
If you belong to a Professional Learning 
Community, you may be looking for a way to get 
your fellow educators’ minds around a complex 
topic. Why not delve into a relevant theme issue 
of Educational Leadership, the journal written by 
educators for educators. 
www.ascd.org/el
EDUCATIONAL
LEADERSHIP
D O N ’ T  M I S S  A  S I N G L E  I S S U E  O F  A S C D ’ S  AWA R D - W I N N I N G  M A G A Z I N E , 
Subscribe now, or buy back issues 
of ASCD’s flagship publication at 
www.ascd.org/ELbackissues.
Single issues cost $7 (for issues 
dated September 2006–May 
2013) or $8.95 (for issues dated 
September 2013 and later). Buy 
10 or more of the same issue, and 
you’ll save 10 percent. Buy 50 or 
more of the same issue, and you’ll 
save 15 percent. For discounts on 
purchases of 200 or more copies, 
contact programteam@ascd.org; 
1-800-933-2723, ext. 5773.
To see more details about these 
and other popular issues of 
Educational Leadership, visit  
www.ascd.org/ELarchive.

The ASCD Whole Child approach is an effort to transition 
from a focus on narrowly defined academic achievement to 
one that promotes the long-term development and success  
of all children. Through this approach, ASCD supports  
educators, families, community members, and policymakers 
as they move from a vision about educating the whole child to  
sustainable, collaborative actions.
Digital Portfolios in the Classroom relates  
to the engaged and supported tenets.  
For more about the ASCD Whole Child  
approach, visit www.ascd.org/wholechild.
HEALTHY
Each student enters school 
healthy and learns about and 
practices a healthy lifestyle.
SAFE
Each student learns in an  
environment that is physically  
and emotionally safe for  
students and adults.
ENGAGED
Each student is actively  
engaged in learning and is 
connected to the school and 
broader community.
SUPPORTED
Each student has access to  
personalized learning and is  
supported by qualified,  
caring adults.
CHALLENGED
Each student is challenged  
academically and prepared  
for success in college or  
further study and for  
employment and participation 
in a global environment.
1
2
3
4
5
WHOLE CHILD 
TENETS
Become an ASCD member today!
Go to www.ascd.org/joinascd
or call toll-free: 800-933-ASCD (2723)

STUDY
GUIDE
ONLINE
Assessment is messy. Day-to-day, in-the-moment assessments not only  
reveal information that drives future instruction but also offer a comprehensive 
picture of students’ abilities and dispositions toward learning. As teachers,  
we might know what this looks and feels like, yet it can be hard to put into  
action—hence the messiness.
Say hello to digital portfolios—dynamic, digital collections of authentic  
information from different media, in many forms, and with multiple purposes. 
Using digital portfolios to capture student thinking and progress allows us to 
better see our students as readers, writers, and learners—and help students 
see themselves in the same way! 
Matt Renwick’s Digital Portfolios in the Classroom is a guide to help teachers 
sort through, capture, and make sense of the messiness associated with  
assessment. By shining a spotlight on three types of student portfolios— 
performance, process, and progress—and how they can be used to assess 
student work, Renwick helps educators navigate the maze of digital tools and 
implement the results to drive instruction. 
Education
Alexandria, Virginia USA
Browse excerpts from 
ASCD books:
www.ascd.org/books

