
DIGITAL
SENSE


DIGITAL
SENSE
T H E C O M M O N S E N S E A P P R O A C H
T O E F F E C T I V E L Y B L E N D I N G
S O C I A L B U S I N E S S S T R A T E G Y ,
M A R K E T I N G T E C H N O L O G Y ,
A N D C U S T O M E R E X P E R I E N C E
TRAVIS WRIGHT I CHRIS J. SNOOK

Cover image: Andy Roberts/Getty Images, Inc.
Cover design: Paul McCarthy
Copyright 2017 by John Wiley and Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as
permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior
written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee
to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400,
fax (978) 646-8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission
should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken,
NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and authors have used their best efforts in
preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with the respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this book and speciﬁcally disclaim any implied warranties of
merchantability or ﬁtness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for
your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor the
author shall be liable for damages arising herefrom.
For general information about our other products and services, please contact our Customer Care
Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or
fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material
included with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in print-on-demand.
If this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you purchased,
you may download this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information about Wiley
products, visit www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Names: Wright, Travis, author. | Snook, Chris J., author.
Title: Digital sense : the common sense approach to effectively blending
social business strategy, marketing technology, and customer experience /
Travis Wright, Chris J. Snook.
Description: Hoboken, New Jersey : John Wiley & Sons, Inc., [2017] | Includes
bibliographical references and index.
Identiﬁers: LCCN 2016044307 (print) | LCCN 2016057120 (ebook) |
ISBN 9781119291701 (cloth) | ISBN 9781119291749 (pdf) |
ISBN 9781119291718 (epub)
Subjects: LCSH: Internet marketing. | Internet advertising. | Digital media.
Classiﬁcation: LCC HF5415.1265 .W75 2017 (print) | LCC HF5415.1265 (ebook) |
DDC 658.8/72—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016044307
Printed in the United States of America
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

“To both of my true loves, Brianne and Beckett. You ground me and
inspire me daily to be more than I was yesterday, and you patiently
share me with the business world, which is my other true love.
I dedicate this book, and all the blood and sweat that
I put into it, to you.”
–Chris J. Snook
“To my two not-so-little ones, Jharek and Liliana. All that I do is
because of both of you. Much love to you and your mom, Mari.
Thanks for allowing me to be a business dude who travels around
and works on all of these crazy projects. Hopefully I’ve taught you a
strong work ethic, a true curious love of learning, and a kind, helpful
approach to human interaction; and hopefully you always keep your
playful nature. Keep smiling, laughing, and loving. I’ll love you
forever, throughout all space and time. May God and the
Universe bless you, always.”
–Travis Wright


CONTENTS
Acknowledgments
xiii
Foreword
xvii
Preface
A Tale of Two “Tweeties”
xxi
The “Save Our Chiefs” Movement
xxix
Optus in Australia
xxxiv
The Genesis of this Book
xxxvii
Section I
OVERVIEW
1
1
The Game at Speed
3
Why Your Organization Needs a Digital Sense
DNA Layer
3
The Game Has Forever Been Changed
4
Bits of Knowledge
8
Who Is This Book For?
9
2
Inﬂuencers, Zombies, and Everything Between
11
The Rise of Digital Transformation
11
Attention and Trust
14
Inﬂuencers, Ampliﬁers, Motivatables, and Zombies
16
vii

viii
CONTENTS
Section II
BUILDING A CUSTOMER-CENTRIC
ORGANIZATION
23
3
Introducing the Experience Marketing Framework
25
The Framework to Ask Powerful Questions
26
The Experience Marketing Framework
28
Customer Experience Is the Battleground in a Digital World
30
Takeaways from Introducing the EMF
31
4
The Insights Layer
33
The Customer Is the Main Thing
34
Customers, Competitors, and Forces
37
The Customer
38
The Importance of Persona and Customer Journey Mapping
40
Audience Development Exercise
41
Look Honestly at Your Competitive Landscape
43
The Customer Is the Asset
47
“Use the Force, Luke!”
50
The 6 Ds (Phases) as Classiﬁed by Peter Diamandis
51
5
Mind over Organizational Matter
61
Mind and Brain Mechanics 101
62
Substance Is All Around Us. We Just Need the Thought.
64
The Stick-Person Explained
67
Understanding the Mind Using the Stick-Person Graphic
69
The Six Intellectual Faculties
74
What to Do When the Zombies Attack
80
Break through Your Comfort Zone
80
Nothing Stays the Same!
81
6
The Vision Layer
91
The Vision Layer + Social Business
93
The Vision Layer Exercises
93
Customer Journeys
98
The Journey Map Touch Point Exercise
100
Scope
102
Takeaways from the Vision Layer
105

Contents
ix
7
The Success Layer
107
What Is a Social Business?
110
Begin with the End in Mind
112
Loops, Love, and ROI
115
Optimizing the Operational Loop
120
Audit 1: ROT Content Audit
120
Audit 2: Brand Guidelines Audit
125
Audit 3: Heuristic Audit
125
Good Governance Guidelines
126
Takeaways from the Success Layer
128
Section III
SOCIAL BUSINESS STRATEGIES AND TACTICS 129
8
Social Business Strategy for Marketing
131
Appropriate Campaign Goals
135
Content Marketing and Paid Media Ampliﬁcation
139
Case Study: Fort Collins Startup Week Goes Global
on $2,500
144
Search Engine Optimization (SEO)
145
Key Determinants Impacting Your Organic Search
Ranking
146
Enterprise Paid Search
148
Predictive Advertising Management
149
GEO Targeting and IP-Based Advertising
150
9
Social Business Strategy for Sales
153
What Is Social Selling?
154
Why Is Social Selling Important?
154
Goals for Social Selling
154
Who Should Own Social Selling?
155
The Social Selling System
156
Social Selling Implementation
156
Social Selling Challenges
158
Account-Based Marketing (ABM)
158
Case Study: #Closing $Millions for Pennies on the Dollar
160

x
CONTENTS
10
Social Business Strategy for Inﬂuencers and
Employee Advocates
163
Inﬂuencer Marketing Tech Is Fragmented
164
Key Trend 1: Decline of Advertising Due to the Massive
Increase in Ad Blockers Globally
164
Key Trend 2: Rise of Inﬂuencer Programs Is Leading to
Greater Need for Efﬁciencies and Proving ROI
164
Key Trend 3: CMOs Are Driving the Budget Increase in
Marketing Technology Spend
165
Key Trend 4: Four Critical Factors Are Fueling the Chaos
in Inﬂuencer Marketing
165
The Five Categories of Inﬂuencer Marketing Tech
165
Inﬂuencer Marketing Platform “5 Capabilities” Model
166
The Inﬂuencer Marketing Manifesto
167
Community: Size and Type of Audience
167
Content: Format and Type
167
Channel: Social Networks and Sites
168
Credibility: Topical Relevancy
168
Chemistry: Brand-Inﬂuencer Fit
169
Controversy: Lack of Resonance and Transparency
169
Employee Advocacy
169
Employees Are the Most Credible Voices in Your Organization
170
Employee Advocacy Drives Sales
170
Who Is Doing Employee Advocacy Right?
171
11
Social Business Strategy for HR
173
Social Recruiting
173
Use Social Media to Evaluate Cultural Fit
175
The New Face of Social Recruitment
176
Play Sherlock
177
Case Study: #Hirecarlos: How to Get Your Dream Gig with
Social Media
178
Case Study: Finding $500,000 Worth of Talent for $250 in Ads 182
Themes for Your Advertising
183
12
Social Business Strategy for Customer Service
187
We All Want the Same Simple Pleasures
188
Social Media Triage
191
Audit Your CX Center of Excellence
193
Where to Begin?
194

Contents
xi
Section IV
DATA AND AUTOMATION
197
13
Designing Your Ultimate Marketing Stack
199
How to Build a Solid MarTech Stack
200
Bottoms Up
200
CRM
201
Marketing Automation
201
Tag Management
201
Analytics and Tracking: You Need to Track Your Performance,
Ads, Technology, and Everything Else
202
Invest in Keeping Your Stack Open
202
Monitoring the MarTech Stack
207
MarTech That Drives Business Growth
211
Agile Is Your Savior
212
Marketing Technology Frameworks and the EMF
212
Always-On Assessment, Evaluation, and Adoption
213
No Single Platform Winner aka “Marketing Operating
System”
213
Build, Buy, Or Rent?
214
Mobile Marketing Technology Stacks
214
Drive Internal Buy-In and Stakeholder Inﬂuence by
Measured ROI
215
Section V
FUTURE-PROOFING
217
14
Building A Personal Brand, BRO
219
Business Relationship Optimization
219
Ass Kiss It Forward
221
ProSumerTribuDucers
223
15
Avoiding Obsolescence and the Road Ahead
227
Dead Ideas
227
Experts Evolve into Sensemakers!
229
Lifelong Learning as a Habit
229
5G, IoT, AI, VR, and Drones, Oh My!
230
The Fourth Industrial Revolution
231

xii
CONTENTS
Virtual Reality Mini-VRcations
232
Virtual Reality Masterminds and Uploadable Consciousness
233
5G Allows Minimal Latency
234
The Dark Side of Drones
235
5G Possibilities
236
Notes
239
About the Authors
249
Index
251

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
W
e owe so many wise and loving people thanks for the completion of
this project and wish to acknowledge them below.
Thanks to Brian Solis for your friendship and your willingness to support
our efforts with your amazing foreword.
Thanks to our awesome team at Wiley Business, which begins with
our editors, Lia Ottaviano, Lauren Freestone, and Pete Gaughan, and the
entire design and development team, who helped us come up with the awe­
some cover and clean layout.
Thanks to all of our peers, fellow thought leaders, and mentors (alive and
dead) who have inﬂuenced us and the content of this book with your
wisdom. You all inspire us to be lifelong learners and ever-more curious with
each waking day. Love you all! Napoleon Hill, W. Clement Stone, Joseph
Murphy, Charles Haanel, Maxwell Maltz, Elon Musk, Sinan Kanatsiz and
the entire Internet Marketing Association family, Danny DeMichele,
Charlene Li, Brian Solis, Gerd Leonhard, Peter Diamandis, Tony Robbins,
John Lennon, George Carlin, Nikola Tesla, Eckhart Tolle, Steve Jobs, Woz,
Elon Musk, Mark Zuckerberg, John Battelle, Michael Arrington, Bob
Proctor, Adam Yauch, Peter Drucker, Steven Levy, Marc Andreessen, Jay
Adelson, Randi Zuckerberg, Biz Stone, Jeff Clavier, Chris Pulley, Adrienne
Goss, Dan Loiacano, Josh Eliseuson, Mia Dand, Kare Anderson, Bill
Murray, Jonathan Shaun, Dirk Hacker, Joel Comm, Lori Ruff, Peter Kay,
Wendy Sweetmore-Hinton, Bryan Kramer, Bernie Borges, Julio Viskovich,
Roland Smart, Tristan Bishop, Zoya Fallah, Allen Kelly, Mike O’Neil, Mohit
Maheshwari, Jason Ary, Dave Fluegge, Ramsey Mohsen, Zena Weist, Koka
Sexton, Jon Ferrara, Jason Miller, Danny Sullivan, Michelle Robbins,
Elisabeth Osmeloski, Chris Sherman, Vala Afshar, Matt Heinz, Didier
Bonnet, Chris Elwell, Sean Moriarty, Matt McGee, Brett Tabke, Paul
Graham, Kelsey Jones, Brent Csutoras, Kevin Rose, Anil Dash, Arnold
Aranez, Kinmun “Mr. Brown” Lee, Hillel Fudd, Walter H. Jennings & Ren
xiii

xiv
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Zhengfei of Huawei, Jeremiah Owyang, Pamela Parker, AJ Wilcox, Jason
Falls, Kevin Mullett, Kristi Hagen, Casey Markee, Stephen Mahaney, Alan
Bleiweiss, Rand Fishkin, Tim Ash, Bryan Eisenberg, Jeffrey Eisenberg, Shelly
Kramer, John Jantsch, Blake Miller, Brian Clark, Liz Strauss, Dan Zarrella,
Michelle D’Attilio, Shawn Elledge, Stewart Rogers, Robert Scoble, Jennifer
Wong, Jeffrey Hazlett, John Swartz, Andre Bourque, John Rampton, Dave
McClure, Sarah Austin, Bill Hicks, Dennis Yu, Tiffany DiPanni, Mike
‘Bubbles’ Smith, Gary Langston, Carol Rydell, Toby Evans, Terence
McKenna, Tim Ferriss, Maria Lucent, Alister Ku, Antonia Silas, Chris
Kovac, Mother Earth, God, the Universe, Kyle Moody and Lisa Bowman of
Bowman PR, Rick Astley, Mike Ramsey, Jean Grey, Alex Grey, Alex Scoble,
Alex Petrides, Dr. Gary Jones, Joey Knight, Steve Moser, Dave Kinison,
Keith Leff, Mitch Hedberg, Nicole Schreiber, Lazlo, Randy “Macho Man”
Savage, Bruce Lee, Chuck Norris, Tim Curtis, Rhonda Shantz, Anabella
Watson, Hugh MacLeod, Ian McCleary, Zeina Khodr, Melina Gouveia,
Jeremy Knibbs, Yen Japney, Pam Kozelka, Leslie Carruthers, Drew
Hendricks, Inspector Gadget, Doc Brown, Carrie Royce, Pam Hedger, Alan
Mundey, Larry Binggeli, Mari Smith, Reid Hoffman, Joe Chernov, Sarah
Lacey, Kara Swisher, Chris Heuer, Peter Kim, Seth Godin, Malcolm
Gladwell, Scott Brinker, Anita Brearton & Sheryl Schultz of CabinetM, Lisa
Qualls, Simon Kuo, Kristi Colvin, Allen Gannett, Brett Glass, Jill Rosen,
Waldo, Dominique O’Hara, Karl Geisler, Mayur Gupta, Mike ‘Jortsy’
Gelphman, Gary Vaynerchuk, Eric Mitchell, Corey Ganzman, Tamar
Weinberg, James Hanusa, Alison Raby, Allison Paige Presley, Soren
Gordhamer, David Berkowitz, David Armano, Jasmin Brand, Avinash
Kaushik, Chris Brogan, Jeff Scult, Akhil Anumolu, Imran Khan, Mary
Meeker, Jason Calacanis, George Lucas, Danuska Bartak, Aaron Swartz,
Alexis Ohanian, Sarah Evans, Chris Penn, Scott Stratten, Mark Abay,
Mathew Sweezey, Shawn Goodin, Marty McDonald, Eric Granell, Phil
Kloster, Clay Wendler, Clark Hunt, Andrew & Elizabeth Davis, Jill Rowley,
Joe Cox, Jason Elm, Evel Knievel, Alex Ortiz, Joe Pulizzi, Jay Baer, Robert
Rose, Ted Rubin, Ann Handley, David Meerman Scott, Marshall
Kirkpatrick, Bruce Clay, Virginia Nussey, Akvile Harlow, Jeff Jarvis, Mitch
Joel, Lee Odden, Steve Rubel, Pete Cashmore, Dharmesh Shah, Sujan Patel,
Neil Patel, Ryan Lefebvre, Focus Seminars of KC, Fauna Solomon, Aseem
Badshah, Steve Rayson, Tim O’Reilly, Jack Dorsey, Ewing Kauffman, Lance
Sargent, Bryan Smith, Richard Sargent, Brian Ryerson, Todd Nutter, Jeffrey
Pruitt, Tony Quiroz, Anna Hrach, Oliver Tani, Mike Barbeau, Jen Walsh,

xv
Acknowledgments
Dayton Moore, Jeff Gibbard, Keisha Malivert, Sean Rice, Alyssa Yatabe,
Greg Poinar, Gavin Francis, Oprah Winfrey, Robert Wallace, Jeremy
Hudgens, Jeanniey Mullen, Whitney Parker Mitchell, Chris Zakharoff,
Robert Moseley IV, Dan Brady, Josh Goodwin, Josh Manion, Dan Dal
Degan, Jessica Tyner, Chris Wojcik, Jeanne Bliss, Shawn Barrieau, Josh
Denne, Jessica Alba, and all of our friends, coworkers, fans, and social media
followers. Much love and respect to every one of you. Thank you for
inspiring us!
Big thanks to Wright/Hayden/Beshore/Brower family peoples. Thanks
for helping Travis to become the inquisitive solution ﬁnder he is today. His
love of learning, experimenting, and laughing came directly from interactions
with you, Cathy Wright, Elmer Wright, Ken Brower, Rebecca Brower,
Barbara Wright, Gene Hayden, Jeff Hayden, Mark Hayden, Mabel Beshore,
Michael Beshore, Rachel Gamble, Jamie Gamble, Hank and Olivia Lamlech,
Sarah Brower, and William Wright.
As for those in the Snook/Sorg clan, thank you for allowing Chris to be
the abnormally curious and brave risk taker that he is. It is because of your
solid foundation and knowing that he will be loved through failure and
success alike that he has been able to repeatedly bloom where planted. Chet
Snook, Ginny Snook, Palook and Sarge Snook, Gus and Barb Leconte,
Corrie Snook Albrecht, Bob Albrecht, Mike Sorg, Karen Sorg, Melisa
Gleason, Joe Gleason. “Hard work deﬁnes us, character separates us, and love is
our legacy!”
And a special thanks to Hai Chen, as Travis and Chris never would have
met if it wasn’t for you, buddy!


FOREWORD
Y
ou are not a digital marketer . . . at least not yet.
I want to use this foreword to ofﬁcially warn you. You’re in for a
delightful experience. Normally books that teach you so much aren’t
supposed to be this fun to read. But that’s Travis and Chris for you. They not
only share their real-world experiences in shaping the future of digital, they
do so in an engaging and entertaining way that keeps you laughing and
learning.
Now, with that said, let’s get to work.
We live in an era of digital Darwinism, a time when technology and
society evolve. The question is, how are you—or how are you not—evolving
to keep up with change? It’s not an easy question to answer.
There’s an illusion that makes us believe that just because we
are investing in new technologies and strategies, that we are ahead of the
curve . . . that we’re leading the way to the future of digital transformation
because we use the same networks or apps as customers. But that doesn’t
make you a digital marketer. A digital marketer is someone who understands
that, to engage someone digitally, it must be done in a meaningful, person­
alized and contextually + culturally relevant manner. Digital marketers
understand the dynamics of online sites, communities, and apps individually,
not in the aggregate; and more so, they understand the human on the other
side of the screen based on preferences, behaviors, values, intents, lifestyles,
aspirations, and so on. As such, digital is a means to reach a different breed of
customers, one who’s connected, informed, empowered, demanding, elusive,
a bit narcissistic, and deﬁnitely in control of their online experiences.
Digital marketers, in the very least, are digitally literate and also empa­
thetic, appreciating the extent of how people have changed and continue to
do so. Only then can they design strategies, messages, content, and such that
break the old chains and conﬁnes of traditional marketing and abolish the
xvii

xviii
FOREWORD
dated checklist and metric system many so-called digital, social, and mobile
marketers rely upon today.
There’s a reason you are reading this. It might be the same reason I wrote
this. We’re ready to sharpen our digital sense so we learn and, more impor­
tant, unlearn, to grow and lead. In its purest form, that’s digital “sense.” It’s
our ability to perceive outside inputs and assess new horizons and states that
are driving the digital economy better than we do now. But it’s also more
than that. All of this is designed to help you be more in tune than your peers
in grasping the gravity of change and do the things that put you ahead of
your competition. And more so, you’re learning how to step outside of what
you think your role is in marketing to actually lead your organization into a
digital-ﬁrst era. This is a story that’s equally about changing the future of
marketing as it is a story of personal transformation.
The other reason I believe you’re reading this is because you possess
something that others in your organization do not . . . the ability to see what
others can’t; and as such, you’re then willing to do what others won’t. We
can’t do any of this alone. And, this is why you are part of a special group of
people who share your passion for knowledge, who look for support from one
another to blaze new trails, and who reassure one another in times of need.
One of the greatest challenges we all face is the difﬁculty in getting others
to recognize the importance of digital when they don’t personally live a
digital lifestyle. As such, it’s impossible to feel the importance of digital in the
future of brand and customer experience. Without empathy and belief, you
will never have the support you need.
And, that’s really the heart of the matter. Most executives don’t live the
brand the way customers do, yet they’re responsible for driving business
objectives and managing resources to achieve them. If you’re waiting for
someone to tell you what to do next, you’re on the wrong side of innovation.
That’s why we are here together right now. We’re not waiting . . . we’re
leading the way.
Read the book. Make a plan. Let’s go . . .
Observe: See the world differently without your personal ﬁlters. See
people for their differences and let it all inspire you.
Visualize: Deﬁne where it is you need to go versus where you are and
what success looks like both now and over time.

Foreword
xix
Act: Start learning and unlearning the things necessary to achieve your
milestones and also help bring others on the path to transformation.
Earn: You are more than a marketer, you are a change maker; and as
such, you will write the future of marketing as you evolve and earn the
support and accolades you deserve.
Your partner in change,
Brian Solis, provocateur, futurist, believer in new possibilities
@briansolis
www.briansolis.com


PREFACE
A TALE OF TWO “TWEETIES”
O
n September 9, 2012, the Kansas City Chiefs lost to the Atlanta Falcons
by a score of 40 to 24. The next evening, Travis was chatting with his
buddy since ﬁfth grade, Bryan, and they were complaining about how the
Chiefs were approximately $30 million under the salary cap for the ﬁfth year
in a row.
Travis said, “You mean to tell me the Kansas City Chiefs have been
approximately $100–$130 million dollars under the salary cap in the last ﬁve
years? OMG, I’m sooo tweeting that.”
So he sent this one tweet: “I’m not much of a @KCChiefs fan anymore.
Clark Hunt’s yearly [$]30m under the [salary] cap is bullshit. Greedy bastard
owners can F.O. cc @nﬂ”1Figure depicting a screenshot of a Twitter user named Travis Wright.

Figure P.1 “The Tweet Heard ’Round the World”
This was not a friendly tweet, Travis understands that. He was angry, as
a fan, and decided to tweet about it. It was one glorious tweet from one
gloriously disgruntled fan. It was only one rude tweet, not a barrage of tweets.
As you’ll soon ﬁnd out from this book, both Travis and Chris tackle the
consequential and inconsequential, in life and in business, with strong
xxi

xxii
PREFACE
opinions and tremendous fervor, with a balance of hilarity and humility, that
comes from an insatiable thirst for continued learning and teaching.
After Travis complained about the salary cap on Twitter, he was over it.
He sent that one tweet and went on his merry way. It wasn’t until the next
day at lunch that he looked through his Twitter direct messages. It was only
then that he noticed the tweet from the Chiefs. He nearly choked on his
delicious Chipotle burrito! Travis thought about it for a few minutes, and
then took a screencap of the direct message, as shown in Figure P.2. It said,
“Would help if you had your facts straight. Your choice to be a fan. cc get
a clue.”
Figure P.2
The Tweet Response with No Digital Sense
The Chiefs had sent this tweet just three minutes after Travis sent his
rude, disgruntled tweet. Somebody from the Chiefs’ social media team
immediately tweeted to Travis, while in an emotional state, from the Chiefs’
ofﬁcial Twitter handle, @kcchiefs. Note: the Chiefs switched their ofﬁcial
Twitter handle to @chiefs in 2016.
The Chiefs’ social media manager didn’t seem to have much “digital
sense.” That person clearly gave zero f ’s at that time. It was not a good
common sense approach to attack Travis. In fact, Travis wasn’t even that
angry. He was just sending out a bit of a rant regarding his displeasure with
how the Chiefs were being cheap and spending signiﬁcantly less than the
salary cap.
Jay Baer recently published a great book on this subject called Hug Your
Haters.2 The Chiefs’ social media team should have tried to defuse the
situation, not fuel the ﬂame. The ﬁrst indicator that it would be wise to hug

Preface
xxiii
their hater was that at the time, Travis’s account had more Twitter followers
than the Chiefs’.
Digital Bit: This is one reason why organizations should
have a social media governance policy in place for how
to respond (or prioritize) tweets such as his.
(Look for more Digital Bits, free templates, and resource downloads
throughout the book.)
After seeing the emotionally charged response to his tweet, Travis did
what any social media savvy person would do, who has just had a crummy
customer experience; he took the screencap of the Chief’s’ message and
tweeted it out to his followers.
This is where the social s#%t-storm started.
Digital Bit: If you send a private message via Twitter or
Snapchat, it’s not necessarily private. Anyone can
screenshot anything.
Travis replied to the private, direct message by sending out this tweet:
“It’s good to know the @kcchiefs social media is ran [sic] by immature teen­
agers. Fact. Hunt hoards salary cap $$$. #KC” (Figure P.3).
Whoever responded to Travis’s tweet from the Chiefs’ Twitter handle
lacked both common sense and digital sense. He made a hasty assumption
that it was appropriate to defend the Chiefs in private via direct message,
indicating the absence of a social media governance policy. He lacked or
ignored any protocol that would enable him to respond in real-time, pro-
actively, to Travis’ public complaint in a way that allowed for a productive
dialogue. He also failed to acknowledge that in a world of noise, Travis’s

xxiv
PREFACEFigure depicting a screenshot of a Twitter post of Travis in which he replied to the private, direct message by sending out this tweet:

“It’s good to know the @kcchiefs social media is ran [sic] by immature teenagers. Fact. Hunt hoards salary cap $$$. #KC”
Figure P.3
initial tweet was far less damaging to the Chiefs’ image than was the tweet
storm that followed.
Look at the data: the ﬁrst tweet had 15 retweets; the follow-up had more
than 3,200!
The Chiefs’ staffer didn’t have, or ignored, any protocol that would
enable responding in real time to this public fan rant in a way that could
allow for a proactive dialogue. They also forgot that in a world of noise, his
initial tweet was far less damaging than the tweet storm that followed. They
had no social media governance policy in place to make a decision as to
whether to respond at all, and it had big consequences.
What did the social media manager have to gain by being rude back to a
rude fan? Nothing except the brief satisfaction of telling someone off. You
can do that, all day long, on a personal account. However, if you do that on a
corporate branded account, get ready for some backlash.
Keep in mind, in the beginning, Travis was just complaining. People
bitch about their sports teams ALL. THE. TIME. This was nothing
out of the ordinary. Immediately after Travis publicly replied to the
Chiefs’ tweet, all hell broke loose. He received a bunch of responses
(Figure P.4).

Preface
xxv
Figure P.4 This Is One of the First Recorded Selﬁes by Travis Wright in
2012
“TW, did the Chiefs actually send you that?” —name removed
“Are you serious, bro? The Chiefs said that?” —name removed
Tweets started ﬂying back and forth asking him questions about the
situation. Many of them had the @KCChiefs twitter handle included. Even
some local Kansas City sportscasters started asking him, “Hey @teedubya, is
this real? Did the Chiefs really tweet that to you?” The response: yes. And
then the Chiefs blocked @teedubya on Twitter.
When they blocked Travis, he could no longer see their public tweets,
and any private tweets they had between them disappeared. Now that made
him angry.
DIGITAL BIT: You don’t want to add fuel to the ﬁre
on social media without a clear understanding of the
unintended consequences that may ensue. Try to
de-escalate or do nothing at all.
After being blocked from his beloved team on Twitter, Travis decided to
teach them a lesson for their lack of digital sense. The ﬁrst thing that Travis
did was go to Reddit.com, and to the NFL subreddit, Reddit.com/r/nﬂ, and
he posted his rant.

xxvi
PREFACE
@KCChiefs Twitter Account, tells fan (Me) to Get a
Clue and stop being a fan. Submitted September 11,
2012 ∗by teedubya
“The KC Chiefs just blocked me on Twitter @teedubya. Last night,
I tweeted that for the 4th year in a row, the Chiefs are at the bottom
of salary cap spending and that the owner, Clark Hunt, is hoarding
cap dollars. The Chiefs commitment to mediocrity has made me not
care much about being a fan . . .
1. My ﬁrst tweet to them (see Figure P.2).
2. They responded with this DM (see Figure P.3).
3. I responded that it is good to know that the KC Chiefs have an
immature teenager running their social media.
4. Then they blocked my account.
I, as a fan for my whole life of nearly 40 years, who has never
seen the Chiefs in a Superbowl; nor have I seen a playoff win in
nearly 20 years; nor have I seen a QB drafted [EDIT: in the ﬁrst
round] in the last 27 years. Chiefs fans have a right to be pissed.
The Kansas City Chiefs have no right to be pissy toward the
fans. We are the ones paying for their salaries. Shame on you,
Chiefs. Oh, and congrats on 50 years of being in KC. 10 years
of greatness, followed by 40 years of pathetic proﬁteering. Clark
Hunt sits in Dallas siphoning Kansas City dollars.”
Keep in mind the customer’s (fan) perspective as context for this situa­
tion. The Chiefs had not drafted a quarterback since 1983, and it was 2012!
The Chiefs hadn’t won a playoff game since 1993. They were in the middle
of a nearly 20-year playoff-win-drought. The Chiefs lost seven playoff games
in a row, and they were spending millions below the salary cap.
Early in the 2012 season, when Travis sent the tweet, the announced
amount under the cap was $26.6 million; it was later adjusted to $16.1
million. In 2011, when there was no salary cap or salary ﬂoor, the Chiefs

Preface
xxvii
spent the least in player salaries. Beginning in 2013, teams had to spend at
least 89 percent of the cap or be subject to penalties.3,4
The NFL football is serious business to paying fans in America. And
being under the salary cap for multiple years in a row had angered many
Kansas City Chiefs fans.
The rant made the front page of Reddit. Some readers were mad at the
Chiefs. Some were mad at Travis, calling him many different colorful terms.
The story began to go viral because of this activity.
Once it made the front page of Reddit, the social media shit-storm
gained strength and started being referenced on big news sites and the local
media.
One local disc jockey in Kansas City named Lazlo started going off about
the situation on his broadcast that day.
Lazlo has a show called The Church of Lazlo in the afternoon in the
Kansas City market. He was yelling about how people behind their computer
screens are keyboard warriors. How weak and ridiculous they are! Lazlo
(on air) said, (paraphrasing)
“The Internet trolls would never talk like that in public, like they do on the
Internet! That ASSCLOWN on Reddit, who was talking about the Kansas
City Chiefs rude tweet today, Oh! they told him to get a clue? Boo hoo! Big
freaking deal!”
One of TW’s buddies called him up and said, “Hey Travis, Lazlo’s talk­
ing about you and your Reddit post and the Chiefs deal. You should call into
the station and chat with him.”
So, Travis did. He couldn’t get through the phone line, so he sent a text
to the Church of Lazlo show saying, “Hey this is Travis Wright @teedubya,
the guy who got the tweet from the Chiefs, and if you want to have a con­
versation, let’s do it.”
Lazlo called Travis, and immediately they were on air. In the digital
world of media today, it is all about attention and trust, and Lazlo couldn’t
pass up the chance to hype the story for his show’s gain. Lazlo was chomping
at the bit to destroy an Internet troll, live and on air. At ﬁrst, he was echoing
some comments from some Redditors, trying to make Travis look like a
whiny idiot. It was clear that he had an angsty attitude about keyboard

xxviii
PREFACE
warriors and disdain for Internet trolls, who are always louder and braver
behind a keyboard. Little did Lazlo know that Travis is that loud in real life,
too.
On air, Travis stated many of the reasons why KC Chiefs fans should be
fed up with the Kansas City Chiefs at that point. He mentioned a litany of
strategic, management, and cultural errors that the organization had made,
and while they were having this conversation, he actually started converting
Lazlo to his line of thinking.
Lazlo recanted, acknowledging how Travis was right, how it had been
since 1983 that the Chiefs have drafted a ﬁrst-round quarterback! The Chiefs
hadn’t won a playoff game since Joe Montana was the Chiefs QB. Maybe the
Chiefs were bad because they weren’t spending enough on salaries? Why do
the Chiefs not let the former players and alumni come to Arrowhead? Why
are they hoarding salary cap dollars?”
Nobody changes Lazlo’s opinion, yet on that day, Travis did with his
own well-informed and impassioned one.
After Reddit and Lazlo, Travis was contacted by local TV stations to do
interviews about the scenario. It made Yahoo!’s front page. USA Today talked
about it. Mashable wrote about it. There was even a segment on it on ESPN
5
.com.
When you have digital sense, you realize that page views are an economic
driver that has forever bastardized traditional and nontraditional journalism
and media, in potentially irreparable ways. The 2016 election debacle in the
United States proved this more than any other single event in recent history.
Travis never expected the Chiefs to respond to him and tell him to get a
clue. If you look at the comments of any YouTube video on the Web, you
see people saying way more rude, and sometimes disrespectful or disgusting,
things about artists or brands than TW was saying to the Chiefs. And most of
these comments are never replied to by the brand.
As a fan, Travis had been to more than 100 games at Arrowhead Sta­
dium. He was a loyal paying customer (100 games ain’t cheap). A passionate
advocate for Kansas City sports teams, he had been to every crushing home
playoff loss the Chiefs had had since 1986. Them telling him that “it’s his
choice to be a fan and get a clue” just wasn’t good digital sense. Of course it
was his choice. It was also his choice and his right to vent his displeasure, as
any customer can, when the product they support fails to deliver.

Preface
xxix
Shortly after the 2012 NFL season, Travis spoke at the SMX Social
Media Conference in Las Vegas. After he shared the story about the Chiefs, a
half dozen other social media directors and managers of other sports teams
approached him. They all stated that the day after the Chiefs told him to get
a clue, every one of those six sports teams had a meeting. The all told their
social media managers to not be rude to their fans and they began to institute
formal governance around their branded accounts on social media channels.
Digital Bit: Don’t feed the trolls. (Also don’t feed the
Zombies, which you will read about in Chapter 2.)
The “Save Our Chiefs” Movement
The situation with the Chiefs continued to gain momentum. The wave of
public disgruntlement grew toward the Chiefs almost daily, and the com­
pounding losses in future weeks did nothing to quell the rage. A couple of
more losses into the season and people from all over began to reach out to
TW about doing something bigger.
ChiefsPlanet.com had been around since 2000, before Internet 2.0, and
was one of the few remaining independent message boards about the Chiefs.
It was founded in August 2000 after a group of core users were fed up with
the Kansas City Star message board moderators. After a negative experience
with moderators at the KC Star happened in 2000, they started their own
private community to commiserate with fellow Chiefs fans. Travis has been a
card carrying member since 2003.
Message forums are a form of social media organized around communi­
ties of common interests. As a participant, you can really get to know people,

xxx
PREFACE
over time, through the medium. There had been several ChiefsPlanet in-
person bashes and tailgating events at Arrowhead with members of this forum
over many seasons. It remains a great community, that commiserates over the
16 years of Chiefs futility. ChiefsPlanet is still going strong today.
A couple of weeks after the initial tweet shit-storm, Travis was perusing
ChiefsPlanet and one of its users, Eric Granell, created a thread that said
“Hey we’re thinking about ﬂying banners over Arrowhead Stadium before
each Chiefs game. What do you think of this idea?” In another thread, Marty
McDonald was setting up a Facebook page and a Twitter page for something
he coined Save Our Chiefs.6 As they were all talking virtually on the thread, it
was decided to merge efforts. Save Our Chiefs was born after the fourth game
of the 2012 season.
With Travis being the disgruntled Twitter “cc get a clue” guy, he wasn’t
about to be on the forefront of this movement. However, he was able to give
key strategic advice and help grow their social media channels rapidly. A
fundraiser was created on ChiefsPlanet for airplane banners to ﬂy over
Arrowhead. When it was all said and done, they had crowdfunded almost
$6,500 to have airplanes ﬂy a banner over the home stadium and parking lot
before each game. Once the banner was funded, Travis reached out to his
local media contacts, who had interviewed him for the Chiefs Twitter story.
He relayed the news back to the members at ChiefsPlanet.
Okay, I talked with Fox 4 and told them “ChiefsPlanet is a 12-year-old
forum (at the time) for Chiefs fans from all over the world . . . and the
banner idea got funded and organized here. Other groups of Chiefs fans are
voicing their displeasure with sites popping up like SaveOurChiefs.com and
many other Facebook groups. People are becoming very, very vocal in this
social age, and expressing their choice to be a fan or not. LOL. They said
they are doing a video news story on it, probably the 10 PM tonight or
tomorrow night . . . and most likely an accompanying story on their web-
site, that will have the video on it.”
WE DESERVE BETTER! FIRE PIOLI! BENCH CASSEL! the ﬁrst banner said.
The local KC news outlets feasted on that development. Within two
weeks, @SaveOurChiefs had almost 80,000 followers on their Twitter
account. For perspective, that was more than the seating capacity (76,416) of
Arrowhead Stadium where the Chiefs play. The perception of having nearly
100,000 followers on Twitter freaked out the Kansas City media. It was

Preface
xxxi
2012. New stations were still struggling to ﬁgure out how to leverage Twitter.
They ate it up. They were like, “Oh My God! The Save Our Chiefs move­
ment (Figure P.5) already has 100,000 followers and over 20,000 Facebook
fans!Figure depicting the screenshot of the "Save Our Chiefs" Facebook page.

Figure P.5 The Save Our Chiefs Facebook Page
The media freak-out enabled greater visibility. Eric and Marty were
being interviewed on sports radio stations all over the nation, talking about
what’s going on with Save Our Chiefs.
Travis penned a letter and sent it to the CEO of the Chiefs, Clark Hunt,
and the general manager, Scott Pioli, stating what the plan was and that the
intended outcome was to see Pioli get his walking papers. Using e-mail
technology called Yesware, he was able to track all opens for that e-mail. His
e-mail never got a response from the Chiefs; however, it was opened up 49
times on 27 devices in 13 different cities. The movement deﬁnitely had the
Chiefs’ attention.
The group even worked out a deal with a local sporting goods company,
Sports Nutz, and created custom black hoodies that said, “Save Our Chiefs
Blackout-Arrowhead November 18th, 2012. (Figure P.6)”
On November 18, 2012, roughly 50 percent of the fans were wearing
black on that game vs. the Bengals. Save Our Chiefs literally blacked out the
Guinness Book of World Records for “Loudest Stadium in the World.”7
The group had other, more positive community events planned as well,
like a food drive. They were partnering with a local food bank on a canned-
food donation campaign called “Can Pioli.” Phil Kloster, CEO of Edgewood

xxxii
PREFACEPhotograph depicting a veiw of Arrowhead Stadium, on November 18, 2012, during the #blackout.

Figure P.6 Arrowhead Stadium, November 18, 2012, During the
#blackout
Construction in KC with the username “Phobia” on the ChiefsPlanet forum,
came up with that one.
However, in a parallel narrative, that was the week that a linebacker of
the Chiefs, Jovan Belcher, committed a double homicide-suicide. Which was
absolutely tragic and brought everyone back to reality about what really
mattered in life. Out of respect for all parties involved, the entire group
ceased all of the Save Our Chiefs activities until the last two weeks of the
season.
The overall statistics from the movement were impressive: 41,545 men­
tions of Save Our Chiefs, with 359 news articles written about it, 160 blog
posts about the movement, and 113 mentions (Figure P.7) on various
message forums.
At the end of the 2012 season, the Chiefs ended up with two wins and
14 losses. On the Monday following the last game of the season, Clark Hunt,
the owner of the Kansas City Chiefs, went after the best candidate possible
and hired Andy Reid as coach. He also hired John Dorsey from the Green

Preface
xxxiii
Figure P.7 The Social Media Mentions of #saveourchiefs after the
@teedubya @kcchiefs Firestorm
Bay Packers front ofﬁce as his new general manager. Former GM Scott Pioli
and the Chiefs’ head coach, Romeo Crennel, and the coaching staff were
ﬁred and a new regime began. The Chiefs were saved! For fans, it was long
overdue justice. Travis immediately sent Clark Hunt, the CEO of the Chiefs,
a note of thanks.
Mr. Hunt,
Thank you. You’ve proven yourself to be extremely tenacious in getting
your man, Andy Reid. I’ll never call you cheap again. You’ve displayed balls
of steel, went above and beyond, and as a result KC fans are rejoicing,
today, at your awesomeness. I put on a Chiefs jersey for the ﬁrst time since
preseason, just now. It feels good to have our Chiefs back from Pioli and in
the hands of Andy Reid and John Dorsey.
I love the Chiefs and am grateful that we have an owner who cares. Could I
be unblocked from the @kcchiefs twitter now? Thanks again for saving our
Chiefs, Mr. Hunt. You’re a badass. Sincerely, Travis Wright @teedubya
The day that Scott Pioli was ﬁred, the Chiefs unblocked @teedubya and
the Chiefs ticket department connected with Travis and offered him half-
price season tickets for the 2013 season. He gladly accepted them, and has
continued to be a die-hard fan.
What started, earlier in the year, with a disgruntled guy tweeting a for­
gettable tweet to the Chiefs after a loss had snowballed into this major
movement all because one individual on the Chiefs’ social media team did
not use digital sense. Save Our Chiefs was a brilliant social media experience
in that it showed how people can impact change when they handle it right.
The idea was born from frustration: Create a social media experience to allow
fans with similar thoughts a place to engage and interact with. Our move­
ment became a cornerstone of daily life for Chiefs fans: we were talked about

xxxiv
PREFACE
on multiple radio stations and local TV, and it drew national attention from
NFL.com, ESPN.com, even the New York Times.
The fallout from this effort was amazing: the Chiefs’ organization had a
digital transformation. They listened to their biggest customer, the fan base.
Sure, they ﬁred their GM and head coach, and they cut ties with an over­
priced sloth of a quarterback (we still relish in helping accomplish that), but
that wasn’t the amazing thing. The Kansas City Chiefs’ organization physi­
cally and mentally shifted into a fan-friendly culture.
They rolled out “Chiefs Kingdom,” which serves as a universal rally cry
to bring all fans back together. They were more positive in social interactions.
They stopped banning people and started to listen, engage, and learn. In
short form, it proved brands are capable of change.
From a digital media perspective, the main takeaway here should be this:
by creating experiences and publishing content that is engaging as well as
entertaining, brands and marketers will build relationships with prospects
and cement foundational relationships with brand loyalists.
“As someone who has been involved in digital media and marketing since
the late ‘90s, I don’t think people set out to be marketed at in the social
channel. Rather, you have to apply some ‘marketing psychology’ to your
message through various types of engagement,” says Marty McDonald,
coconspirator of Save Our Chiefs and senior director of Strategic Develop­
ment and Sales at G/O Digital. “Simply stated, your prospects and customers
simply want to be a great guest at the dinner table of your brand. Treat them
that way and they’ll embrace your brand.”
Fast forward to January 2016, the Chiefs 23-year playoff futility ended,
when they won their ﬁrst playoff game since 1993. Saved indeed.
Optus in Australia
In November 2014, Travis was traveling to Australia for the ﬁrst time to
speak at Ashton Media’s conference, the Data Strategy Symposium, north of
Sydney in an area known for its wine, Hunter’s Valley. It’s a great conference
put on by Mark Abay and his Ashton team.8
Before travelling, Travis sent out a tweet to his friend @ChrisBrinkworth
asking if T-Mobile had service there, as he was feeling a bit unprepared for

Preface
xxxvFigure depicting a screenshot of a Twitter post of Optus on 10 November 2014. Optus tagged the message "Be sure to drop in once you arrive Travis and we'll set you up to live more #Yes with our prepaid options-Paolo" to kateiselin and teedubya.

Figure P.8Figure depicting a screenshot of a Twitter post of Optus on 10 November 2014. Optus tagged the message "If you exit from Gate A, you'll notice our store or Gate B, our Kiosk. Either way ask for DJ who will look after you!- Paolo" to teedubya.

Figure P.9Figure depicting a screenshot of a Twitter post of Optus on 14 November 2014. Optus tagged the message "Hey Mia, like @teedubya we've organised a little something at the Optus Airport store for you ;) Safe travels - Mark" to MiaD.

Figure P.10
international travel and need to ﬁgure out his SIM card situation. The local
phone carrier, Optus, was doing some social listening and tuned into the
conversation. Paolo from @optus (Figures P.8, P.9, and P.10) sent a couple
of tweets to Travis, instructing him to drop by once he arrived in Sydney and
they could set him up with their prepaid options.9
“Sweet,” Travis replied. “Nicely done. Consider this a conversion,
Paolo.” He then recommended that Optus connect with @MiaD, my former
boss at Symantec, who was also speaking at the same conference.
Well, when Travis arrived in Sydney, he saw the Optus store and was
ready to buy a SIM card for the trip. However, when Travis walked up to the
store, an Optus employee, Jordan Zac, said, “Hello, Travis. Welcome to
Australia. We’ve been waiting for you.”
“What?!” Travis was blown away (Figure P.11) by the customer service
already. But wait, it gets better. Jordan handed Travis a huge Optus bag, and
inside it were some Australian items, such as a six-pack of Victorian Bitter
Beer, some ﬂip-ﬂops, some delicious Tim-Tam cookies, some Vegemite so he
could make a sandwich, some other gadgets and gizmos, and, best of all, a
free 4G hotspot with 10 GB of free data for the trip.
In case you were wondering if they had a system in place to serve others
this way, they gave Mia Dand a similar experience (Figure P.12).

xxxvi
PREFACEFigure depicting a screenshot of a Twitter post of Travis Wright on 14 November 2014. Travis tagged the message "Wow. @Optus is the coolest carrier ever. Damm they gave me the hookup. Australia is the friendliest country ever." to Optus. An photograph of Optus taken in his office is uploaded below this message. 

Figure P.11 Optus AustraliaFigure depicting a screenshot of a Twitter post of Mia Dand on 10 November 2014. Mia tagged the message "These socially savvy Aussie biz are blowing me away :-)" @teedubya @Optus cc: @daveando.

Figure P.12
Optus gave Travis the free hotspot since Apple and T-Mobile wouldn’t
unlock his iPhone 5S, so they went the extra, extra mile and hooked him up.
Talk about digital sense. Travis has been back to Australia twice since then,
and guess which phone carrier he uses?
The moral of these two stories is that digital sense goes both ways. It
can infuriate a customer or inspire them. It is also possible to gain real
momentum out of a major commitment to redeem your organization when
you have failed to have digital sense in the past.

Preface
xxxvii
The Genesis of This Book
What you have in your hands right now is a book that will teach you how to
keep up with the pace of change, keep your customer at the center of your
decision processes, and inspire the people inside your organization to lead
from wherever they are with more honed Digital Sense.
Soon after the Chiefs incident in 2012, Travis and Chris were speaking
on the same panel at the 2013 Denver Startup Week festival in Colorado.
Chris, a serial entrepreneur, was on a personal sabbatical in Colorado, mired
in ethnographic research around the Fourth Industrial Revolution and cus­
tomer experience, following a venture exit. Chris and Travis immediately hit
it off.
In Summer 2015, they reconnected and the concept of this book was
born. Chris was back in build mode with Ethology (a customer experience
performance media agency) and Travis had become one of the most sought
after thought leaders in marketing technology. Travis was working on build­
ing his agency, CCP Digital, was a paid columnist at Inc. magazine, and had
a new podcast on VentureBeat, called VB Engage, with the incomparable
Stewart Rogers. We had originally decided to write the book and self-publish
it, when serendipitously a few weeks later, Lia Ottaviano, from John Wiley &
Sons, Inc. in Hoboken, NJ, reached out, and a deal for Digital Sense was born
with the country’s oldest and most proliﬁc business book publisher.
In this book, you will learn how to blend customer experience, social
business strategy, and marketing technologies using the Experience Market­
ing Framework.
TM This book will teach you how to amplify that content
correctly, and give you some different hacks and tricks on how to look at
digital. It will help teach your organization how to be more digitally savvy at
an individual and collective level.
We want digital sense to permeate your whole organization and the
world at large.
With over 3 billion more humans coming into the commercial cycle
globally in the coming years, as mobile web and smartphone access prolifer­
ates in the Third World, we no longer live in the information age, instead
residing ﬁrmly in the age of opportunity.
You have an unprecedented chance to capitalize and thrive (not just
survive) through what Klaus Schwab, the founder and executive chairman of
the World Economic Forum, has called the Fourth Industrial Revolution.10

xxxviii
PREFACE
Having a model to cultivate a continually increasing digital sense will be
an imperative. In the coming decade, the road ahead will not merely be a
prolongation of the Third Industrial Revolution, which used electronics and
information technology to automate production. It will be a complete and
distinctly different revolution wherein everything exists as bits centered
around velocity, scope, and impact as humanity enters a time of scale where
technology has no historical precedent.
Our hope with this book is to share some of the wisdom we have picked
up during our collective 40-plus years of marketing and technology startup
experience. We have uniﬁed our sharp tongues and quick wits into one voice
for the narrative to make your reading experience ﬂuid.
You’ve heard the quote from Wayne Gretzky that says, “I skate to where
the puck is headed, not where it is.” That’s been one of the guiding lights and
principles of Travis’s whole existence. Chris’s personal tagline for those who
have seen him speak, mentor, or invest, is “The real risk is doing nothing.”
Strap yourself in and let’s begin.

Section I
Overview


1 The Game at Speed
E
very second of every day the rate of change is accelerating and we all fall
further behind. Welcome to your new reality. You will realize this reality
slowly at ﬁrst and then suddenly in the coming years. As an executive, a
marketer, and/or a founder/entrepreneur, you are no longer dealing with the
convenience of saying outwardly that the customer is always right while
staying with legacy processes and metrics internally as you march toward your
next quarterly earnings call or round of funding.
We now live in a world where the customer is always right and enabled
by technology, platforms, and channels to provide unparalleled support for
the brands they love in any given moment and to enact massive justice/
vengeance in real time on the brands that violate their trust or abuse/take for
granted their attention.
We are already four compounding—exponential—years from the dates
in Travis’s personal Save Our Chiefs story and two years from the Optus
story, and we have just watched the most interesting/disruptive political race
in the history of the United States unfold. We are in the crosshairs of a dying
traditional media universe and the rise of the earned media era, where every
individual is both empowered and feeling helplessly lost by the digital power
and complexity at their ﬁngertips. Time moves fast in the digital world.
Why Your Organization Needs a Digital Sense DNA Layer
No industry is immune to the new rules of social business, the increasing
demands, and the need to make customer experience the one metric that
matters. World renowned futurist Gerd Leonhard has gone on record to say
3

4
DIGITAL SENSE
that the exponential speed and evolution of technology has created a digital-
ﬁrst world in which “humanity will change more in the next 20 years than
the previous 300.”
Think about that for a minute. Imagine it is the year 1717 (300 years ago
from the release of this book) and that you are hanging out with us over your
favorite adult beverage in a candlelit tavern on Manhattan Island in New
York. Imagine that as we all ﬁll up our bladders and make our way to the
outhouse (or side of the building) to relieve ourselves, we notice a small hot
spring on the ground. We decide in our stupors to take off our sweet pow­
dered wigs and take a relaxing bath for the ﬁrst time in a few weeks, while
continuing our imbibition.
As we begin to relax, Travis tells some joke about the British soldiers,
making you laugh so hard that you spill what is left of your beverage into the
sulfur-infused bubbling water and it transforms our hot spring into the Hot
Tub Time Machine! Immediately we are transported to present-day New York
City 300 years into the future! (It could happen.) Talk about feeling over­
whelmed. We would have a real challenge (Colonial skivvies aside) assimi­
lating into the 2017 world with our 1717 understanding of how society is
organized, information is proliferated, and commerce is done.
Well friends, whether Gerd is 100 percent correct or not, the reality is
that all humans alive today will experience the same level of change by the
year 2037 as our ﬁctitious Colonial counterparts would experience if they
were transported to present day. In the next 20 years, with 5G Internet, AI,
AR, VR, chatbots, and the Internet of EVERYF#%KINGTHING, the world
as we know it is certainly going to change (Figure 1.1). Welcome to the
Fourth Industrial Revolution! Nothing before has ever prepared us for what is
going to happen. As Wired Magazine’s founding executive editor, famed
futurist Kevin Kelly, also states, “It’s Inevitable.”
Are you ready?
The Game Has Forever Been Changed
Your reality today is that your customer doesn’t care about your internal
battles, political hurdles, or legacy technologies’ lack of integration into your
newer cloud-based ones. She doesn’t care about your struggle to retain top
talent, or your troubles creating a culture uniﬁed around core values, while

5
The Game at Speed
Figure 1.1
Source: Gerd Leonhard, “Exponential and Combinatorial Futures: All Depends on
Ethics (Futurist Gerd at Tedx),” https://vimeo.com/117335574.
continuing to hit the quarterly earnings numbers. Nor does she care why, at
different touch points along the journey, you can’t seem to deliver the same
brand promise she bought into on the front end. She could give two craps
about your issues and is—like all of us—no longer loyal to a brand as much
as she is loyal to the need for a solution to the problem she has in that
moment. She grades you only on how you deliver against it and how con­
sistently you can meet her evolving needs over time.
Just because you have satisﬁed customers doesn’t mean you have happy
ones. Satisﬁed customers are best deﬁned as those customers who continue to
pay for the service you provide, because they have not yet found another way
to live without you.
Think about that for a minute.
It makes sense but it is hardly aspirational as an offensive strategy. It
merely serves as a temporary defensive one that can fool you into compla­
cency, because it doesn’t currently violate the universal Law of

6
DIGITAL SENSE
Compensation. There is a universal Law of Compensation you ask? Yes, there
is. There are only three rules to earning the majority of the market share at
any given time, and for those who haven’t read any of our earlier stuff, the
Law of Compensation is deﬁned below as follows:
1. the need for what you do,
2. your ability to fulﬁll that need consistently, and
3. how difﬁcult or easy it is to replace you.
Satisﬁed customers are not secure customers in tomorrow’s marketplace,
and you are vulnerable because of the false sense of security you feel as it
relates to number three in this law. The reason is simple. If your customer is
merely continuing to pay you because you fulﬁll their need consistently (taxi
cabs ﬁll the need of rented individual transport) and you are difﬁcult to
replace (2007), then once Uber/Lyft and so on get to scale (2010), your
satisﬁed customer becomes your disruptive competitor’s happy one. Then the
cycle starts all over again.
Satisﬁed customers of Uber are now just as vulnerable to leave if it
becomes easier and more exciting to replace Uber with some other option
for timely, affordable, easy transport. In the same way, happy lessees or
owners of (insert your favorite automaker here) cars and trucks are a vul­
nerable asset the minute they decide ridesharing is more economically
viable and convenient than paying for a vehicle they only use on average
5 percent of their week.
Companies like GetAround, Turo, and Skurt are renting people cars and
disrupting the car rental business now. If you’re driving your car only
5 percent of the time, why not rent it out to someone who needs it? The
sharing/trusting economy is in full effect, and some simulations show that in
the coming years taxibots could replace 90 percent of all cars on the road, drop
commute times 10 percent, and open up acres of land for parks and public
use, completely transforming cities with a marriage of mass carpooling and
UPS delivery intelligence.1
The cycles of innovation around your customer experience, business
model, and solution set as a differentiator must continue to speed up without
sacriﬁcing the reliability of that delivery. Your organizational DNA and
leadership teams must make immediate shifts in prioritization around the
following new ideals.

7
The Game at Speed
• The Customer is the Number One Asset. (We suggest you follow fellow
Wiley author Jeanne Bliss at CustomerBliss.com. immediately, read
Chief Customer Ofﬁcer 2.0, and commit to implementing her ﬁve core
competencies to your corporate list of Key Performance Indicators
[KPIs].)
• There is no online/ofﬂine world in which we exist. It is now an always-on
world.
• There may be multiple budgets within the org chart, but there is only 
one bank account. 
• Every decision must be measured against how it impacts the customer 
experience. 
• The internal customer (employee) is as important as the external cus­
tomer you seek to serve. 
• You can’t keep up with it all, so focus on improving the areas with the
least friction and highest ROI ﬁrst, and then gain momentum daily,
monthly, and yearly to tackle more.
• Empathy (EQ) is the number one skill to cultivate in your organization.
• Design thinking is not just for creatives and should be rooted in your 
professional development plan for all departments. 
• In a software-is-everything world, your product is your focus group, as
sensors connect everything, availing data-fed iterations in real time for
those who build the proper technology stack.
• Your organization needs digital sense.
As you read this book, please understand that we are both pragmatists at
our core, more than we are anything else. We are both insatiable learners and
fearless doers, but at our mutual hearts, we are pragmatic problem solvers and
dot connectors before we are anything else. Each of us has been blessed with
the gift of gab, and our intention with this book is to use our ability to
assimilate a multitude of inputs into succinct and focused outputs that inspire
you to action that causes massive impact. We have endeavored to make this
book a pragmatically powerful perspective and reference resource for you, the
reader. Our goal is that Digital Sense will help provide you the context and
conﬁguration to build a custom solution for your business that achieves a
focused social business strategy, powered by the proper technology, to deliver

8
DIGITAL SENSE
your customers (internal and external) a world-class experience, day in and
day out.
This book is not going to read like a marketing or operations textbook or
technology manual. Instead, it will be infused with cross-functional exercises,
a framework, a mental model for optimizing communication, case studies
statistics, data, a few emojis, and jokes. We will discuss some of the research
and provide assessments at your ﬁngertips that are cutting edge, but we did
not run any double-blind experiments on a group of test subjects in a lab.
We are not those authors. We are not in an ivory tower. We are warrior
generals in the ﬁeld running full speed into success and failure, licking our
wounds while researching, thinking, and DOING in real time. We know
that a large percentage of the tactical advice in this book won’t work exactly
the same in the near future and will face obsolescence, but the framework and
thinking that created those efforts will be foundational for your ability to stay
ahead of the game and solve the problems you face in the future.
The book is designed to build, more than anything else, a common set of
language, visual tools of communication, and an active community of fellow
ﬁeld generals. Join the community and stay up on trends with our newsletter
at DigitalSen.se and help each other as we iterate this work in the future.
We will provide references to several of the extremely valuable ivory-
tower authors and sense-making organizations throughout this book, since we
consume content voraciously from them, but we are writing this book pri­
marily to deliver on its subtitle and provide you with “The Common Sense
Approach to Effectively Blending Social Business Strategy, Marketing Technology,
and Customer Experience.”
Our recommended approach within this book is completely custom­
izable. It is simple, but won’t be easy. We have provided Chapter 2 and
Chapter 5 to ensure that you are armed with the proper mental awareness
and leadership ammo to take the ideas in this book and put them into use in
any organization regardless of where you sit in the hierarchy.
Bits of Knowledge
Throughout the chapters, we will have several Digital Bits of knowledge that
we call out or link to for your further discovery or deeper diving into key
topics. We also will utilize these links and assets to continually update the

9
The Game at Speed
supplemental and supportive content of this book as the months and years
pass and exponential shifts change the truth around some of the strategies and
tactics we are sharing in this version. Please consider this a reference point
and check back often with our Digital Bits as we provide updates and changes
to the ideas and recommendations we discuss herein.
Who Is This Book For?
Our goal for Digital Sense is to empower all executives, marketers, internal
change agents, and entrepreneurs with a framework and structure to build an
amazing work culture that aligns the customer needs to the major business
goals in a sustainable way that delivers both reliability to the customer expe­
rience across all channels and a method to operationalize innovation more
effectively.
This book was written for the executive of a growing or large organiza­
tion to illuminate the robustness of the techniques discussed and empower
you to lead from wherever you are in the org chart, to help you defend
against the coming disruption to your existence. This book is also written for
the founder/entrepreneur or early stage company leader building a vision
from the ground up to take on an inefﬁcient and impersonal giant in the
industry. Disrupt away, brothers and sisters!
Throughout this book, we will highlight some great examples from your
peers in both regards, as they have navigated the bumpy road of proliferating
a Digital Sense across the layers and silos of their organization to build a social
business strategy that delivers a better customer experience each and every
day.
Mostly, however, we wrote this book for anyone who wishes, as Steve
Farber says, to “do what you love in the service of those who love what you
do!” Adding what Jeff Weiner, CEO of LinkedIn, says as his personal mission
statement, “To help lead with wisdom and empathy.” If it is true that work is
love made visible, we can only hope that at the conclusion of this book, you
will clearly feel and know how much we loved working on this book together
in service to you, our peers. Enjoy the journey!


2 Inﬂuencers,
Zombies, and
Everything Between
The Rise of Digital Transformation
“The realignment of, or new investment in, technology, business models, and
processes to drive new value for customers and employees and more effectively
compete in an ever-changing digital economy.”
—Brian Solis, principal analyst at The Altimeter Group
With a combined 40 years of experience building, leading, and advising
organizations from the napkin and seed stage to the Fortune 100, FTSE 100,
and companies on every continent but Antarctica, both of us have realized
one fact about life and one fact about human beings.
FACT 1: In life the only true constant is CHANGE.
FACT 2: No human being resists change, but every human being resists
being changed!
Every fundamental and successful organizational change, large or small,
happens through effective communication that penetrates the subconscious
part of our mind. These facts hold true for organizations as well, where fun­
damental change occurs and begins to rapidly appear when a tipping point of
some smaller percentage (10 to 15 percent) of the workforce accepts the new
paradigm or operational order into their collective subconscious.
11

12
DIGITAL SENSE
There are different personality types that you have to learn how to deal
with effectively to facilitate positive change within your organization. For
those who haven’t studied persuasion or any of the masters of inﬂuence
throughout history at length, we will do our best to provide you some nec­
essary high-level clarity in this chapter to the levers that govern successful
communication and shifts in consciousness. We do this so that you can lead,
from wherever you are, and become a catalyst for creating a truly digital
organization that is ready to sustainably compete and delight its customers in
the years to come.
Anyone in marketing or sales knows, all too well, the old adage facts tell, but
stories sell. Stories cause us to connect to our emotional (subconscious) mind.
The mind that ensures that our circulatory, respiratory, and digestive systems
work without us having to consciously be aware of them. The subconscious
mind is our operating system and the body is our hardware. The conscious
mind is where we can load software and new programs, but only the ideas that
are compatible with our current OS (paradigms) will work immediately.
To put any of the framework and ideas in this book to work in your
organization, you must ﬁrst understand how to play the game of people and
inﬂuence. The following paragraphs are our effort to level-set with you by
installing the proper “plugins” to your organizational perspective before you
can load some of the new software this book discusses and run it successfully.
You must understand that there are only three ways (ports) to penetrate a
new idea or concept into the subconscious mind, where it can be nurtured
and begin to grow.
The three methods to “get in the head” of someone are below.
1. Shock
2. Awe/Fascination
3. Agreement
You will want to employ all of these directly as you attempt to imple­
ment the strategies in this book. You will also be prudent to time some of
your deployment of crucial conversations around the indirect occurrences
that shock or fascinate the mass workforce and key players within your
organization. In other words, never waste a crisis or a high that you could use
to implant some of your agenda ﬁrmly in the mind of your leadership and
delivery teams.

13
Inﬂuencers, Zombies, and Everything Between
Having worked with everything from early stage startups to middle-
market turnarounds and large organizations like Sprint, Symantec, Qual­
comm, and Huawei, we are always making mental notes of how these three
tactics are deployed to create mass control scenarios, traction, or intrigue.
At Symantec, Travis experienced the impact (shock) of reorganization
three times in his 2-plus years. While consulting for Qualcomm for 110 days
in 2013, Chris witnessed its use twice. In contrast, for startups and early stage
companies, fascination and agreement can get a lot of use as tools for mass
control and direction. In any event, make a mental note that these three are
the paths into the subconscious and reptilian part of the human mind. In the
coming paragraphs, we will talk about the four types of people you will
meet along the way to drill this point home further.
Think for a minute of how hard it is in a large company to get
agreement on an idea. Think even more about how hard it is for manag­
ers across an organization to create a sense of fascination or awe. Cer­
tainly, you can think of some of the masters at this, such as Steve Jobs,
but the one thing that works time and time again for getting uniformly in
the subconscious mind of your entire organizational chart is a reorg. They
create a visceral level of uncertainty and stress that can be utilized to weed
out the detractors, put potential uprisings back in their place, and realign
power centers under the most entrenched or inﬂuential leaders. At the
end of the day, however, it is all about getting your undivided attention,
so that some other news or communication can be delivered unabated
into the heart of your mind.
Think about why news organizations always lead with what bleeds. And
notice how pundits, anchors, and talking heads often show up on screen in
four boxes screaming at each other, only for the station to go to commercial
every few minutes with some product designed to eliminate other stress in
your life—whether by a pharmaceutical remedy, an enticing vacation, a
gluttonous meal, or an adult beverage. Even when you put the news on mute,
to lessen the shock and adrenal burnout, they have artfully placed camera
angles showing the amazing legs of the female anchors—fascination—to keep
your eyes engaged while they use graphics and the news alert ticker to feed
you the same information in repetitive nature. Today, the BREAKING
NEWS alert can include anything from a terror attack to a tweet war between
Kim-ye and Taylor Swift. It’s all designed to get and keep your ﬂeeting
attention just long enough to jam a message deep into your subconscious.

14
DIGITAL SENSE
The way that successful startups use these three tactics to gain traction in
the mind of their intended targets is even more fun. It is the old game of
Villains, Victims, and Heroes, where they typically have some narrative around
the inefﬁcient or human injustice (shock) they are out to eradicate with their
solution. They leverage every aspect of their youth, boldness, and apparent
fearlessness to create a cascading sense of awe and fascination about the dis­
ruption they contend is imminent in a space that nobody thought could be
toppled. They take early adopters and use growth hacking to proliferate the
stories of their users who love being set free from the burden of the old way to
amplify and create agreement that this is the future of (insert industry here).
When your customer experience or marketing team endeavors to surprise
and delight your customer, this is a combination of positive shock and awe in
full effect. The point is that you must also be willing to deploy these three
tactics to get your organization to align around the idea that the present and
future battleﬁeld is around customer experience.
Our bold belief is that customer experience is truly the one metric that
matters most. Organizations that align their total focus around optimizing
their departments to provide the most seamless experience at each touch
point in the journey will take home the lion’s share of all rewards in the
coming decade.
We highly recommend that you check out the efforts and CCXP
TM
certiﬁcation at The Customer Experience Professionals Association (CXPA.org),1
if you are looking for a complete road map and operational aptitude to unify
your managers around the discipline of CX. They are great friends of ours,
and they provide an amazing level of best practices forums, white papers, and
research to keep you sharp.
Those who fail to achieve and maintain great customer experiences across
the customer journey will be relegated to a distant second place or put com­
pletely out of business.
Attention and Trust
Attention and trust are the two most important (and hardest) currencies to
attain today and for the foreseeable future. They will also be the easiest to lose
once attained. You already know that attention has long been the asset most
coveted by marketers. In the digital world, however, attention is becoming

15
Inﬂuencers, Zombies, and Everything Between
nearly impossible to gain and retain over time. Too much noise out there and
not enough signal. Consumers are being bombarded with advertising, con­
tent, social updates, texts, and app notiﬁcations 24/7/365.
A recent study, by Microsoft in Canada, found that since the year 2000,
our attention span has dropped 30 percent from 12 seconds in 2000 to 8 seconds
in 2016.2 By some accounts, we have the same attention span as a goldﬁsh!
Have you ever held a meaningful conversation with one of those? Better yet,
have you ever gotten a goldﬁsh to give you their credit card?
You didn’t need Microsoft or us to tell you that attention spans have
dropped. Hell, you have probably answered a text or watched part of a You-
Tube video while you were reading this chapter and popping an Adderall.
Many of the people who picked this book up may have gotten so distracted
that they never even made it to this page! So kudos to you. You’re a cham­
pion and we love you for making it this far.
MILESTONE: To reward you for getting this far, tweet
@teedubya & @chrisjsnook that you’re a champion with
the #imachampion hashtag. Add a picture of your
favorite winning moment, if you like, as this will
condition your subconscious for winning. Do it now
and we will give you some RT love!
Attention isn’t enough for winning more market share year over year.
Trust is also required for that to occur. Trust to attention is the equivalent of
carbon to steel. You need attention in enough compounding moment-by­
moment proximity to gain a level of trust that builds with each micro-
transaction or touch point. You must consider it your organization’s sole
purpose to build real relationships (think deep friendships and marriage-level
quality) with each customer, at scale. This means you will work at it day in
and day out.
This also means that breaches of trust will occur from time to time and
that how you repair that trust (while you still have the customer’s attention)
will be as important as how well you maintain it day in and day out. To truly
be world class, to sustainably hold on to happy customers, and to not be

16
DIGITAL SENSE
vulnerable to massive disruption, you can no longer consider this optional. As
a matter of fact, it is fundamental to survival. The good news is that you can
use digital sense and powerful communication tactics to lead your team into a
fully transformed digital organization and leap ahead of your competitors.
Inﬂuencers, Ampliﬁers, Motivatables, and Zombies
We mentioned in an earlier paragraph that every organization, and even
society at large, is made up of approximately four general archetypes of peo­
ple. It is important to have high-level understanding of this phenomenon as
you go about being a change agent to not only be more effective but also to
give you context that will help alleviate your frustration and self-doubt that
you are somehow running into a unique situation that means you’re doomed
for failure. Everyone who has succeeded or will succeed in shifting their
organization to a customer-centric organization will have gone through the
same issues. People are people. There are no truly unique cases. It is not a
matter of whether you are able to succeed; it will come down to what you are
willing to endure to make it happen in your organization.
Look at the two pyramids in Figure 2.1. On the left you will see the
typical layers of an organizational chart along with their primary decision-
making lens/view. On the right, you will see the generic archetypes of the
people that ﬁll those spots. The Inﬂuencers (I), Ampliﬁers (A), Motivatables
(M), and Zombies (Z)—everyone’s favorite antihero. This graphic doesn’t
imply that all the Zombies are in the rank and ﬁle or that you don’t have
Inﬂuencers buried deep in the organization. Each archetype can penetrate all
echelons of an organization, but this is where you will ﬁnd each in their most
native setting.
Starting on the left side, let’s baseline our understanding that any time a
decision is being made at a different layer of the organization, that the lens by
which that decision is assessed is as follows:
• Inside the C-suite, decisions are based upon the overall enterprise-wide
impact.
• At the SVP or VP level, the decision criteria are usually centered around
the business unit or division-level impact.
• Senior directors and directors focus on their department-level impacts 
and budgets. 

17
Inﬂuencers, Zombies, and Everything BetweenFigure depicting the two pyramids. On the left, the typical layers of an organizational chart along with their primary decisionmaking lens/view are depicted. On the right, the generic archetypes of the people that fill those spots are depicted. The Influencers, Amplifiers, Motivatables , and Zombies—everyone’s favorite antihero are denoted by I, A, M, and Z.

Figure 2.1
• Senior managers and managers are concerned primarily with how it will
affect the program objectives they are being held to achieve.
• Lastly, the rank and ﬁle merely want to know what is going to make their
task or project go more smoothly.
None of this is new to you but, it serves as important mutual context as
we discuss who you will meet, and need to leverage (or avoid) along the way,
as you endeavor to implement some (or all) of the recommendations in this
book. Humanity always falls into statistical buckets, and this chart represents
more than 40 years’ combined experience in the trenches, leading organiza­
tions, consulting to organizations, and building businesses and teams from
the ground up to exit. These are not exact percentages, but the percentages
are good enough for government work, as the saying goes, and will serve you as a
good barometer as you go about leading change.
Roughly 3 percent of the population are what we consider to be Inﬂu­
encers. They are also commonly identiﬁed as motivators. These are the mas­
ters of human persuasion. They lead effortlessly and we all want to follow.
They are master motivators, orators, communicators, visionaries, and

18
DIGITAL SENSE
catalysts. (These aren’t the same type of Inﬂuencers, however, that we’ll dis­
cuss in Chapter 10). For every 100 businesspeople, three or fewer will fall
into this category, and you will notice them immediately. If you read the
energy of the room, it will always gravitate toward them. In the rare event
that an Inﬂuencer cannot shift the energy of a room or a conversation to their
agenda or liking, they may leave that room, company, or conversation, never
to return.
Next up are what we call the Ampliﬁers. They represent roughly 10 per­
cent of humanity, are extremely self-motivated, and have the innate drive and
raw talent to become Inﬂuencers, but they must be placed in fertile soil to
develop the nuances of that well-rounded mastery. They are intrinsically ambi­
tious but many times can be constrained by blind spots in their own personal­
ity. They can show signs of frustration at times as they bang their heads against
the same wall until someone masterful shows them another way around it. They
are never short of effort but sometimes can be short of insight or tact.
Ampliﬁers are the foot soldiers of the Inﬂuencer. They lead by example,
and they are critical players in turning a vision into tangible reality and proof
points. They love the challenge of doing things that others say can’t be done.
They ﬁnd personal fulﬁllment in being different than the masses, but they are
not satisﬁed with their place in the world and hunger for higher tiers of
inﬂuence, money, success, and notoriety. These are the people who will die
for ribbons of acknowledgement and validation. They seek mentorship. They
love to be a part of a winning team. Some are selﬁshly motivated, egotistical,
and only stable in the organization because the leaders have found a way to
tie their incentives to the goals of the organization. Others in this category are
extremely altruistic and willing to build others up as part of their leadership
expression. In any event, the Ampliﬁers are the critical fuel to the ﬁre that is
ignited by the Inﬂuencer and are, often times, the tangible day-to-day heroes
inside of your organization.
As we move into the largest segment of humanity, we come across the
Motivatables. These are the motivatable people inside of your organization and
make up roughly 60 percent of everyone you know or will meet. Motivat­
ables have the less than effective and often tiring habit of being people
pleasers. They don’t do it with malicious intent. They do it to blend in.
Motivatables are masters at thriving and surviving in any environment. Like
chameleons, they are wired to adapt. It comes from any number of prior
experiences and early childhood software downloads that told them to be

19
Inﬂuencers, Zombies, and Everything Between
safe, nice, and polite even at their own expense. They dislike conﬂict and
crave the comfort zone.
Motivatables can tend to be your passive-aggressive types. These are your
political players, the most savvy of which have worked their way up to the
higher levels of the organization. There, they can rule a silo and ﬁnd personal
signiﬁcance through championing the inspired cause of an Inﬂuencer/
Ampliﬁer while falling back on a victim-type dominance when things imply
change that forces them out of their comfort zone too quickly. Motivatables
become who they hang around. Like chameleons, they adapt to their envi­
ronment and rarely/almost never create it.
By the way, there is no judgement passed by us for people reading this who
aim to please. Motivatables have not yet fully mastered how to stay on the
productive side of that line. Their intention to create harmony is right, but their
method leaves them vulnerable. Our hope in giving this example is that you will
become more self-aware of where you ﬁt on this leadership continuum and
endeavor to lift yourself and others up to Ampliﬁer and above.
Organizations that do well with culture have a solid and active mainte­
nance by the Inﬂuencer and Ampliﬁers that causes the Motivatables to appear
to have the same characteristics as the Ampliﬁer. Over time, Motivatables
who hang around Ampliﬁers long enough can morph into them, but the
likelihood is smaller that they will ever become Inﬂuencers simply because
they tend to be wired to be risk averse. Because of this risk aversion, the
Motivatable can be an extremely vulnerable segment of your organization, if
you allow too many of the fourth segment to exist in your organization.
The Zombies represent 27 percent of humanity, and inside your orga­
nization these are the truly unmotivatable people. They have the same
smartphones and access to information, noise, and pop culture as everyone
else, and therefore their power to proliferate poison is even greater than it was
just 15 short years ago. Truly unmotivatable, they combine Debbie Downer
with Negative Nancy. Wah wah wahhhh. If you handed a Zombie a gold
brick for a Christmas bonus, the Zombie would drop it on their foot and sue
you for gross negligence and max out their workers compensation claim.A cartoon sketch representing a zombie.

The Zombie gets off on one thing. Turning other people into
Zombies.

20
DIGITAL SENSE
You cannot let Zombies get their teeth into a Motivatable or anyone else.
Your Inﬂuencers can smell Zombies from miles away and will never be seen
around them but will strike them quickly in the head the minute one comes
anywhere near someone healthy.
The Ampliﬁers have no problem ﬁghting the Zombies either but will, at
times, spend too much time saving Motivatables from their grasp because
Motivatables are too worried about being liked by everyone to run away from
the Zombie.
Zombies are experts in every sordid detail of what is wrong, scary, or
unsafe about society and your company’s product, culture, and leadership.
How to spot the Zombies in ﬁve bullets:
• They know every piece of gossip and share it all frequently behind closed
doors.
• They build or promote websites or write negative posts on Glassdoor 
.com when they leave an organization. 
• They know every loophole in the HR policy.
• They are absolutely destructive and toxic and suck the energy out of 
every meeting they are in. 
• They are insatiably hungry.
In every great story, there are villains, victims, and heroes. In your orga­
nization, the Zombies are the villains. The battle is constant and culture is
built with each decision or indecision on a daily basis. If you want good to
overcome evil in your company, you MUST avoid the traps and neutralize
the Zombies as you proceed with your efforts to transform your organization
and do your part to proliferate a digital sense across it. The Zombies don’t
want to be exposed. The Zombies win on persistence and prey on apathy and
negativity. To Zombies chaos and the status quo are oxygen. The Zombies
are like crabs in a bucket. They will do almost anything to keep any other
crabs from getting out of the bucket and into the light. They don’t want the
organization to be free from its past. They are your mortal enemy.
We aren’t worried about offending any Zombies, however, because we
are WAY too far into this book for any Zombies to still be reading. And the
chances are that no Zombie would pick up or buy this book in the ﬁrst place.
Although, when the word gets out that we called 27 percent of the adult

21
Inﬂuencers, Zombies, and Everything Between
workforce Zombies in this book, we are fully expecting that a Zombie will
start an anti–Digital Sense page railing against us to the rest of the walking
dead. We fully intend to leverage that, by the way, into book sales for them
to burn at their Zombie-hater parties. Hey if it makes dollars, it makes sense,
right? Allegedly, we know the person who owns DigitalSenseSucks.com.
Now that you know the game and the players, let’s arm you with the
framework, tools, and strategies to win as we proceed to the next chapter and
introduce the Experience Marketing Framework.


Section II
Building a
Customer-Centric
Organization


3 Introducing the
Experience
Marketing
Framework
A
s you already know, we work and live in an always-on, always-moving,
mobile-ﬁrst reality, where business happens at the speed of speech and
thumbs. This present-day reality will compound in speed, accuracy, and
efﬁciency 1,000 times over in the coming decade. Qualcomm (one of the
largest chipset providers in world) actually had an internal corporate directive
in 2013 called “solving the 1000x challenge” while Chris was consulting for
them. The Experience Marketing Framework (EMF) will help you navigate
this reality with agility to ﬁnd the powerful simplicity on the back side of all
this added complexity.
As we introduce the EMF, please repeat the following three agreements
to yourself daily for context and consider posting this prominently in full
view in your workspace.
25

26
DIGITAL SENSE
The Three Agreements to Customer-Centric Accountability Cultures
1. I admit that I am powerless over the demands of always-on marketing.
2. The power (our customer) that is greater than our organization
gives me the singular focus necessary to restore my sanity and ﬁnd
focus.
3. I will take a fearless inventory of our insights, vision, and execution
annually and score them with brutal honesty against the customer
needs, competitors’ strength, and external forces that threaten our
existence.
The Framework to Ask Powerful Questions
It is important to note that these next few chapters are not about giving you
answers as much as they are about giving you the framework to ask the right
questions. The EMF was conceived in an effort to provide you and your
organization a complete foundation and structure to ask the fundamental
questions needed to build your road maps in a way that aligns your major
business objectives to the priority needs of your customer. All of this is set
within a model that can optimize the reliability of your processes and draw
out the creativity of your people.
As we dive into the next few chapters, we will provide you categories of
speciﬁc questions and steps to take your team through that will both baseline
and enhance your approach to build your strategy with humanized tactics
that are built with digital sense.
We are both proud, card-carrying, antiestablishment members of
Generation X, and therefore we have a deep appreciation and love for ’80s
metal, early ’90s hip-hop, and grunge. Music is a universal language and a
perfect example of the power and beauty of conquering dissonance when
properly composed. It also proves that great results don’t always require
months’ or years’ worth of labor. When top talent is free to come together
in individual expression but aligned focus, magic can happen. A musical
example of this is the creation of the Guns N’ Roses classic hit “Sweet
Child O’ Mine,” which was literally created in less than ﬁve minutes (see
Figure 3.1).1

27
Introducing the Experience Marketing FrameworkOn the right hand side, the photograph depicting four members of Guns N' roses band. On the right hand side, the text describing how the song "sweet child O mine" was created.

Figure 3.1 Guns N’ Roses
Cognitive dissonance is the clash in an organization when two or more
disharmonious elements or ideas try to coexist. In an organization, this is
commonplace wherever the culture is weak or the objectives are unclear. In a
digital world, this can be ampliﬁed in its negative impact because of the speed
by which information (true or false, veriﬁed or unveriﬁed) can and will travel
to each individual. To overcome dissonance as an organization in the digital
world, an even deeper commitment to frequent (crucial) communication and
to establishing a common language and framework from which everyone is
operating is paramount.
The EMF was created after an inspiring nudge from Ethology
founder and CEO, Jeffrey Pruitt. Pruitt’s passion to help brands think
about experience marketing and performance media at the strategic level,
instead of just digital marketing as a myriad of tactics and channels, was
the catalyst for building this framework. We enlisted Chris’s colleague
and VP of Customer Experience, Tony Quiroz (@TQ_AZ), to ﬂush out
our ideas around the initial EMF in late 2015 (see Figure 3.2). We are
grateful to both of these individuals for the inspiration and insights they
provided along the way to making this model a reality.
We will spend the next several chapters diving deeper into each layer of
the framework, discussing what the EMF answers and avails on both a day-
to-day basis, as well as in forward-looking planning cycles. We will walk
through the pragmatic use of each layer and loop one at a time, but ﬁrst, let’s
summarize the EMF with visuals and a summary description of what it will
help you achieve and why it matters in the ﬁrst place.

28
DIGITAL SENSEFigure depicting initial EMF sketch from Chris’s Whiteboard, July 2015.

Figure 3.2 Initial EMF Sketch from Chris’s Whiteboard, July 2015
The Experience Marketing Framework
• The EMF (Figure 3.3) maximizes client/customer success by delivering
reliability and innovation to the customer experience.
• Experience marketing is deﬁned as the union of purpose-driven strategy,
human-centric tactics, and data-fed iterations.
• A simple “learn, plan, do” approach quickly leads to reliability, which
ensures the maintenance of market share.
1. Learn the client/customer’s business goals or consumer needs and
personaA triangle depicting the experience marketing framework, where its vertex are representing strategy, data, and tactics. The sides of the triangle are representing purpose, people, and process. A circles inside the triangle is representing great customer experience.

Figure 3.3 The Experience Marketing Framework (Snook,Quiroz 2015)

29
Introducing the Experience Marketing Framework
2. Plan projects/launches/campaigns with a focus on measurable
interactions.
3. Do the work, release to market, measure, and iterate.
• Innovation ensures market share growth and arises from insights. Insights
can occur while executing but will be generated more reliably by adding
dedicated cycles of research to your operational procedure and road map.
• A complementary “discover, design, deploy” approach leads to more
seamless onboarding of innovations and commercialization of key
insights gathered while executing.
1. Discover the most vulnerable/opportunistic touch points in your
customer journey.
2. Design by assessing what’s feasible (technology), viable (business),
and desirable/usable (human), and build on top of a data structure
that will measure what’s most valued as it relates to the problem you
are setting out to solve.
3. Deploy and iterate based upon the data loop to optimize for reliability.
• Vision guides strategy. Strategy is the art of applying insights to speciﬁc
touch points in the customer journey, guided by business goals, cali­
brated by scope, and prioritized to a schedule.
• Success = a great customer experience: well executed, uniquely crafted,
and sustainable.
The EMF helps organizations and leaders deliver on the two commit­
ments (Figure 3.4) of reliability and innovation that fellow Wiley author
Jeanne Bliss (@customerbliss) called out in her book Chief Customer
2
Ofﬁcer 2.0.
The EMF is composed of three distinct layers, interdependent walls, and
two loops. As we take a look below the surface, we notice how Purpose,Figure depicting the two customer experience commitments.

Figure 3.4 The Two Customer Experience Commitments

30
DIGITAL SENSE
Figure 3.5 Elements of User Experience (left); Experience Marketing
Framework (right)
Note to the reader: The picture on the right (EMF Snook, Quiroz 2015) is
incomplete in that it does not include speciﬁc models related to human resource
planning and design, market share analysis, or product development methodology. It
is designed to be agnostic and plug in or play nicely with your existing frameworks
for those considerations.
People, and Process hold the structure together and contribute to key phases of
Research, Strategic Planning, and Execution.
Fans of design thinker Jesse James Garrett and his groundbreaking work
in the Elements of User Experience will understand and see the similarities in
the EMF, as we attempted to build a framework that can allow an organiza­
tion to think across the silos. The goal was to develop a uniﬁed approach to
diagnose the problem areas in the journey map, realize insights into action­
able innovations, and optimize the reliability, all while executing in real-time.
In Garrett’s model for UX (see Figure 3.5), the foundational elements were
the marriage of user needs to site objectives. The EMF model for CX is also
rooted in a foundation consisting of the proper alignment of customer needs
and business objectives.
Customer Experience Is the Battleground in a Digital World
Customer experience is not about a speciﬁc data point in the journey of
interacting with your brand or product; it’s the entire thing. In a digital
world, where loyalty to brand is rapidly being replaced by the end users’

31
Introducing the Experience Marketing FrameworkFigure depicting the four guiding principles of the EMF.

Figure 3.6
The Four Guiding Principles of the EMF
loyalty to their need in the moment, success is no longer predicated on push
but is primarily related to pull. Great customer experiences will pull the
market toward you, whereas empty or incomplete promises that get pushed
out on top of faulty/siloed infrastructure will merely expose you. Like all
structures built to last, you must have a solid foundation and a guiding set of
principles. The EMF is no different and you can see the guiding set of prin­
ciples in Figure 3.6.
In the next chapter, we will begin building your foundation for deliver­
ing great customer experiences guided by these principles. EMF will help you
assess the forward-looking strength of your business model, value proposi­
tion, and competitive advantage as it relates to serving your customer’s needs,
and the conditions of the playing ﬁeld on which you compete.
Takeaways from Introducing the EMF
• The EMF is designed to help you deliver great customer experiences in a
digital world by providing a multilayered framework to turn insights into
innovative solutions that deepen the relationship with your customer and
are executed with reliability.
• The EMF is comprised of an Insights (Research), Vision (Strategy), and
Success (Execution) layering. EMF enables a simple “learn, plan, do”
approach in the horizontal operational plane while simultaneously
allowing the vertical plane to enact regular cycles of innovation that
“discover, design, and deploy” new enhancements to your day-to-day
operation.
• Customer Experience is the battleground we all compete on in a digital
world, and where customer service historically takes a well-honed “com­
mon sense,” customer experience requires a well-honed digital sense.


4 The Insights Layer
T
he 2017-plus version of Fletch’s statement (an iconic character played
by Chevy Chase) would be “It’s all 1s and 0s nowadays.”1 The art and
science of turning insights into business growth is where the rubber meets
the road for today’s marketers and operators. Everything from big data to
small data is available as the real-time raw material you are tasked with
sense-making into strategic initiatives that drive increased growth and
decreased churn.
The Insights Layer of the EMF assists you in answering several founda­
tional questions that will ultimately help you ensure that the right customers
remember your name for the things you want to be remembered for, in a
disproportionate ratio to your competitors. The Insight Layer (Figure 4.1) is
where you establish regular research and discovery cycles both to gut-check
your current assumptions as they relate to the foreseeable future and to
uncover the new assumptions you will need to ﬂush out, as you make the
effort to meet the customer where they are likely to need you/value you in the
coming 12–24 months.
The heart of a great customer experience is that it feels human and
reminds us that there are still other humans on the other side of our trans­
actions, regardless of the interface by which we executed the transaction or
query. When we boil down the most important takeaway value of auditing
the following pillars of the Insights Layer within the EMF, it simply comes
down to what insights you can operationalize that will further your organi­
zation’s ability to be more human in approach at each interaction across the
customer journey.
33

34
DIGITAL SENSEA triangle depicting the inside layer: research, where its vertex are representing customers, competitors, and forces. The sides of the triangle are representing purpose, people, and process. A circles inside the triangle is representing human centric tactics.

Figure 4.1
The Insight Layer: Research
The Customer Is the Main Thing
Stephen Covey tells us that “the main thing is to keep the main thing the
main thing.”
As you can see in this cross section of the EMF, the top of the pyramid is
the Customer. They are the main thing. They always have been the main
thing and always will be. They are our reason for existence. It is them we exist
to serve, not stock price. It is the love of the customer that we want to win.
It is their hard-earned money that we seek, to separate from their wallet in
increasing quantities into ours, by exchanging equal or greater value through
our offerings. The. Customer. Is. The. Main. Thing.
As we make our way down the sides of the pyramid we will notice that
the other two areas of focus when we look at the Insights Layer are our
Competitors and Forces. With the entire EMF, you will be assessing your
insights and their impacts to your customer through three distinct lenses that
represent the interdependent functions of your Purpose, People, and Process.
The output from this layer into the subsequent layers will be more
humanized tactics that have come from the combination of big data trend
analysis, intuition, and your ethnographic (primary) research efforts. Most of
you reading this have an embedded and published corporate purpose state­
ment. For those who do not yet have a documented purpose statement for
your enterprise, the simplest way to understand the difference between

35
The Insights Layer
purpose and mission statements is that your purpose guides you while your
mission drives you. Your purpose statement handles the “why” about your
organization’s existence. Mission drills home the “how” you will achieve the
vision (the “what”).
Step number one in becoming a human-centric organization is to
develop and galvanize your Purpose, Mission, and Vision statements, and to
align everyone you bring into your organization around them in an emo­
tionally charged way (i.e., get it into their subconscious). Your corporate
purpose statement is not only important for mapping out the customer
experience and the customer journey but also crucial for your social business
strategy, which we will hit on later.
Since the majority of you reading this likely have a clear under­
standing of the purpose of your organization, this is where we do a gut
check with you on an individual level that allows you—without blame or
judgement—to mentally reconnect to that purpose and assess where you
could improve in your alignment to that vision. In some cases, you will
ﬁnd that through any number of internal experiences, you cannot ﬁnd
your way back to a complete emotional alignment to the company’s pur­
pose. If this is the case, the brutal truth is that it is time you move on. If
you cannot put in effort every day in the pursuit of this stated ideal, you
are no longer a ﬁt for that organization, and vice-versa; it is time to move
on to your next adventure. Life is too short, and work that ﬁlls your soul
is far too rewarding, to ignore this brutal fact.
Do not sit in an organization and get zombiﬁed! Don’t rot and please
don’t take a check each and every pay period for something you don’t align
with or believe is making a difference in the world. All the money in the
world cannot cure that sickness. BRAAAAAIIIINNNSSS!!
Gandhi said to “be the change you wish to see in the world.” What that
means to us is that you can make the conscious decision each day to lead
from where you are, with or without a speciﬁc job title or fancy corner ofﬁce.
You have to be willing to do work that you are not being paid for, and to
have effective conversations with whomever you can that will be an asset in
you moving your personal vision forward.
Napoleon Hill discussed the habit of going the extra mile in Think
and Grow Rich (one of our all-time favorite books). This habit brings the
individual to the favorable attention of those who can and will provide

36
DIGITAL SENSE
opportunities for self-advancement. It also tends to make one indispens­
able, and it enables him/her to command better compensation for their
services.
You will know you are truly aligned with the company’s purpose and a
champion for the customer when you make decisions throughout the day
based on the likelihood of a positive impact to one of two important cus­
tomer groups. Those two groups consist of the internal customer (fellow
employees) and the end-user customer.
Much has been written about regarding the end-user demographic, but
all of us realize that the only way to truly be customer-centric in the mar­
ketplace is to ﬁrst ensure that our internal culture is treated as an equally
important asset. And guess what. Happy employees are among the best
salespeople your organization has. Customers don’t trust your brand or CEO
half as much as they trust the word-of-mouth recommendation from one of
your employees. Happy employees are crucial for the growth and well-being
of your organization. They are your ﬁrst customer!
Buying from some brands can be a religious experience, and yet for the
majority of brands, each transaction is just that—a transaction. If your pur­
pose statement is clear and up to date, you should be hiring and ﬁring to that
purpose. Who you are hiring and ﬁring (people) is the next lens by which you
will be auditing and assessing as we go through the layers of the EMF. People
must embody the values of your brand (stated or otherwise) and be bought in
to the purpose at an individually meaningful level. Then they must have the
required skills and competencies to outperform your competitors in deliver­
ing against the promises your brand and marketing makes on a day-in and
day-out basis.
People are the glue that makes the EMF work, or the acetone that takes
an otherwise brilliant strategy founded in the right research and eats away at
its impact with each point of execution. Although you are people powered,
your processes should be designed to make sure that you don’t become peo­
ple dependent. Process is the third foundational piece of your puzzle before
you begin to dive into the dialogues of the Insight Layer.
At the Insight Layer, you are relishing in brutal truths and insights
gained about how and where your current processes are halting/accelerating
innovation or optimizing/reducing reliability. The reality is that there are
very few processes in any company that cannot be further improved.

37
The Insights Layer
In a digital world, you must increase the cycles of review around your
processes as part of your quarterly or biannual reviews with the operations
team. Why? Because the rate of change to your customer needs, competitive
solutions, macroenvironment, and available technologies is so great that your
very business model may be at risk.
An organization with digital sense doesn’t resist this discipline but instead
embraces change as the one true constant. Each process will have a different
life cycle, so the value of having a clear understanding of the reason for your
existence (purpose) and the relationship you wish to have with your customer
(vision) will help you guide your decisions around people (who) and process
(how) improvements as you march forward.
We suggest that, in your annual offsite meetings, at a minimum,
you sit with your team and extended team leaders and put every person
and process—even the sacred ones—on the table and run a game of
KCT (Keep, Change, or Trash) on the contents of that table. This is a
habit of great organizations that provides insurance against complacency
at large.
Complacency and apathy are the top two killers of customer experience.
The dangerous idea that you have achieved the peak of your potential already
is a cancer that will slowly eat at your organization and market share until one
day it is all suddenly gone, never to be regained.
Customers, Competitors, and Forces
We now live in a world where, according to CEB Global research, 57 percent
of the buyer’s decision in the B2B category has been made before they even
contact your sales function. At any given time throughout the buyer’s jour­
ney you have 12 percent of their mindshare on average.2
Think about that through your own buying habits to help ground you in
those statistics more personally. How many places do you look for something
online before you center in on the handful of brands you will consider doing
business with to make a purchase? On the B2C side, think about how easy
and fast it is for you to compare pricing online or on a mobile device for a
product you have in your basket, before you decide whether or not to pur­
chase it at that outlet or somewhere else. We both open up a price scanner
app whenever we are shopping at brick-and-mortar locations. Don’t you?

38
DIGITAL SENSE
If you are reading this hardback book right now inside of a Barnes &
Noble or local bookstore, we hope you will decide to purchase it there, but
we totally understand if you decide to buy it on Amazon as a Prime member
or for your Kindle, if the price is more aggressive.
The reality, each of us understands, is that when we have a need and
have done our research (broad or narrow) on that purchase, we simply
want the most seamless, personalized, and efﬁcient checkout process we
can get. We value not only the transaction itself or the product/service
being consumed but also our belief and trust in the support system or
portal by which we transacted. This is so that, in the event something is
wrong or undesirable, we aren’t unknowingly creating more work and
hassle for ourselves.
Have you ever taken a ride with Uber? No fumbling for payment, no lag
in the entry or exit of your ride; you get back your most precious asset,
TIME. Digital expectations are raising all expectations.
One of the most basic tips to training a baseline level of digital sense is to
have your team members ask themselves how they—as customers—would
react to the decision, process, or protocol being instituted. Play devil’s advo­
cate. Never perpetuate a process that your internal team would not tolerate if
they were customers.
The Customer
“Our challenge is to be in the spaces where our audiences are and understand that
they will leave us if we don’t work with them and understand their needs.”
—GAVIN HEATON3
Despite this well-known fact, there are thousands of organizations that
give lip service to implementing the root changes to their operational DNA
(Figure 4.2) to effect real change.
As regular air travelers, we are always blown away by how commonplace
this is at major airlines. This digital example from American Airlines illus­
trates how difﬁcult this is without complete organizational alignment from
the top down around the customer as the number one asset. The lip service
part is below in Figure 4.3 and 4.4.4

39
The Insights Layer
Figure 4.2
A Truism Depicted by an Emoji Sentence
Figure 4.3 American Airlines Website Screenshot, July 2016
Figure 4.4 American Airlines Website Screenshot Post Click, July 2016

40
DIGITAL SENSEA triangle depicting the customer node of the EMF insights layer, where the triangle is representing customers. A circles inside the triangle is representing audit empathy maps personas journeys.

Figure 4.5 The Customer Node of the EMF Insights Layer
Figure 4.4 is the page you land on when you click through on “See how we’re
coming together to create something greater.”5
The most important step to evaluating the state of your customer node as
you work through the Insights Layer of the EMF (Figure 4.5) is to ensure
that you have up-to-date documented personas and journey maps for each of
the products/services you offer. You’ll also want these for each of the known
customer types that you engage with or see as a critical customer class to
acquire in the present and near future.
The Importance of Persona and Customer Journey Mapping
Volumes of great material have been written about the importance of persona
and journey map development as it relates to effective and efﬁcient experi­
ence marketing. Fellow Wiley author and friend Brian Solis has some great
resources in his most recent book, X: The Experience Where Business Meets
Design. We encourage you to nerd out with Brian in the latter chapters of his
book on all of the science and design thinking speciﬁcs that surround great
journey map development. Also, if you aren’t following him yet, do that right
now: @briansolis.
The areas to audit at this layer are your detractor pipeline, your
Employee Net Promoter Score (eNPS) to Net Promoter Score (NPS) ratio,
your journey maps, and how well you have deﬁned and empathized with

41
The Insights Layer
your core persona targets. One of the problems with just looking at NPS is
that as you lose detractors your score actually improves, so you also want to
measure the trajectory of your eNPS and make sure that it is not heading in
the opposite direction. It is a signal that something is fundamentally wrong
within your organizational design and culture, and the ﬁrst customer
(employee) must be as big of a priority as your end-user customer.
For the sake of the pragmatic applications required to get your Insights
Layer completed with a solid snapshot of your customer needs and how well
you are aligning your major business objectives to them, we suggest you focus
on the exercises below as your immediate starting point.
Audience Development Exercise
Purpose: Identify key personas and empathize with them
Step 1: Stop thinking ﬁrst about general demographics and think ﬁrst
about the individual human who needs what you sell. What is their
problem that you are solving?
Step 2: Assign a facilitator and deﬁne as a group the top four ﬁctitious
customers (personas) in detail that represent your ideal customer set.
Give them ﬁctitious names, ethnicities, ages, relationship and/or family
statuses, and career proﬁles. Use the guideline list of persona elements
below as a guide if you don’t have a formal one.
Sample Worksheet of Persona Characteristics:
Name: Fictitious name goes here
Gender:
Ethnic background:
Marital Status:
Children:
Occupation:
Education level:
Household Income:
Age:
Websites/Apps most visited:

42
DIGITAL SENSE
Hobbies:
Interests/Likes:
Values: (i.e., family, material goods, etc.)
Behaviors: (impatient, driven, multitasker)
Lifestyle: (i.e., foodie, workaholic, etc.)
Who is their boss?:
What problems are they trying to solve?:
Step 3: Gather a diverse group of team members (marketing, sales, oper­
ations, customer service, executive) that own or have impact on one of
the deﬁned customer touch points.
Step 4: Hand out a stack of sticky notepads to each person and draw the
following chart (Figure 4.6) on a whiteboard or ﬂipchart.
Figure 4.6 Empathy Map: Persona A
Step 5: Run through each known touch point (see Figure 4.7) of your
customer’s journey with your diverse group of leaders and ask the fol­
lowing questions about each touch point.
Empathy Mapping Group Exercise Questions:
A. How do they feel?
B. What are they thinking?Figure depicting an example of a generic journey map of touch point. This flow starts from aware of need to refer and advocate followed by search, evaluate/consider, purchase, post-sale support, complain, upgrade, and renew.

Figure 4.7 An Example of a Generic Journey Map of Touch Point

43
The Insights Layer
C. What are they saying and in which medium/channel (on the
phone, to a friend, via social media, in store, etc.)?
D. What are they doing?
Note: Each member of this discussion will write their answer to
these questions on their sticky notes, and when everyone is done
they will stick them on the board in the appropriate quadrant.
Step 6: Depending on which touch points you care most about (i.e.,
awareness, evaluation, consideration, purchase, etc.), this exercise can
take as little as 30 minutes or as long as several hours for each persona.
Regardless of the time you give this, don’t let lack of time become a
reason to procrastinate.
Empathizing with your customer sets is the single most important strat­
egy and tactic you can engage in to begin humanizing your business and
taking customer experience to a new level. It is also an amazingly efﬁcient and
telling way to uncover unknown alignment or lack thereof among your team
members and address any inconsistencies or differences of opinion to whom
your most valuable personas are and the associated needs they have, which
you can help solve.
Look Honestly at Your Competitive Landscape
Now that you have updated your
empathic understanding of your core
“The journey of a thousand miles begins
customer segments, and their current
with a single step”
and likely near-future needs that you
—Lao Tzu
help solve, we need to look honestly
across the competitive landscape and score how you stack up overall and align
the current baseline to your stated vision of where you are headed.
Many of you assess market share using a popular framework such as
Boston Consulting Group’s BCG Matrix or the Gartner Magic Quadrant.
We will speak to both tools and how you can use them in this node to create
a clear picture of where your opportunity and challenges lie as it relates to
increasing your competitive advantage and likelihood of increased success.
As you continue to work through the Insight Layer in this section with
your team of internal stakeholders, agency partners, and key partners, you

44
DIGITAL SENSEA triangle depicting the competitors node of the EMF insights layer, where the triangle is representing competitors. A circles inside the triangle is representing audit identify magic quadrant BCG matrix biz model.

Figure 4.8 The Competitors Node of the EMF Insights Layer
will leverage research and all available data on your business in comparison to
your direct competition (Figure 4.8). You will take the audits on detractor
pipeline from the work done in your customer node and begin to further
map which competitor you lost them to. This allows you to proactively work
to discover where the vulnerability lies. You will also identify new competi­
tors or potential competitors in the near future based on leveraging tools such
as the Gartner Magic Quadrant6 (see Figure 4.9). In some cases, Gartner will
have a current-year, published magic quadrant for your industry, and in other
cases they will not. In either case, we suggest that you build your own using
their framework and compare the two, and discuss the implications and
opportunities for you to move from wherever you are to the top right of the
quadrant, most relevant to your stated goals and company vision.
According to Gartner the following quadrants are deﬁned as follows:
How does a Gartner Magic Quadrant Work?
A Magic Quadrant provides a graphical competitive positioning of four types
of technology providers, in markets where growth is high and provider dif­
ferentiation is distinct:
Leaders execute well against their current vision and are well positioned
for tomorrow.
Visionaries understand where the market is going or have a vision for
changing market rules but do not yet execute well.

45
The Insights Layer
Figure 4.9 Gartner’s Magic Quadrant
Niche Players focus successfully on a small segment or are unfocused
and do not out-innovate or outperform others.
Challengers execute well today or may dominate a large segment but do
not demonstrate an understanding of market direction.
The beneﬁt of using the EMF in concert with Gartner’s Magic Quadrant
is that it will clarify an additional context by which you should rank your
competitive advantage looking ahead. That added insight will be based upon
your group’s qualitative and quantitative assessment of how well you cur­
rently execute on the reliability of your customer experience as it relates to
your competition and how complete your vision is. This will also show you

46
DIGITAL SENSE
how to continue innovating your customer experience as a competitive
advantage in the coming years.
We will discuss how to operationalize your commitment to reliability
and innovation through a social business digital strategy later in this book;
until then, the visual in Figure 4.10 will help you contextualize for your
C-Suite where both of these commitments play into your present and
future market position within the Gartner Magic Quadrant.
Depending on how many lines of business you currently oversee, it may
also be in your practice to utilize the BCG Matrix (aka Growth-Share Matrix,
as seen in Figure 4.11) as part of your annual assessments and strategic
planning.
The EMF will complement this effort as well. It should help you view
the investment decisions and future resourcing not only around the imme­
diate impact to the P&L or balance sheet but also as it relates to the near-
term future-need-states of your customer. It may also reveal what intellectual
property or assets can be repositioned or divested to allow for a doubling
down on the most promising question marks, while innovating the customer
experience of your cash cows to sustain your priority sources of wealth cre­
ation and growth fuel.
Figure 4.10 Layering the Two Commitments of CX over the Gartner
Magic Quadrant

47
The Insights Layer
Figure 4.11 BCG Matrix
We both believe that any framework, including our own, is strongest
when it is brilliantly simple and powerfully clear in its communication.
However, there is an equally present potential liability or limitation due to
that simplicity. The BCG Matrix has great strength in its simple elegance,
but it also does not account for a detailed assessment of all the contributing
factors of your overall competitive strength, especially in a high-growth
market.
Market share is an important factor and leverage point to assess, but
in the digital world, where business life cycles have exponentially short­
ened (see Figure 4.12), complacency and reliance on market share as a
strength is the number one blind spot and vulnerability to your
sustainability.
The Customer Is the Asset
To reduce this vulnerability in the BCG Matrix, we suggest that the EMF
will help you provide through all three layers a more complete picture, as it
relates to your market share, brand equity, distribution relationships,

48
DIGITAL SENSE
Figure 4.12 “Reaching 50 Million Users by G. KoﬁAnnan”7
Note to reader: This Angry Bird Space meme has been called “too good to check”
because it makes a clear point about user adoption scenarios today versus yesteryear.
It is important to call out that for those sticklers who want to know the full context.
The Wall Street Journal (WSJ) did an exposé piece worth reading about this.8
logistics/supply chain inefﬁciencies, product/service line offerings, and cus­
tomer loyalty/advocacy.
The BCG Matrix, on its own, is most valuable as a reasonable measure of
competitive strength in low-growth markets—cash cows and dogs—but it is
going to be a much less accurate predictor of your overall health and stability
in high-growth, highly fragmented markets. The other limitation of the BCG
Matrix (other than the fact that different publishers of it move the boxes
around from version to version under the guise of artistic expression, we
guess) is the large middle section where many of your offerings/brands or
business units may be plotted. There is no inherent tool in the BCG Matrix
alone that allows you to know which decision to make as it relates to items in
the black hole (Figure 4.13).
Therefore, we believe that as you dive into the competitor node of the
EMF, it is important to assess your relative strengths against competition in

49
The Insights Layer
Figure  dep ict ing th e bla ck hole of the BCG matrix, where stars (top-left), question marks (top-right), cash cows (bottom-left), and dogs (bottom-right) are represented.
both the BCG and Gartner frameworks. Each has its value in helping you
benchmark where you stand today and where the potential opportunity to
leap ahead will be in the future.
DIGITAL BIT: Download your free Excel template for
creating a BCG Matrix with or without known market
share data here: DigitalSen.se/FreeBCG.
Now that you have a good handle on how and where you sit in rela­
tionship to your customers in comparison to your direct competitors, it is
time to take an intuitive and logical—data-backed—look at the unknown
future of outside forces (Figure 4.14) that are possible or likely to have an

50
DIGITAL SENSEA triangle depicting the forces node of the EMF insights layer, where the triangle is representing forces. A circles inside the triangle is representing market technology legislative cultural acts of God.

Figure 4.14 The Forces Node of the EMF Insights Layer
impact on your customer, your competition, your industry, or society at
large. We have bucketed forces into one of ﬁve categories and developed
some simple questions for the forces exercise to help you get a well-rounded
view what is at play around you, so that you can develop a core group of
insights worth acting upon.
“Use the Force, Luke!”
As it relates to market forces, you will pull together historical analysis of
market trends (bubbles, bursts, election cycle impacts, Fed Funds rates,
quantitative easing cycles, employment and productivity data, etc.) and
have it at the ready as you ask the group the following directional
questions.
1. Do I/we believe that the general stock market value has a direct or inverse
relationship to our growth potential?
2. Do we believe that within the next ﬁve years we will be in a recession,
coming out of one, or in a full-blown bull market?
3. As it relates to our customers and the needs we solve for them, what
impact does an uncertain market, growth market, or down market have
on their buying potential, loyalty, or psyche?

51
The Insights Layer
4. As it relates to our competitors, who is vulnerable or well positioned
from a capital to growth trajectory ratio if the market and access to cap­
ital changes signiﬁcantly in the coming years?
5. Is that an opportunity for us to consolidate our industry or be acquired
under favorable terms?
The next category of things outside of your control that must be
considered are technology forces. In his book, BOLD, Peter Diamandis
talks about the six phases that industries go through due to technological
forces. It is worth familiarizing yourself with these phases as context
because you will want to assess which phase you believe your industry is
currently in. You’ll also want to assess where current near-term capabili­
ties will be in the coming 2–5 years, especially as you map a plan to stay
relevant and in front of your customer’s needs with your solution and
infrastructure to support them.
The 6 Ds (Phases) as Classiﬁed by Peter Diamandis
1. Digitization: The reason why you and your organization need a digital
sense is because today, anything can be digitized—represented by ones
and zeros—and everything will be digitized in due time. As Marc
Andreessen stated in his August 2011 op-ed in The Wall Street Journal,
“Software is eating the world.”10
If you are still wondering why this is happening and how it can
happen, consider that we are now more than 60 years into the computer
revolution and more than 20 years into the rise of the modern Internet.
We are no longer in the low trajectory of the exponential compounding
of Moore’s law or Zuck’s law; we are at the knee-bend heading into full
vertical. Technology that can transform industries overnight through
software is now readily and widely available, affordable, and getting
cheaper by the second. When things are digitized, they can spread at the
speed of light, constrained only by the current speed of our Internet
connections.
2. Deception: This is the phase that follows digitization, and in many ways,
this is where the masses of society consciously live. This is the phase
where most of the exponential growth and compounding goes unnoticed

52
DIGITAL SENSE
and is mistaken for linear improvements, because our biological evolu­
tion happens over millions of years, but we manufacture new complexity
in picoseconds.
The classic exercise to show humanity’s bias to think linearly vs.
exponentially is The Penny or $1 Million Dollars Exercise: (Figure 4.15)
Step 1: Ask your group to choose between accepting $1 million in
cash today or a single (one-cent) penny that doubles every day
for the next month.
Step 2: Tell them they have 15 seconds to choose.
At ﬁrst blush, most people will do some quick ﬁnger math ($0.01
Day 1, $0.02 Day 2, $0.04 Day 3 $0.08 Day 4, $0.16, and so on until
you call time.) People will get impatient or fearful of losing out on some
percentage of the $1 million in cash by guessing, and based upon their
miniscule returns in the ﬁrst week, they will project a plodder’s progress
of linear growth on the month and opt to take $1 million today. How­
ever, as you can see (in Figure 4.15) they would have left a lot on the
table by making that choice.
Those who chose the penny-doubled option are sweating it a bit at
day 20, but as their minds begin to grasp the visible and conspicuous
disruption of the compounding, they get very excited. At the same time,
when you begin to realize that this holds true for all truths and realities
we hold dear today, it can become threatening, scary, and overwhelming.
What does all this mean to your business reality moving forward?
Consider that the smartphone you hold in your hand today has moreA tabular representation of a penny doubled for 30 days chart, where day, value are represented in the column heads.

Figure 4.15 A penny doubled for 30 days chart

53
The Insights Layer
access to information right now than President George W. Bush had
at his total disposal when he entered ofﬁce in January 2000. The
equivalent device at the $1,000 price point in 2023 will have the
speed and processing power of a human brain, because of this expo­
nential doubling, and the deception phase is where we wrestle with
the notion that something like that is likely or possible when the
reality is it is already happening.
3. Disruption: In many ways one of the most overused buzzwords today is
disruption, but in the most simple terms, technology forces that cause
disruption are the technological breakthroughs or developments that
create an entirely new market and destroy an existing one.
Think about what Airbnb has done for hospitality or Uber has
done for consumer expectations and access not to just affordable ride
sharing but also to payments at point of sale. The zero-friction
payment interface in both of these examples not only has caused
massive disruption in their direct industries (hospitality and trans­
portation) but also is disrupting the banking industry and retail
payments and merchant industry because of the new consumer
expectation and interface they have deployed. Let’s not even get into
how blockchain technology is disrupting banking, because that’s a
whole other book!
You have heard it before, but we live in an exponential era and a
digital world. Either disrupt yourself or be disrupted by someone else.
Focusing on the customer and the forces shifting their overall expect­
ations outside of your industry are the only ways, in our opinion, to stay
ahead of this fact sustainably. It is the one true area to still win compet­
itive advantage.
4. Demonetization: As the disruption takes root in a marketplace, it com­
pletely erodes or removes money from the model it disrupted. Skype, and
now FB Messenger and the like, demonetized long-distance telephony.
Travis paid his way through the University of Kansas by peddling
Sprint’s $0.10 a minute long distance forever plan! Guess what? It wasn’t
forever.
Ubiquitous Wi-Fi access will continue to demonetize wireless carrier
plans for fees around SMS, voice, and so on. Napster demonetized the
music business. Snapchat and similar applications that allow for

54
DIGITAL SENSE
personalized consumption and simultaneous production/interaction with
media and content may soon demonetize broadcast television in the same
way that Netﬂix demonetized primetime television and the retail movie
rental business. Remember Blockbuster Video? Travis may still have
some ﬁnes to pay them. Let Wayne Huizenga, former CEO of Block­
buster, know that he is truly sorry.
5. Dematerialization: Where demonetization relates to the disappearance
of money that was once paid for certain goods and services, demateriali­
zation relates to the disappearance of the actual goods and services
themselves.
For example (Figure 4.16), autonomous driving vehicles at scale will
dematerialize the need for trafﬁc cops, auto dealerships, auto lending and
ownership in general, and much more. Think about all of the luxuries
that existed and were consumed by the upper middle class and wealthy
demographic in the 1980s and have now been dematerialized and come
standard within the lowest/most basic generation smartphone in an
everyman-affordable, pay-as-you-go monthly lease contract.
6. Democratization: The upside of every disruption, however, is that it
brings an end to the exponential chain reaction of vanishing returns and
opens up an entirely new and abundant marketplace of opportunity that
is more widely available for new entrants to solve problems with new
innovations.
In the world ahead, everything from money, health records, and
title/ownership records to corporate capitalization tables can exist in a
distributed ledger, such as blockchain, with no need for intermediaries or
trust agents; the opportunity is endless. In a world where cars drive for
us, we will think of new opportunities to ﬁll our time. In a world where
we use mobile devices—or merge with our devices—as if it was our
personal remote control, to call on-demand anything and everything,
where are you positioned as a company and organization? This world is
not off into the 50–100 year future. This is the next 5–15 years. The
most exciting and disruptive moments in human history are happening
now through 2030.
Lastly, there are also technology forces that have nothing to do with
the future and everything to do with the past, that must be navigated as
you attempt to become a customer-centric digital organization. Those

55
The Insights Layer
Figure 4.16
Source: India Times.11

56
DIGITAL SENSE
forces are the legacy technology systems and disparate incentives between
your IT and marketing/sales functions. We highly recommend you also
pick up and read The Inevitable: Understanding the 12 Technological
Forces That Will Shape Our Future by Kevin Kelly as a great supplemental
guide to the questions below.
Questions to Assess Technological Forces
The high-level questions to ask your team to assess the technological
forces that are likely to impact your business are below and give you a
starting point to prioritize your plan of attack:
1. What can we do to better meet the increased frictionless expect­
ations that our customers have about transacting with any com­
pany because of outside disruptions from Uber, Amazon, and so
on to the user interface and experience of purchasing a product or
service?
2. What are we doing to think of ourselves as a technology and
media company, regardless of our core offering, so that we can
deepen the engagement and relationship we have within our cus­
tomer’s mindshare?
3. What are the truths that we hold about ourselves that are not
vulnerable to disruption?
4. What new cultural shift, technology, or consumer access point
would make those truths and sacred cows go away?
5. Why wouldn’t we endeavor right now to create them before they
get created by someone else?
6. What legacy technology systems do we rely on that can or are
inhibiting our ability to seamlessly align around customer
experience?
7. Do we have a documented and widely known and drilled set of
protocols in the event of an act of terror, direct cyber attack, or
indirect cyber attack against one of our major partners that will
secure the assets and data of our employees, customers, and
partners?

57
The Insights Layer
The remaining forces include acts of God, cultural, and legislative forces
that are outside of your control (sometimes even if you own and fund the
political lobby). As you address these in your EMF planning, the following
questions are good high-level catalysts to stir up your brainstorm.
Acts of God Questions
1. Do we have an up-to-date disaster and recovery plan documented in
place for our employees and our customers?
2. Do we have a marketing and promotional plan and communication
strategy to respond in real time to natural disasters that communicates an
on-message proactive response to our employees and customers?
3. Do we have a robust set of supporting partners or internal programs to
help our people through emotionally trying times or life events and have
we empowered HR to create and invest in this strategy for when bad
things happen to our good people and customers?
Cultural Forces Questions
1. Does our internal culture, ofﬁce esthetic, policy, and procedure design
meet the needs and desires of tomorrow’s workforce and talent?
2. Is our compensation model clear, equitable, and fun? Do our incentive
structures line up to us achieving our major business objectives while
simultaneously causing customer-centric decision-making across
departments?
3. Are we at risk of having talent poached by direct competitors? If so, what
postmortems have we run to assess where we can shore up vulnerability?
What one change could we make in this coming quarter to mitigate
future losses immediately?
4. How aligned are the growth trajectories of our eNPS scores to our
customer NPS scores? Are we focused on giving our ﬁrst customer
(the employee) the attention and clarity of purpose they need and
deserve?
5. If our culture is one of our greatest assets, how are we leveraging this
story to be told through our marketing and communications plans as a
key differentiator? Are we doubling down on this or deprioritizing?

58
DIGITAL SENSE
Legislative Forces Questions
1. What have election cycles (lame duck periods and media inventory costs)
done to our projections of conversion rate, cost per lead, length of sales
cycle, and so on in the past? What sensitivity analysis and assumptions
are we making about this next few years as we look forward?
2. Are we investing appropriately in political capital locally, regionally, and
nationally depending on our business footprint? Are we inefﬁcient or
inactive in this regard? Are we missing an opportunity?
3. If our industry gets deregulated (or regulated) in the coming few years,
does our strategy have a parallel plan in place to capitalize on this type of
shift and either preserve our core business and customer relationships or
take market share away from our competition?
4. Will legislation that is reactive to acts of terror, acts of God, or shift in
political control cause us an increased cost burden to maintain compli­
ance? And what will our plan be to maintain our customer relationships
on smaller budgets as we meet any of these new requirements?
Congratulations! You have now arrived at the end of the Insights
Layer and now have a couple of dozen questions from each node that you
can formalize a meaningful discussion within your team immediately to
begin building your insights into a social business strategy with human­
ized tactics. As you contemplate this chapter, you may also come to the
conclusion that your very business model is at risk of rapidly becoming
obsolete.
Business model is best deﬁned simply as “how you make money sus­
tainably to survive and grow.” As you think through the customer needs, the
competitive landscape, and the various forces described previously, you may
come to the conclusion that you need a new vision and business model all
together. As G.I. Joe said, “Knowing is half the battle!”
Takeaways from the Insight Layer
• The major insights you will gain come from taking a deep look at the
needs of your customer, your current and attainable near-term posi­
tion in the competitive landscape, and the forces outside of your
control.

59
The Insights Layer
• In a digital world there are six phases of the business life cycle: Digitiza­
tion, Deception, Demonetization, Disruption, Dematerialization, and
Democratization, which then leads to a remonetization.
• You must assess the insights, opportunities, threats, strengths, and vul­
nerabilities through both the internal customer (employee) lens and the
external customer (market).
After the exercises in this chapter you may come to the conclusion that
your very business model is on the near-term trajectory to obsolescence. In
any event it is a wise practice to use EMF to disrupt yourself and ﬁnd new
ways to win the customer relationship before someone else does.


5 Mind over
Organizational
Matter
♫♫Drop the negative vibe
and draw a hard line
No fear, no doubt
I’m in control of my mind
Stand behind me
‘Cause I was born to lead
My truth is your dare
Cause today I’m a player♫♫
—Playa’s Anthem (Orpheus Hanley Soundstation Records 2009)
“By wrapping the world in seamless and digital connectivity we move closer to a
world of interdependent economic peace and prosperity. Connectivity is destiny.
Functional geography over Political geography.”
—PARAG KHANNA IN HIS BOOK CONNECTOGRAPHY
W
e know that by now a digital sense sounds like something out of Elon
Musk’s next brilliant bag of science-ﬁction-turned-reality tricks. For
those of us under the age of 65, in our lifetime there probably will be a true
digital sense—sixth sense—layer of consciousness available to allow human
beings to keep pace with our technological and AI inventions. Many futur­
ists, from Ray Kurzweil to Gerd Leonhard, have predicted the singularity will
occur as early as 2023.
61

62
DIGITAL SENSE
At the 2016 RE/CODE conference,1 Musk even hinted that he believed
a digital layer embedded into our consciousness would be a good idea for
humanity, as a means to augment our painfully slow evolutionary biology,
and that it was possible to achieve in a short window of time. However, since
he is busy changing the world in three other signiﬁcant ways right now, this
book will have to do.
For the immediate pragmatic purposes of helping you transform your
organization into a digital organization, centered around customer expe­
rience and great culture, you need a practical approach and understanding
of how and where transformation and paradigm shifts occur in your
mind. It is also imperative that you can help others around you (the
collective organizational mind ), tap into the power of their minds, to
create groundswell momentum and digital sense to successfully realign
purpose, vision, goals, systems, and tactics around the customer as the one
metric that matters. It is with this in mind that we will spend this chapter
diving deeper into a simple yet powerful visual of how you can put your
mind to work to create a new subconscious operating system. One that is
focused on achieving this desired end. This will keep the zombies from
derailing your efforts and infecting your motivatables, as you make
the effort to build your brand into one that differentiates on customer
experience across all points in the buyer journey.
To successfully implement the EMF, to gain buy-in across the executive
rank, and to motivate/lead the body of your organization in this new direc­
tion; you must have a clear picture in your mind from which to work.
Mind and Brain Mechanics 101
Mind is the activity and movement of the spirit. Our brain is the system/
organ that organizes and distributes the activity called “mind.” We are all
spiritual beings, blessed and empowered with an intellect, living in a physical
body and having this human experience. Spirit is not to be confused with
religion. Religion is merely a vehicle that studies spirit, and there are many
ﬂavors of religion. Pick your favorite one, or none at all, and this truth about
how our creative power works will hold true. Mind is the master power that
can transmute the spiritual desires given to us from the divine/ethereal form
into their physical equivalent.

63
Mind over Organizational Matter
Let’s travel back to a time when you didn’t have an e-mail address.
Remember or imagine with us when you didn’t own a cell phone. Now,
about half of you reading this book can’t remember that time, because you
were born after 1990, but a good majority of you can remember when that
was your reality. However, within the last 5 years, the one thing that almost
all of us (Boomer, GenX, GenY, Gen Z, and our kids of Gen Alpha) have in
common is that we are all completely reliant and even somewhat addicted to
our digital devices—our sixth sense—aka “smartphone.”
The power of this can’t be understated. Even those of us from GenX and
the Boomers who remember living an adult life without a smartphone or
even an e-mail address will have a hard time recollecting how we made it
through our day without those technological breakthroughs. Going to the
bathroom has never been the same, right? Less than 27 years prior to the
printing of this book, there was no such thing as the world wide web/Inter­
net. Bottled water was a new concept that some critics touted as silly, saying,
“Why would I pay for bottled water when I have a faucet in my house?” If
you have stayed in a hotel room lately, you will agree that those convenient
bottles of water on your nightstand for only $4.50 per liter are a blessing if
you wake up with dry mouth.
How did these “necessities” of today become our reality when they
didn’t even exist 30, 20, or even 10 years ago? The amazing thing is that
when the Internet went up as we exited the 1980s and entered the 1990s,
the Google founders were barely in high school. Yet, in the year 2017, the
idea that Sergey Brin and Larry Page dreamt up a decade and a half ago,
for a “search engine” to organize all of the world’s information for people
on this relatively new thing called the World Wide Web, joined ﬁve other
tech companies in the six largest (by market capitalization companies in
the Fortune 500, as seen in Figure 5.1) with only Exxon representing a
nontech company.
Figure 5.1 Market Capitalization of the Top 6 Fortune 500 Companies 
in 2016 

64
DIGITAL SENSE
In 2007, 10 years ago, Google (now Alphabet) boasted over 11,000
employees with revenues of just under $1 million per employee and was
ranked seventeenth on the Fortune 500 with market value at $143.6
billion! Not a bad 9-plus year growth in value of over $411 billion as
of 2016.2
Substance Is all Around Us. We Just Need the Thought.
“Every block of stone has a statue inside it and it is the task of the sculptor
to discover it.”
—MICHELANGELO
The way to ﬂy the plane was here long before the Wright brothers tuned
in their awareness to the discovery of it. (Note: Orville and Wilbur are no
relation to Travis, although he will tell you that they are. Don’t believe him
though; he’s bulls#%ting you.)
Similarly, the way to build the incandescent light bulb and all the mate­
rials were already here, but it was Edison’s persistence, organized effort, and
mind power that made it physical reality. (Note: Screw Edison and J.P. Mor­
gan lol. As badass as they were as shrewd monopolists, Nikola Tesla was a much
cooler and important inventor in our opinion).
MILESTONE: Let us know you made it this far and
share your preference with us by tweeting either
#TeslaOverEdison or #EdisonOverTesla to @teedubya
@chrisjsnook.
What is the point? Every desire in your heart, every dream, every idea
starts in the mind. The understanding and development of your mind and its
interdependence with the Universal Mind will allow you to quickly realize
that the creative genius in those mentioned above resides equally in you for
your desires.
It has been said that a picture is worth a thousand words. We think in
pictures, and if we said, “Think of a car,” you would agree that you instantly

65
Mind over Organizational Matter
saw a picture of either a car you want or your current car. You would be able
to describe in detail the color of the exterior and interior, the level of clean­
liness, etc. You would not think of the letters c-a-r. If we said, “Think of your
house,” you would not see the letters h-o-u-s-e, you would see a picture of
your house as it ﬂashed across the screen of your mind, and it would replace
the car.
The opposite works, as well. Let’s try this quick exercise. Right now, do
not think of a pink elephant.
It’s nearly impossible to not think of a pink elephant in that instance.
So, think of what you want, in a positive way, not about what you
don’t want. It may sound woo-woo, but stick with us because your
ability to communicate and achieve desired objectives will be forever
impacted for the better if you can apply this chapter in your life moving
forward.
When we ask you to think of a picture of your “mind,” what do you
see? If you are like the majority of people, you may have seen a picture of
the brain. Having trained and done this exercise with thousands of people
and hundreds of organizations over the last decade, we have seen that
roughly 65 percent of people’s immediate knee-jerk answer/picture to this
question is their brain. However, we mentioned previously that your
brain is not your mind any more than your ﬁngernail or pancreas is your
mind. Brain is the system/organ that organizes the movement of mind.
Mind is ﬂowing in every cell of your body—even your heart has cells that
are part of the collective mind.
If you have ever been startled by something, you have felt the “ﬁght
or ﬂight” response of your sympathetic nervous system kick in instanta­
neously. Why? Because the activity of mind activated your adrenal gland
and shot adrenaline through every ﬁber of your being to prepare your
body for a quick and efﬁcient exit from perceived danger! When you are
trying to lead change or create a new paradigm without a picture of your
mind—read, goals or business objectives—you are left with unordered
chaos of your knowledge and thoughts and the inability to consistently
reproduce the desired result.
Thoughts are invisible waves of energy. You can’t see them—much as
you can’t see Wi-Fi, AM/FM radio, or antenna TV—but you know they
are there. The more you feed the thought, the stronger it gets. For

66
DIGITAL SENSE
example, if you dwell on how bad you feel, or something you fear, that
thought gets stronger, and the chances of it happening increase. You can
see their results when you tune into the right frequency positively or
negatively.
If thoughts become things, but you—like the majority of people—
are absent a proper picture of your mind, you lack the ability to give
order to your thought patterns and knowledge. Given this it should be
no secret why many people are frustrated by the acquisition of more
knowledge, methods, and frameworks without seeing an increase shift
in end results.
Fortunately, Dr. Thurman Fleet gave humanity a picture to work with in
1934 when he started the Concept Therapy® movement in San Antonio,
Texas. The concept was further developed into a honed curriculum and has
been delivered to millions of people and thousands of organizations globally
by one of our partners at the Proctor Gallagher Institute over the last
40 years. In the coming paragraphs we will share a magical “Stick-Person”
graphic with you and explain how to use it daily, and in complement to the
EMF, so that you can cause meaningful and lasting change in your organi­
zation in a digital world.
Dr. Fleet, a chiropractor, was intrigued and frustrated by the practice of
treating symptoms and not the root cause of people’s ailments. He was
committed to a holistic healing regimen with his patients while paying close
attention and providing treatment to their acute symptoms and complaints.
He found that without a picture of their minds, his patients could not invoke
the laws of the universe effectively to begin healing the root cause in their
thinking, which was continuously bringing back the symptoms of their
disorders. Fleet gave them a picture called the “stick-person” that transformed
their results dramatically in record-breaking time. This same concept of the
“stick-person” has become a foundational element of all our consulting/
workshop programs.
When Bob Proctor ﬁrst shared it with us over a decade ago, it took
our client results and personal effectiveness to unprecedented levels of
growth and satisfaction in less than six months. We are excited to share
its basic explanation and diagram with you below and encourage you to
study it thoroughly from now until you leave this planet, as we remain
committed to do.

67
Mind over Organizational Matter
The Stick-Person Explained
Human beings are the only known living things that can choose their
thoughts—that we know of—and by doing so, humans have the creative
power of the universe in their hands to discover, make, and mold the life of
their dreams.
“I bring you today, both a blessing and a curse.”
—MOSES, DEUTERONOMY 11:26.
Moses’s words there are the best way to describe this wonderful power
of free will that the Creator/Universe has bestowed upon you. When you
and your team can grasp that your reality is always the result of your
dominant thoughts (which create), your feelings (what we give focus to),
and your behavior and actions (the result of your vibration), you can truly
begin to live a life of peace and enjoyment. W. Clement Stone said, “If
you can see it, and believe it, you can achieve it.” He was, and still
is, right.
We all think in pictures. For instance, when we asked you before to
think of a car, you will notice that a car ﬂashed across the screen of your
mind. Now, if you saw your current car or your dream car, with all the
details of the exterior color and interior design, that is because you were
emotionally involved with that idea. We think in pictures of the things
with which we are emotionally involved. We could have either a positive
or negative emotional involvement with any idea, but that doesn’t matter.
The idea will begin to unfold from thought form into its physical equiv­
alent the minute that we attach emotion (positive or negative), feeling,
and meaning to the idea!
This is critical to understand because many of the people living today
focus on what they do not want instead of giving thought and energy to what
they do want.
The law of polarity tells us that everything in the universe has an
opposite that exists simultaneously. Therefore, the high, or goal, you seek in
your business is present at the same time as the low, or failure, you may be
currently experiencing and giving more energy to. Whatever thoughts we give
emotion and feeling to will expand and begin immediately to move into
their physical form, or reality, and they do this by the law of perpetual
transmutation of energy.

68
DIGITAL SENSE
DIGITAL BIT: You can learn more about the
7 Universal Laws in a free audio podcast by visiting
DigitalSen.se/the7laws.3
When most people are asked to think of a house or car, or any other
material thing including their body, they instantly get a clear picture on the
screen of their mind; however, when you ask them what their MIND looks
like, they draw a blank. Our minds are the most powerful creative resource in
the universe, and we have never been given a clear picture to work with.
Many people feel confused and frustrated because they have knowledge of
how to do what they want but are unable to organize it into a meaningful
course of action and a deﬁnite purpose that moves the thought into its
physical form with speed and accuracy.
We use the power of our intellect to experience our physical reality. The
largest gap in human experience is the gap between what we know and what
we do. With the picture below (Figure 5.2), you will begin the journey of
rapidly closing that gap in your performance from here on out.Figure depicting the conscious mind.

Figure 5.2 The Conscious Mind 

69
Mind over Organizational Matter
Understanding the Mind Using the Stick-Person Graphic
Let the top half of the circle represent your “thinking mind” or conscious
mind. This is where you have the ability to accept or reject any idea you
choose. When thoughts come to you from the world around you, this is your
ﬁlter to choose only those with which you will get emotionally involved. This
is where you can create the thoughts and dreams that you want for your life
and for your organization as well. After all, if you have built or are building
a company, you thought it into existence. You believed in your idea and
executed consistently to make it happen.
When you create a thought or dream that you want, you can repeat it
over and over, until you get the feeling of joy or abundance that you desire,
and then the thought will move across the line into the subconscious or
“feeling mind” where the order will be carried out to manifest it in physical
form.
You can never outperform your self-image. Neither can your
organization. All these laws will do for you is attract to you more of who
you are, and never what you want and are unwilling to become ﬁrst.
It is estimated that today, you are bombarded through multiple forms of
media and experience with upward of 60,000 images per day. This is up from
10,000 images per day less than a decade ago. Of these images, we can
effectively capture or process only 1,000 on a conscious level. The Informa­
tion Age democratized access to smartphone technology, and this societal
beneﬁt has magniﬁed the complexity of our lives while simultaneously—law
of polarity—making our lives more efﬁcient and easy through the “app for
everything” culture. Without the understanding of the difference between
your deductive and inductive reasoning, it is very possible to relate to your
reality primarily through the use of your ﬁve senses and your smartphone
digital appendage. When you do this, you can consciously accept thoughts or
ideas that you do not want to “think” on the subconscious level, where they
must and will be followed as “orders” by your effort.
Ask yourself how often you notice when you have gotten emotionally
involved with a disturbing idea simply because you listened to it or saw it on
the news. How often do you ﬁnd yourself feeling down or upset or fearful the
rest of the day? When you watch the news before bed or ﬁrst thing in the
morning, or get overly involved with the gossip at work, you are deduc­
tively—using your visual and hearing senses—accepting those thought

70
DIGITAL SENSE
patterns into your subconscious. This will set up your present-state vibration
and dictate what you choose to act on and inevitably how you feel. This sole
reason is why neither one of us watches the evening news or horror movies.
We want to keep that stuff far away from our subconscious mind.
We both consciously decide to not view those forms of media because in
both of our cases we have noticed that it negatively impacts us and siphons
power away from our productive focus.
If you want to think, feel, and act more positively, you must guard your
subconscious (Figure 5.3) with your conscious mind by being watchful of
what ideas you get emotionally involved with and what images you are
repeatedly viewing. The greatest gift the Creator/Universe bestowed upon
humans was “free will” to choose what we want. You need to exercise that
tool in your favor, with the understanding that if you don’t monitor your
thoughts, you are a Motivatable for people, organizations, and advertisers,
which will be more than willing to inundate you with their dogma and
attempt to bend your will to their own.
This is the “emotional mind” or “feeling mind.” The ancient Greeks
called it “the heart of hearts.” The subconscious mind only has one answer to
all commands it receives from the conscious mind, and that answer is “YES!”
The subconscious mind has no ability to accept or reject the thoughts that weFigure depicting subconscious mind.

Figure 5.3 The Subconscious Mind 

71
Mind over Organizational Matter
get emotionally involved with; it can and will carry them out by sending
orders to the body below as fast as possible.
The universe loves speed! This is why it is important to monitor the
thoughts and ideas you are getting emotionally involved with. If you worry or
have doubt about some negative idea happening, the subconscious will begin to
move you in the direction of having that negative thing happen. Likewise, if
you create a positive idea of how you want things to go, or how you want to
handle the unfortunate things that happen, then the subconscious mind can
and will move you into that positive vibration and begin to manifest that result!
Remember that if the conscious mind is “the general,” the subconscious
mind is the “troops” and will always carry out the orders that come down
from the general. It makes no difference if these orders will help you or hurt
you. The beautiful thing is that you can monitor your conscious mind and,
more important, use autosuggestion to create the thoughts that you want and
make those thoughts the orders that your general gives to your troops!
Maxwell Maltz, MD, FICS, who penned the classic book Psycho-
Cybernetics in 1960, had this to say: “A human being always acts, feels, and
performs in accordance with what he imagines to be true about himself and
his environment. This is a basic and fundamental law of the mind. It is the
way humans were built.”4,5
Why not imagine yourself successful in establishing alignment and digital
sense across your organization? Maltz wrote extensively about how scientists
discovered that your subconscious mind operates as what is referred to as a
negative-feedback servomechanism. Servo-what? Okay, imagine you are in
your house and it is summertime. It is 90 degrees outside, and you decide to
set the thermostat to 70 degrees. Someone in the house leaves and doesn’t
shut the front door. Some of you may ﬂashback to your childhood when your
father or mother yelled to you, “Why am I paying to air-condition the whole
neighborhood!? Were you born in a f$%^ing barn!!?” Regardless of the
ﬂashback moment, your thermostat senses the differential between the out­
side temperature and the internal setting. Thus, immediately the fan kicks on,
and it begins to work overtime to maintain 70 degrees inside the house. This
is a negative-feedback cybernetic mechanism. The goal is set and known, and
therefore only negative feedback is necessary for the goal to be achieved.
Each of us has a subconscious mind that operates in the same way as
everyone else’s. The engineers who built things like thermostats, autopilots,

72
DIGITAL SENSE
and heat-seeking missiles knew how to build them because of their under­
standing of how the subconscious mind works. When you get emotionally
involved with a dream or goal and it enters the subconscious, the mind “locks
in” on the desired outcome. Then, all future negative feedback is processed as
guidance and reverse-engineered, to make a conscious correction, take actions
to get back on course, and to achieve the chosen and subconsciously
embedded destination successfully. This is comforting because the minute
that you have your goal on the subconscious level, you possess its spiritual
equivalent and cannot miss your target.
The law of gender is what predicates and determines the gestation period
of that speciﬁc goal’s transmutation from its spiritual form to its physical
equivalent. This law does not allow you to know when you will “reap,” but it
does guarantee that “as you sow, so shall you reap.”
In his masterpiece, The Power of Your Subconscious Mind, Joseph Murphy
tells us to “quiet the mind and still the body. Tell the body to relax; it has to
obey you. It has no volition, initiative, or self-conscious intelligence. Your
body is an emotional hard-drive disk that records your beliefs and impressions.”
The body (Figure 5.4) is the physical form and the machine that is cre­
ated and recreated daily by your dominant thoughts and actions. The body is
energy in a massive and constant state of vibration. The body is alwaysFigure depicting the body.

Figure 5.4 The Body 

73
Mind over Organizational Matter
changing or staying the same based upon your thoughts and feelings. It
releases 50,000 cells per second back out to the universe, which means that
some parts of your physical body are regenerated every day. Roughly every
7 years, you have a completely new body at the cellular level. The results you
are looking at, in your physical environment—current business—were pro­
duced by the same thoughts and feelings that set up the vibration of your
body. In your business enterprise, the body is the physical embodiment of
your dominant cultural vibration.
For you to change your current results, you must ﬁrst change the
thoughts and ideas that you get emotionally involved with. When you change
the thoughts you give the most focus and energy to, you set up a new feeling/
vibration in the subconscious mind, which changes what is acted upon and
attracted to the body. This is how you bring any and all ideas from the
spiritual plane down to their material equivalent in the physical plane that we
all call reality.
This baseline understanding of your mind is also how you proliferate a
digital sense across your team and organizational mind. Beware the Zombies
in this regard, and ground yourself in the truth that Zombies in your orga­
nization—and life—are masterfully on autopilot, leveraging every aspect of
this tool to cause you and your people to get and stay emotionally involved
with negative and destructive thoughts.
The Zombies are operating from a purely animalistic/survivalist set of
subconscious paradigms with no ability or willingness to consider a new
way of thinking. They will immediately reject or neglect any new ideas.
Quarantine them away from your most important initiatives. Remember that
their true power of being on autopilot is equally available for you to use as
yours for good. The war is won or lost at the level of the subconscious mind.
Master this mind power and harness it for good, and model it for your
Motivatiables each and every day as you train them on how to master it
as well.
Normal functioning human beings are born with ﬁve senses (Figure 5.5):
sight, taste, touch, hearing, and smell. Those of you who are still reading this
book, will have six. #sixthsense
By the age of ﬁve, most children have a complete understanding of their
ability to use their ﬁve senses to understand the world and environment
around them. These are our deductive reasoning faculties. The ﬁve senses are

74
DIGITAL SENSE
Figure 5.5 The Five Senses 
limited to telling us and showing us what already “is.” The ﬁve senses have
NO power to create, and therefore we cannot consider ourselves to be
“thinking” when we are looking at our world and results with our ﬁve senses.
The ﬁve senses are merely feedback loops providing real-time analytics of our
experience.
The Six Intellectual Faculties
1. Reasoning (both deductive and inductive)
2. Intuition
3. Perception
4. Will
5. Imagination
6. Memory
These are our creative faculties and our “thinking muscles.” For you to
utilize your mind in its intended way to provide you the life or business of
our dreams, you must develop these mental muscles. It is also imperative to

75
Mind over Organizational Matter
understand that these six intellectual faculties are always “on” and “perfect” in
design. However, they may be weak or strong depending on how much and
how often you exercise them. It may be helpful to your understanding to
compare these mental muscles to the physical muscles in your body.
For instance, you have a bicep muscle in your arm. Some people have
24-inch “pythons” like the ones Hulk Hogan would always boast about, and
other people have tiny little arms. In both of those cases, the bicep is there
and will provide the body with ﬂexion at the elbow joint. The bicep’s lifting
capacity, and its aesthetic appeal, is directly proportional to how often and
consistently you exercise it, speciﬁcally in its natural plane of motion. If you
exercise your bicep consistently, it will grow and expand. However, if you
ignore the consistent exercise of it, then it will atrophy.
Your six intellectual faculties operate by the same laws. Your ability to
have the life of your dreams starts with your “thinking power.” Your “think­
ing power” is proportional to the development, integration, and strength of
these six faculties. Start exercising them consistently in your life and your
ability to persuade people to your way of thinking will improve incre­
mentally, and then exponentially!
Reasoning
Reasoning is your innate ability to think. We discussed that deductive rea­
soning is not thinking with your own mind, but is instead a default way of
thinking that ensures you are going to continually be a product of your
environment. Motivatables spend a lot of time with deductive reasoning.
Deductive reasoning relies on your habitual conditioning at the subconscious
level for guidance. This is harmful, because when you are deductively rea­
soning, you will quickly reject anything that doesn’t match your current
understanding or paradigms.
Culture is best deﬁned as nothing more than group habit. Therefore, if
your culture is deeply embedded with people in the status-quo comfort-zone
of deductive reasoning, it will require some real effort in strengthening of the
inductive reasoning muscle within the core group of Ampliﬁers to make a real
shift occur as it relates to implementing the EMF and a social business strat­
egy. Deductive-reasoning-heavy organizations are guaranteed to continue
acting on ideas that keep the current paradigm in place, which means your
leadership will be highly likely to reject an idea that would move your

76
DIGITAL SENSE
business forward in a sustainable way. This is the same reason Western
Union didn’t adopt telephone technology. Alexander Graham Bell offered
to sell the patents to them for $100,000 in 1879. Western Union turned
them down as they were in the paradigm of the telegraph. Western Union
should have also become like PayPal, but they didn’t switch their para­
digm.6 And Yahoo! LOL at Yahoo! They could have purchased Google
for $1 million in 1998. Instead Verizon made a bid to purchase what was
left of them for $4 billion in 2016.
The following excerpt from The Google Story by David A. Vise highlights
Google’s earlier buy-out offer to AltaVista and seems to suggest that Yahoo!
too would have been asked to pay in the region of $1 million:
Seated in Palo Alto’s Mandarin Gourmet restaurant in March 1998, Page
and Brin prepared to pitch Paul Flaherty, a Stanford Ph.D. and an architect
of AltaVista, on the merits of their superior search engine technology.
AltaVista, they hoped, would pay as much as $1 million to get access to the
soon-to-be-patented PageRank system . . .
With the help of Stanford professors and the Ofﬁce of Technology
Licensing, Brin and Page tried unsuccessfully to sell their PageRank system
to Excite and other search engines. Yahoo!, seemingly a logical buyer
because it relied on directories edited by people and didn’t have a fast way
to scour the entire Internet, also turned down the chance to buy or license
the Google technology. In part, Yahoo! rejected it because the ﬁrm wanted
computer users to spend more time on Yahoo!7
You are purely deductive when your environment creates you, and you
are being inductive when you create your environment’s vibration.
Inductive reasoning—true thinking—occurs when we use our intuition,
perception, will, imagination, and memory to analyze new insights or prob­
lems and move immediately to create and support the picture of what we
want to see manifest with new thought patterns.
Intuition
Often referred to as our “sixth sense,” coincidentally—not digital sense—
intuition is our ability to recognize someone else’s vibration without even
knowing them or speaking to them. When we meet someone who immedi­
ately makes us feel good or positive, that person is in a positive vibration.
When we meet someone who makes us feel negative or scared, they are in a
lower or more negative vibration.

77
Mind over Organizational Matter
Napoleon Hill’s Think and Grow Rich explained that when you demand
a deﬁnite plan from your subconscious, it will and must answer you; but it
will do so through inspired thought, or the sixth sense, along with hard work
and action.8 When the still small voice answers, you must ACT immediately,
and failure to do so, without delay, will be fatal to success.
You have more than likely had a gut feeling about something only to
deductively—logically—talk yourself out of moving on it and had it come
back to haunt you. Travis had this with NASDAQ: APPL stock in 2001. He
intuitively knew that with Jobs leading and with the release of the iPod and
the new iMac, Apple was back. The only problem with that was Travis didn’t
invest NEARLY ENOUGH, and he sold it way too early.
The bottom line is—Trust Your Gut—and develop your intuition to
tune in at the highest level of those around you. This will allow you to
see through all the noise coming out of the data feeds and mouths or
people, and get right to the essence of what they are saying and who they
are. Malcolm Gladwell is the best-selling author of The Tipping Point,
Outliers, and Blink: The Power of Thinking without Thinking. In the
latter, he discusses a term he calls “thin-slicing,” which is the phenome­
non of taking the smallest amount of information possible and using it to
make a judgment or decision. He illustrates, through numerous real-
world examples and scientiﬁc research, that when you properly learn to
“thin slice” in the area of your business, personal, or ﬁnancial life, your
quick judgments and analyses are often more insightful and better than
those made with more information. He refers to the “adaptive
unconscious” as a giant computer that quickly and quietly processes a lot
of the data we need to keep functioning as human beings in forward
direction.9
Thin-slicing relies heavily on the intuition and can either work for you or
against you depending on which paradigms are ruling your subconscious.
If properly developed, however, Gladwell quotes volumes of scientiﬁc data
that support the accuracy of decision-making when relying on the intuitive
“gut” reaction.
Perception
This is the mental muscle you use to make “meaning” of events or experi­
ences in your life. This is where your existing conditioning (truths that we

78
DIGITAL SENSE
hold dear) will creep up and give us an interpretation. Everything in the
world just “is” until we put something next to it and compare it.
For example: What is $20,000 per month? Some may say that
$20,000 per month is a lot of money, and some may think that $20,000
would be a terrible pay cut or what the company spends per day on spon­
sored employee lunches. The point is that $20,000 per month just “is.”
It only has meaning when we use our perception and invoke the law of
relativity to compare the thing that “is” with something else. For example:
murder “is.” Murder is “BAD” only after we compare it to our moral com­
pass or to “Thou shalt not murder” in the Ten Commandments.
Will
This is your ability to hold any image, idea, or thought that you want in your
conscious mind and focus until it has the chance to embed itself into your
subconscious mind. You do this so that the idea can become your default
paradigm and begin to move into its physical form.
The sun has an outer visible layer called the photosphere, and its tem­
perature is 6,000 degrees Celsius. (Which is almost as hot as Chris J. Snook’s
hair-metal mixtape, which he made back in 1989.) The sun is 93 million
miles from the Earth, and that is why you and I can go outside and over the
course of a few hours of being in the sun’s energy get a golden tan (or, in
Chris’s case, a BAD sunburn). However, most of you will remember grade-
school science when you took a magnifying glass and placed it between a
piece of gum on the ground and the sun and watched that same energy that
gives your skin a darker color burn the gum into a ball of ﬁre in less than 60
seconds. (Travis thinks this is an especially fun experiment to do to light
ﬁrecracker fuses). The magnifying glass is the instrument that harnessed all
that energy—6,000 degrees Celsius—into a single focus. Will is the magnify­
ing glass for our mind.
Imagination
This is your creative power. Humans have the ability to create such amazing
innovations as airplanes, fax machines, the Internet, the automobile, and the
light bulb against all doubt and odds. Why? Because of the power of imagi­
nation when combined with the other ﬁve intellectual faculties. Your

79
Mind over Organizational Matter
imagination is either concocting how you can do something or telling you all
the ways that you can’t. Start using it to fuel what you want, and put the
brakes on using it for coming up with reasons why you can’t.
If you imagine all of the constraints around organizing a multi­
disciplinary working group inside of your company to tackle the EMF con­
versations, research, and planning, you will ﬁnd those constraints to be very
real and strong. You can also imagine an amazingly passionate, customer-
centric, dedicated group of change agents within your organization, which
efﬁciently join small multidisciplinary working groups to tackle the digital
transformation of your company. Combining all of this new understanding
with the EMF as your foundational framework to deliver great customer
experience, you will attract and ﬁnd the resources you need.
Focus on what you want your organization to look like, with a clear vision,
and chances are, it will manifest, once you adopt the right actions to move it
forward. You can have the business relationship with your customers and
employees that you dream of, and, frankly, deserve. Napoleon Hill tells us that
you have two complimentary forms of imagination with which you can work.
1. Creative Imagination is what works with the inﬁnite intelligence to
bring forth a new plan previously unaware to you at the conscious level
to turn your insights into real world innovations.
2. Synthetic Imagination, on the other hand, is where you take your cur­
rent pool of knowledge, data, and resources to create.
Hill also called your imagination the “workshop of the mind.” Inside this
workshop, you need to be using and developing your skill for both your cre­
ative and synthetic imaginations if you are to produce the results you desire.
Memory
This is your ability to recall previous events and experiences. Many people
tend to remember only their failures, but your memory can also produce
images of success. We want you to use your memory to bolster your conﬁ­
dence and self-esteem as you try something new because at one point every­
thing was new to you. No baby is born with the ability to talk, walk, or ride a
bike, and yet most of you today, as adults, do all three with no regard to how
difﬁcult those things once were. You need to exercise your memory to work

80
DIGITAL SENSE
in your favor and remind yourself that you can do anything you set our
mind to!
What to Do When the Zombies Attack
Now that you are armed with a clear picture of the faculties you and your
team will leverage, along with inﬁnite intelligence and the EMF to create a
massively differentiated and lawfully sound social business strategy, powered
by purpose, people, and processes, you must be prepared for the guaranteed
standoff with the Zombies. The Zombies are the widely known, and yet
undiscovered, dream-killers that plague the universe we operate in. They are
not divinely inspired, but they are extremely powerful. Their most common
weapon of choice are seeds of destruction also known as “Other People’s
Opinions”: OPO. These Zombies are subtle cancers that live in and leverage
the Motivatables, whose easily persuadable nature and dominant habit of
deductive reasoning create your most common vulnerability. OPOs are seeds
planted by Zombies and watered by Motivatables in discrete moments, and
they grow into the tall weeds (which the Zombies feed upon) that infect your
dream space, while your newly planted creative crop is still early in its
gestation.
OPOs are the catalysts for worry and doubt in the conscious mind, and if
emotional involvement with these proceeds, fear manifests in the sub­
conscious mind, thereby setting up a vibration that results in anxiety at the
body/physical plane. This puts you in a ﬁght or ﬂight state waiting for the
Zombies to appear and takes your focus off of creation.
The reason the Zombies are dangerous is that these subtle seeds of
destruction they plant don’t require that they be directly seen or in striking
range of your wrath. They can actually cause more direct havoc on your
momentum because they, oftentimes, go undetected until they have grown
substantially strong in key minds around your support network.
Break through Your Comfort Zone
There is a sneaky, conniving, and fraudulent internal foe to the very spirit
that each of you must constantly negotiate. It is the only fertile soil inside of
us that doesn’t serve your interests in personal growth. That foe is your

81
Mind over Organizational Matter
individual comfort zone. The laws of the universe work cohesively and in
accordance with one another to create an orderly universe by which effects
may be repeatable. One of the outcomes of this body of laws governing all
things in the physical plane is that of “create or disintegrate.” This could also
be explained by saying “that which is not growing is dying.” The fraud of the
“comfort zone” is that it hides behind the law of gender and fools us to
believing that things stay the same, because you do not see an immediate
“death” in the physical plane when you stop your spirit from driving forward
or growing in a certain direction. The death of all dreams, aspirations, and
things happens slowly over time and could be likened to you running through
a ﬁeld of thorny rose bushes and then taking a few years to bleed to death.
Nothing Stays the Same!
Everything is in a state of constant change! To think otherwise is to advertise
your ignorance of—or about—the indisputable laws of nature. The worst
thing about comfort zones is that they don’t hurt. They feel comfortable, and
in the worst and most paralyzing states, they may even feel good! You are
most vulnerable as an individual and an organization when you put too much
value on being comfortable.
We want you to pause and think about a couple of things for a minute as
they relate to the laws of the universe.
1. Have you ever seen water boil at 211 degrees Fahrenheit? NOPE! It 
always boils at exactly 212 degrees (at sea level). 
2. Have you ever wondered how scientists can predict the exact time of the
sunset on any given day, or the timing of the high tides and low tides?
3. How in the world did they ﬁgure out how to make a wireless device
called a smartphone that can simultaneously transmit the sound waves
of your voice through a satellite into the receiving end of a friend’s phone
in an airport terminal in France and allow you to three-way call your
sister on her wireless phone in New Jersey, while you scan pictures of the
trip on Facebook before snapping a selﬁe of yourself accomplishing this
and posting it to Instagram or Snapchat before hanging up?
The exact science that allows brilliant people to engineer such techno­
logical feats must be studied and applied to bring forth anything in the “great

82
DIGITAL SENSE
order” that is our universe. That same order governing water’s boiling point,
the high and low tide, and the feats of wireless transmission governs your
income, your health, your organizational dynamics, everything! However,
your current comfort zone (Figure 5.6) contains all the information that you
are ever going to have and all the awareness of opportunity that you will
currently and continually have. If you do not stretch your comfort zone and
gain new awareness through the setting of goals outside of your current
understanding, what you have in all areas of your life today is all that you will
ever have and all you’ll ever be!
Russell Conwell wrote Acres of Diamonds and spent his entire speaking
career talking with people about the tremendous opportunities that lay right
in their own backyards but that they lacked the awareness to see. If you’re not
familiar with the story, the speech begins with an anecdote about a man who
owned a large farm and was “wealthy and content” until he learned of the
riches of diamonds. He became so desirous for diamonds that he sold all he
had and left his family to search the world for the gems. In the end, he found
none. Broke and exhausted, he committed suicide. The man who bought the
farm from him soon discovered that soil and earth underneath the farm was
ﬁlled with diamonds and became ﬁlthy rich. Ouch!10
The lesson for you is that every organization (backyard) has issues, and
although it may seem as though you have to go outside of it to ﬁnd the value,
more often than not, you can ﬁnd it below your feet, if you are willing to
apply your intellectual faculties to the situation and stretch out of your
comfort zone. Use the EMF and the power of the stick-person to become aA circle depicting your current comfort zone.

Figure 5.6 Your Comfort Zone 

83
Mind over Organizational Matter
more powerful leader who leads digital transformation across your organiza­
tion by attraction vs. promotion.
Charles Haanel wrote deﬁnitively about “life as an enfoldment” in his
book, The Master Key System.11 The inﬁnite power of energy is always mov­
ing into form, through form, and out of form. It is never stagnant! It is
equally present in all places at all times. It is just as much in front of you as it
is behind you. Just as much to your left as it is to your right. It is just as much
in us, as it is present in you. But it’s never stagnant and never still.
Fear is what is holding you back, and the false Terror Barrier is a beast
that the Zombies love to use, that we will show you how to slay on the
upward climb to your dreams of building a more customer-centric digitally
sensible organization!
The picture of the stick-person in Figure 5.7 graphically depicts your
comfort zone. Let “x” represent an idea or thought that comes into your
Conscious Mind. Assuming that you also have x-type conditioning or para­
digms, then you will be quick to accept the x-type idea, and this will reinforce
the x-type conditioning in your subconscious. The subconscious mind will
setup an x-type vibration in the body which will take action in that accord
and manifest into physical reality as an x-type result (R). At no point in this
Figure 5.7 The Mechanics of the Terror Barrier 

84
DIGITAL SENSE
process will you feel “uncomfortable” because the “x” idea that enters your
conscious mind matches your underlying subconscious conditioning and you
will relate to it as “good” using your deductive reasoning.
What frustrates many people is that they will ask for advice from some­
body on how to get new results, but they are unaware that they are only
going to accept an idea at the conscious level that matches their current
conditioning. They will, therefore, never reason inductively (truly “think”)
about the idea’s actual impact on results. They will falsely expect that they
will get new results, but, as the previous drawing clearly indicates, this is
simply not possible.
You may be reading this book and others like it, in the sincerest
effort to learn how to apply the EMF and some of our recommendations,
but if you have paradigms and beliefs in your subconscious mind about
how politically stiﬂing or resistant your team or organization is to
change, you are setting the table for an interaction with the Terror
Barrier. The drawing in Figure 5.8 depicts what happens once the person
reaches past aspiration and begins to act and “stretch” their comfort zone
by “reasoning with a new idea or goal.”
Whenever you set a truly worthy goal you will know, because when you
set a good goal, achieving it will require you to increase your awareness and
stretch your comfort zone to allow the new “how” to permeate your stream of
consciousness. In other words, when you are honest about what you “really
want” you will see you have no idea how to get it inside your current aware­
ness level.
DIGITAL BIT: For an audio podcast on the 7 Levels of
Awareness visit Digitalsen.se/7Levels.
When this happens we will let “y” represent a new idea or goal. When
you have autosuggested your new desire consistently enough to your mind,
you will be successful at creating a “positive” emotional involvement with the
y-type idea and it will cross the border of your mind and enter into your
subconscious mind. At this point your new paradigm (“y”) will be going into

 
85
Mind over Organizational Matter
Figure 5.8 
a head-to-head battle with your old “x” paradigm for precedence in the sub­
conscious mind. Your old paradigm will begin a sabotage pattern to prevent
“y” from dethroning it by sending signal patterns to your conscious mind to
rely on your ﬁve senses to look for physical evidence in the outer world. It
will enlist all the Zombies it can around you to infect the Motivatables on
your team, your advisory group, and even potentially your supporters at
home to cause the chain of events depicted in this graphic. Since the “y” idea
is in process of moving into “form” from its spiritual state to its physical
equivalent, you will not see physical evidence through your ﬁve senses. The
old paradigm knows this, and it will effectively create the notion of worry/
doubt in the conscious mind.

86
DIGITAL SENSE
If you decide to get emotionally involved with worry/doubt, your old
paradigm will win the battle, and you will invoke the pattern of fear in
the subconscious mind. The vibration will set up the manifestation of
anxiety in the body, causing you to hit the terror barrier and retreat back
into the “safety” of the comfort zone. This will cause you to continue to
get x-type results and fail to break through and materialize your stated
goal and objective. We mentioned it earlier but remind you again how
critical it is to remember that you can never outperform your own self-image.
Your goals are not wrong. You wouldn’t be given a desire in your heart if
you weren’t capable of having it manifest. You must develop a congruent
self-image that is in line with that which you want and not let fear of the
unknown derail you.
In his study on the self-image and his work on Psycho-Cybernetics, Dr.
Maxwell Maltz noted that human beings are only born with two innate fears
as a means of survival: Fear of falling and fear of loud noises!12 Every other
fear is “man-made” or, better yet, “paradigm-made.” Another point to
remember is that you are never actually speaking to a person when you are
trying to enroll them in your way of thinking. You are always speaking to
their paradigms and narratives. Everyone can be right in their own mind from
their perspective. To overcome this, you must raise your own vibration ﬁrst,
and attract those of similar mind to the mission.
Our personal acronym for fear is Feeling Excited And Ready! What the
stick-person is illustrating is that in almost all cases (except falling or loud
noise) the “Terror Barrier” is a mirage that limits us only because we let it.
The only way through the Terror Barrier is faith! Faith is not something
you get from religion. Faith comes from understanding. Faith comes ﬁrst
from an expectation, which becomes a belief after repeated and consistent
expectation. Belief becomes faith after repeatedly ﬁnding evidence and
understanding to believe in that something time and again.
Now and from here forward, you have a conceptual understanding that
when you feel worry and doubt at the conscious level, you need not sweat. It
will take practice and repetition, however, to trust that and change the way
that you relate to feelings of worry and doubt from here on. When you bust
through the false Terror Barrier, it is truly a time to CELEBRATE, because
your new idea or goal has successfully moved from a wish and dream to the
realm of the subconscious mind (Figure 5.9).

 
87
Mind over Organizational Matter
Figure 5.9 
Remember that the subconscious can only say “yes” to whatever you give
the most emotional energy to.
Faith and doubt cannot exist at the same time any more than night and
day can. You will feel worry and doubt because your y-type idea will be
battling with your x-type conditioning and trying to replace it. The
uncomfortable part is not in wanting the y-type idea. It is when you have to
step forward in faith, believing in the physically unseen with the under­
standing that everything is moving from “thought”—spiritual equivalent—
into “thing”—physical form—through the power of your mind.
When you focus on faith in “y,” the worry and doubt will not vibrate as
fear, and you will step through the Terror Barrier into freedom from your old
“x” conditioning! Once you have successfully replaced the old “x” with the
new “y,” it will become your present conditioning, your spirit will seek
expression and fuller expansion again, and your “y” will become the new “x.”
That is the cycle of our spirit unfolding, and it is the miracle of life and of
achievement science!
Remember that Emerson said, “Whatever you give energy to, grows!”
Now you understand why you will feel thoughts of worry and doubt as you
begin to put the EMF into practice using the exercises in this book to bring
clarity and collaboration from your cross-functional teams into reality. You

88
DIGITAL SENSE
also now know how to step forward with increased faith, because you
understand that your dreams are ﬁnally trying to move “through” your sub­
conscious mind into the vibration of the body, to attract the necessary items
to manifest your dream in its physical and observable equivalent!
Practice doesn’t make perfect, but practice does make permanent. Now
you have the perfect model of your mind to work with to practice making
your efﬁcient and consistent use of the EMF a permanent ﬁxture in your
planning process.
Emerson also once called the law of cause and effect, “the law of laws.”
Most people understand the law of cause and effect incorrectly. They have
comprehended the basic tenets of “the more you put into something, the
more you get out”; however, they thought that the actions they took were the
cause and the results they got were their effect.
You now visually understand through the stick-person that they are
mistaken, and the cause is at the level of thought. The effect is at the level of
vibration—paradigms and conditioning of the subconscious mind—and the
vibration is what dictates the action taken, which produces the results we can
see and observe in our visual reality through our ﬁve senses! This is why
merely changing the action—such as by reading this book and doing the
EMF exercises—without changing the root cause (thinking) typically leaves
a person frustrated, with more of the same results (a siloed organization,
lacking digital sense, that is not customer-centric) and thinking that this book
or—even worse—the universe is letting them down. Now you can see that
this is just not true.
The power is within you. The EMF is ﬂuid and dynamic and agnosti­
cally integrates with any other processes you currently deploy. Use the stick-
person to ﬁrmly implant the vision for where your company is going in your
mind ﬁrst and it will be an unwavering beacon for the rest of your team to
align with as you work through the bulk of the EMF nodes and put this
vision into a plan with milestones.
The law of cause and effect (Figure 5.10) is illustrated below inside of the
stick-person to further drill this home.

 
89
Mind over Organizational Matter
Figure 5.10 
Now that you are working with a clear picture of your mind and the
universal laws you are working with, you are ready to wield your creative
power. You are ready to dive back into the EMF and set up and/or optimize
your purpose-focused strategy in the Vision Layer.


6 The Vision Layer
“If you are working on something exciting that you really care about, you don’t
have to be pushed. The vision pulls you.”
—Steve Jobs
Y
our business is a relationship, more than it is any other thing. Don’t rush
on to the next paragraph. Think about that for a minute.
Wikipedia deﬁnes business as “a commercial operation or ﬁrm engaged in
commerce that seeks to achieve volume and proﬁts by transacting its goods and
services.”1 However, we are here to tell you that, although that deﬁnition
holds true, your business is a relationship, ﬁrst and foremost.
Your business is one of the most complex and important relationships in
society; it moves the world forward in aggregate. Business is the engine of
humanity’s progress and it could, therefore, be said that business is human­
ity’s most important relationship in the evolution of our species. However,
focusing solely on proﬁt motives—without regard for other people, species,
and the planet—is not a good way to run your business. Either way, you
deﬁnitely have a relationship with your business, good or bad. So, if you will
think about your business from here on out as a relationship, we believe that
you will be well on your way to leveraging the EMF to its maximum beneﬁt
as you transform to a customer-centric digital organization.
All of the great relationships in business, music and entertainment, sports,
and everyday love stories have one thing in common. They all have a vision for
where they are going together. Think of the great business partnerships, great
rock bands, or great baseball teams like the 2015 Kansas City Royals, and think
about why they work. It begins with painting a clear inspiring picture of where
you are going and how you are taking each person with you. Charlene Li of the
Altimeter Group says, “The biggest determinants, by far, of whether you will
be successful at social business are leadership and culture.” (Sidenote: Travis
91

92
DIGITAL SENSE
added the 2015 Royals because (1) they were awesome and (2) the Royals beat
Chris’s favorite baseball team, the New York Mets, in the 2015 World Series.
Chris left this in the ﬁnal edits because karma is real and vengeance will be his
in the next book . . . he hopes. )
For relationships to work and last, an ongoing alignment and a shared
vision are necessary.
Your employees, your stakeholders, and your customers all crave—and
deserve—to know, and have the chance to align with, your vision. For that
matter, your spouse does too! However, your vision without a prioritized plan
is nothing more than a pipe dream. You must schedule and calibrate the
scope. It has always been true that the vital few in society who can see the
future and simultaneously work their face off to create it have carried the
many who can merely just hope and dream.
MILESTONE: The following mental break is sponsored
by our ﬁctitious foundation: ATTENTION DEFICIT
DISORDERLIES OF AMERICA. And now that you’ve
made it to this part of the book, we just want to thank
and congratulate you. According to publishing analyst
Dan Poynter, 87 percent of people will never read this far
into a book they purchase.2 In fact, to let us know you
have made it this far, stop reading right now for a few
seconds and tweet @chrisjsnook and @teedubya with the
funniest Bro picture that you can ﬁnd, bro.
Don’t say anything else. It will be our inside secret that you are
nearly halfway through the book! Here’s one of our favorites. We’ll
cover business relationship optimization in a later chapter, #BRO!Photograph depicting brotato.


93
The Vision Layer
The Vision Layer + Social Business
In the Vision Layer (Figure 6.1) of the EMF, you will clearly state and anchor
your vision into a social business strategy that aligns to purpose, deploys
human-centric tactics, and course corrects with data-fed iterations.
Later in the book, we will provide plenty of “how to” ideas and resources
as they relate to speciﬁc tactics, technologies, and life hacks you can deploy to
leverage your newly enhanced digital sense into more meaningful results.
Since strategy always should come before tactics, let’s focus on how you can
leverage the EMF to build your strategic plan and the questions you need to
ask and answer within your team to ensure that your strategy is holistic and
human at its core.
The Vision Layer Exercises
Dive right in with your team to the Vision Layer with the momentum gained
from your efforts at the Insight Layer by starting with an audit of your cur­
rent business goals (aka, major business objectives) as they relate to the clarity
you gained around your customer’s needs. The ﬁrst step here is to ensure that
your major goals (Figure 6.2) align to the needs of your customer and will
allow you to achieve your higher purpose.
Building a solid social business strategy is the art of applying insights to
speciﬁc touch points in the customer journey, guided by business goals and
calibrated by scope to the resources available. This all begins with a clearA triangle depicting the EMF vision layer: strategy, where its vertex are representing goals, touch points, and scopes. The sides of the triangle are representing purpose, people, and process. A circles inside the triangle is representing purpose focused social business strategy.

Figure 6.1 The EMF Vision Layer: Strategy

94
DIGITAL SENSEA triangle depicting the goals node of the EMF vision layer, where the triangle is representing goals. A circles inside the triangle is representing measurable results aligning to VOC 1yr, 2yr, 3yr.

Figure 6.2 The Goals Node of the EMF Vision Layer
focus on the top three business goals that deepen your relationship with your
customer and employees, in a way that drives increased volume and proﬁt to
your ﬁnancial statements.
Time to complete exercise: 50 minutes to 2 hours (depending on the
organization)
Setting the stage: On the whiteboard should be the top three major busi­
ness objectives for the coming year. The facilitator will quickly state
aloud the major business objectives on the board and check for align­
ment amongst all the working group team that those objectives are clear
and aligned on.
Confucius said, “Man who aim at nothing—sure to hit it.” He also says, “Man
who stands on toilet is high on pot.” But that’s irrelevant.
Step 1: In this Vision Layer exercise of the EMF, each member should
write out their top three to ﬁve department-level goals for the coming
year on sticky notes.
Step 2: Each member will place those sticky notes underneath the most
relevant major business objective that they support or impact.
Step 3: The facilitator and remaining working group will discuss and
verify that you have clear metrics (KPIs) by which you are measuring
your progress to each of those goals. If you do not, either pause to deﬁne
the valued metric related to each or throw that goal out and replace it
with something you are willing and able to measure.

95
The Vision Layer
Note: Data should drive decisions today, but the data is made valuable only
when we hold each other accountable, as a cross-functional team, to deﬁne
which measurements provide the most relevant value. When you measure
the right stuff and observe the data through your ﬁve senses, you will ben­
eﬁt most from the continued mental muscle building of each individual’s
intellectual faculties. This allows your group intuition to grow stronger and
more aligned. Intuition is the faculty you will use to uncover insights from
the data and then imagine and create the innovations that you can oper­
ationalize in the future as you seek to optimize reliability in the customer
experience.
Step 4: Discuss your Lean Six Sigma and Voice of Customer (VOC)
data,3 NPS scores, survey feedback, and detractor pipeline data, and look
at how the happy and lost customers have prioritized their needs, and
make sure that you helping them achieve those needs. Only this will
allow you to achieve your stated business objectives in a sustainable way.
Don’t forget to give equal weight to considering the needs of your
internal/employee customer as well as your external/end user customer in
this regard.
Step 5: Wrap up this session by revisiting the original major business
objectives that are up on the whiteboard along with the three department
level goals each leader is driving toward. Gut-check that they are stated
properly and adjust them as needed to formalize the goals node as a
group.
Step 6: Document this and publish it everywhere it is appropriate and
share with your department teams. Some example questions to help cat­
alyze your goal alignment to customer needs audit are as follows:
1. Do our department level metrics and KPIs all map to and connect
to our management by objectives (MBO)?
2. Does the impact on our customer rank number one in our
department-level decision criteria?
3. If the answer to question 2 is “no” or “not sure,” instead of asking
why, which will just cause a justiﬁcation of the current depart­
ment level processes and KPIs, ask question 4.
4. What if we put the customer (internal and external) ﬁrst in pri­
ority across the company? What current decision criteria and
KPIs are we governed by that would violate this new edict?

96
DIGITAL SENSE
5. How can we leverage our social business channels, tools, and
incentives internally (Ofﬁcevibe, Yammer, Slack, Facebook
groups, and so on), to build a relationship between our people to
these business goals, as a mutually beneﬁcial and dynamically
human thing?
Now you have up-to-date and documented 12-month goals. The good
news is, if you are in a politically toxic environment, but you can’t quit or
won’t leave, you can actually have these conversations with yourself and build
out your own path to map your day-to-day team efforts to aligning around
the customer and your current stated objectives. If you are reading this book,
you are not a Zombie, which means you can make a difference if you are
willing to try. Recruit one or two other people and start small. Remember
always that much gathers more!
As Margaret Mead famously said, “Never doubt that a small group of
thoughtful, committed people can change the world; indeed, it’s the only thing
that ever has.”
The EMF is here to help you organize your own thoughts as well as your
teams so that you can lead from wherever you are. A small group of com­
mitted people with digital sense and the customer at the heart of their efforts
can make a huge impact even inside of siloed organizations.
Please don’t mentally check out here if you feel yourself saying that,
“This is great, guys, but it will never work in my f#@ked up company.”
Remember that your relationship to your own enjoyment of your work is
as important as anything larger. Master this effort for your own purposes.
Never underestimate the power of you as a force for greater customer
experience.
There is nothing wrong with self-interest as long as it is enlightened. If
you are aware of and serve your personal goals and needs in alignment to the
enterprise goals, you are acting in enlightened (mutually beneﬁcial) self-
interest, which is a worthy ideal for any company to enable. Depending on
your rank in the company, its size, and its years in business, an ofﬁcial pur­
pose statement may or may not be in your control. If your company has a
clearly articulated purpose statement, you want to get yourself in relationship
with that purpose at a renewed, visceral level. If you can’t get yourself excited
to embody that purpose day in and day out and you don’t own the company,

97
The Vision Layer
start looking for more meaningful work. If you do own the company and
don’t feel an unquenchable passion for the current or stated purpose, stop
everything right now and get honest about what purpose inspires you to get
out of bed every morning and grind. You must have a strong WHY to per­
sonally be your best, to inspire your team, and get their best output on a
daily basis.
At Ethology, we realized in year 5 that we didn’t have a clearly concise
purpose statement that all team members would jump out of bed for and
commit to hire and ﬁre against. At the beginning of the ﬁfth year, we
embarked on a 6-month process that yielded a simple but powerful purpose
statement, “To earn the compliment of being each client’s most trusted
business advisor.”
Now we have a purpose that every leader internally can hire and ﬁre to.
This purpose is both achievable and fragile in every single business and client
interaction and represents an accountable relationship.
• It is human to earn a compliment. It is human to strive for continual 
improvement. 
• It is also human to f#%k up and have to eat s#%t, apologize, and ﬁnd a
way to make it better with the follow-up interactions.
• It is human to crave trust and respect from our closest relationships
• It is human to not give our trust and respect out to others ﬂippantly.
All of these truths make this purpose something extremely visceral for
the organization and therefore make it a great purpose statement. What is
yours? Can everyone on your team and in your organization state it out
loud if called upon? If not, you don’t have a clear purpose, and at a
minimum, you need to remind people what it is and help them ﬁnd their
own conviction on why it matters. Strong culture is glued together by a
clear and meaningful “why.”
A purpose-focused social business strategy must have a strong why, a clear
what, and a manageable how. Redeﬁne it if it needs redeﬁning, or put it up
on the whiteboard now and get everyone in your circle to share how and why
it matters to them. Build a frothy energy of aligned purpose and bask in the
productivity it will produce as you move through the rest of this layer with
your team.

98
DIGITAL SENSE
Customer Journeys
As you move around the nodes of the Vision Layer to the bottom left corner
node, we will get into an audit of how you deliver at each of the key touch
points in your customer’s journey (Figure 6.3).
You will run an audit against each product/service line, update and/or
establish documented personas, journey maps, and the associated channel
strategies you deploy for each. You will also decide how aligned your KPIs for
each touch point map to your overarching channel strategy goals and your
major business objectives. You will replace or redeﬁne the data you capture
and care about to ensure this is the case.
The most common mistake made in deﬁning your social business strat­
egy is not technology or choice of platform or channel. It’s not necessarily the
user experience either. All of those things play into your results, but before a
line of code is written, a blog post or editorial calendar is conceived, or a
dollar in advertising has been deployed, you cannot forget to answer the simple
questions that your target has at each point in their journey.
In this section of the Vision Layer, you will unpack your major customer
touch points along their journey from Awareness to Advocate and everything
in between. You will begin to score yourself by how well you clearly solve and
engage with them in a relevant way at each touch point or moment of truth.
You will also build on the information gained at the Insight Layer around
your competitors by benchmarking how well you stack up to competing
solutions in the marketplace on relevance and engagement at these key touch
points.
The bullets that follow cover the baseline understanding you should go
over with all members of your cross-functional working group to level set the
team around this section.A triangle depicting the touch points node of the EMF vision layer, where the triangle is representing touch points. A circles inside the triangle is representing product line persona type channels KPIs.

Figure 6.3 The Touch Points Node of the EMF Vision Layer

99
The Vision Layer
• A journey map is a formal and customized business document that makes
your customer experience visible and tangible by injecting thoughts,
actions, and feelings into the process.
• It also helps you pinpoint key “moments of truth” in which decisions are
made and positive vs. negative impressions are set—so that you can give
those special attention.
• These “moments of truth” happen at a handful of digital and or physical
touch points with your brand along the buyer’s journey.
• For each key persona and product/business line offering you will poten­
tially have an associated journey map.
• You will likely have a minimum of four documented personas and asso­
ciated journey maps that represent the core value driving offerings of
your business.
• A buyer persona is a semiﬁctional representation of your ideal customer
based on market research and real data about your existing customers.
When creating your buyer persona(s), consider including customer
demographics, behavior patterns, motivations, and goals.
If you are newer to the world of customer journey map design and persona
development we recommend our fellow Wiley author and friend Brian Solis’s
latest book X: The Experience When Business Meets Design as a phenomenal
resource for architecting experience with deep process dives and visual examples
of how to design and develop customer journeys for your organization.4
DIGITAL BIT: If you would like a very practical
facilitator’s resource for your working group that is
100 percent free, visit DigitalSen.se/nssg∗and down­
load The Not-So-Secret-Guide to ALL Our Secrets
from Ethology. It includes step-by-step instructions for
how to set up and facilitate everything from a business
blueprinting session to a content workshop, journey
map, tactical plan templates, heuristic audits, ROT
content audit, design studio, how to benchmark com­
petitors, and more.
∗Adapted from The Not-So-Secret Guide to All Our Secrets.

100
DIGITAL SENSE
The resources above are invaluable to you and the free download is easy to
print off and duplicate in PDF so that you have a step-by-step process for
how to facilitate each internal working session. To start you off with an
example of an exercise you should do with your team immediately, we have
broken out elements of an audience development session below:
The Journey Map Touch Point Exercise
Tip: You should use both analytics and direct observation (ethnographic)
research when informing your journey map and audience development
efforts.
Setup: A large whiteboard (preferably 4 feet high and 8 feet long) or
posterboard surface. Tape (using masking tape) a line that separates the
top and bottom in equal parts across the full length.
Materials Needed:
× 8´´
× 5´´
◆You will need a stack of 5´´
and 3´´
index cards
◆You will need several packs of multicolored (yellow, purple, green,
pink, blue, etc.) sticky notes
◆You will need Sharpie markers and/or pens for each participant.
◆You will need one team member as facilitator and should aim for a
cross-functional working group that includes a representative from
marketing, sales, operations, delivery, customer service, and ﬁnance
with direct customer knowledge from their domain.
Time to complete: 2–3 hours
Step 1: Identify the key steps that a customer takes as they progress
through the buyer’s journey.
◆DON’T limit this to just the interactions/touch points with your
brand, but take a broad view to see their entire experience.
× 8´´
◆The facilitator will write each phase on one of the 5´´
index cards
Step 2: On the top half of your whiteboard/poster board the facilitator
will place these steps in order of how they occur, from left to right.
Step 3: Identify what your customer is doing at each step in their buying
journey
◆Have each team member write every action they can think of for each
step on a yellow sticky note

101
The Vision Layer
◆Place the yellow sticky notes directly below the corresponding step
above the tape line
Step 4: Identify what your customer is thinking and feeling during each
step.
◆Write every thought/feeling on a purple sticky note directly below the
corresponding step, below the tape line.
Step 5: Examine the touch points in the journey (these are where your
brand has the chance to interface with the customer such as search
engines, websites, apps, social media, people, employees, retail stores/
service centers, call centers, etc.).
◆Have each person write these touch points on the green sticky notes.
◆Place the green sticky notes below each corresponding step to identify
which touch points are in play at each step of the buyer’s journey.
Step 6: Identify your customer’s pain points during each step.
◆Write every pain point on a pink sticky note.
◆Place the pink sticky note directly below the corresponding step,
below the line
Step 7: Now you are ready to discuss the opportunities to improve the
customer’s experience and prioritize which areas will generate the largest
impact/delta in ROI and get investment and focus in the coming year as
it relates to budget and scope.
◆Each member writes the opportunities as they see them on a blue
sticky note and places them at the bottom of your board
Recap:
◆Yellow sticky=Customer action
◆Purple sticky=Customer thoughts/feelings
◆Green sticky=Touch points in the journey
◆Pink sticky=Customer pain points
◆Blue sticky=Opportunities
Step 8: Identify the moments of truth
◆Have each team member consider what your customer is doing,
thinking, feeling, and experiencing every time they think or interact
with your company and write each of these moments of truth on a
3´´ × 5´´ card.

102
DIGITAL SENSE
◆Place the index card next to its corresponding phase/step in the
journey
Step 9: Pop your favorite adult beverage because you have just mapped
your customer journey. Now you can use this map to audit your existing
customer experience and key touch points and make a plan to improve
areas of concern.
Scope
Scope is the range or view, aim and purpose, length, and limit by which you
will address any given opportunity or challenge you uncover as you complete
your Vision Layer. It is the clear deﬁnition of any operation that you will
undertake as it relates to improving key customer touch points that align to
customer pain points/needs and generate the most impact toward your stated
business objectives. No Vision Layer (Figure 6.4) can be complete without
calibrating resources, time lines, and opportunities to a deﬁned scope.
Your strategy becomes ready to execute in the Success Layer once it has
been put to a proper scope that deﬁnes how you will satisfy your strategic
objectives/goals. Scope is your written governing document or road map that
translates the customer needs and your product/service objectives into spe­
ciﬁc requirements to improve the infrastructure and messaging at key touch
points, and deﬁnes who within your organization or vendor network will be
tasked with implementing them and at what budgetary cost.
Taking time to deﬁne the scope is both a valuable process and a valuable
end product. It is valuable as a process because it allows you to uncover land
mines, budgetary conﬂicts, or internal political issues that could derail the
project before it gets started and work to ﬁnd a compromise in advance. It is aA triangle depicting the scope node of the EMF vision layer, where the triangle is representing scope. A circles inside the triangle is representing resources timelines opportunity priority.

Figure 6.4 The Scope Node of the EMF Vision Layer

103
The Vision Layer
valuable end product because it provides a document for governance and
measurement that can be shared and executed across the silos to maximize
buy-in and efﬁciency.
Step 1: Begin by deﬁning the requirements.
◆This seems obvious but it important to know what you are building
and for what objectives. The second and equally important reason to
deﬁne the requirements is to identify what it is that you are not going
to build.
◆If you have completed the Goals and Audience Development/Journey
Map exercises from earlier, then the second half of these deﬁned
requirements is easy to complete. We suggest writing these deﬁned
requirement statements as follows: “We are building a (insert project
here) to address the (insert speciﬁc customer pain point here) at (insert
touch point impacted here) in the buyer’s journey, for the sake of (insert
the associated major business objective/goal here). List of requirements and
phases would be expanded in each case below this summary statement.
EXAMPLE: “We are building a mobile-ﬁrst customer app portal to
address the customer’s need for real-time access to account information
and transaction ability while on the go at the USE touch point, for the
sake of increasing cross sales and customer loyalty by 10 percent this year.”
Phase 1: Requirements and time line (derived from direct customer
knowledge and feedback)
Timeline of the sprint: January 15 to March 31, 2017
Requirements:
◆Simple, reliable, app interface that works reliably even in low-
bandwidth environments
◆Ability to see balance and recent transaction history in real time
◆Ability to send or receive money or transfer to and from linked
accounts.
Phase 2: Requirements and time line
Budget to complete Phase 1 and 2: $50,000 
Internal team members required: 
◆Director of Mobile Payments, director of IT, compliance ofﬁcer,
general counsel

104
DIGITAL SENSE
External resources needed:
◆Front end developer, backend developer, UX/UI specialist
Step 2: Prioritize the requirements.
◆In the example above, we began to show a simple theoretical example
of what a prioritized requirements document might look like.
◆It is very important (although sometimes difﬁcult) to put in the time
to be very speciﬁc with the requirements of each investment you will
make to optimize a key touch point in your customer’s journey. It is
not enough to stick with vague words like “a hip, cool interface that
looks good to our customers on a mobile device.”
◆You have done rigorous work in this layer and the Insight layer before
to gain a clear picture of the thoughts, feelings, and actions your cus­
tomers will be guided by at each point in the journey. As you think
through these requirements, you will want to be as speciﬁc as possible
and provide access to that summary persona data and journey map to
whoever is building or executing the project for you.
◆You will also need to negotiate with other department leads and bud­
get holders depending and ensure that the scope stays well deﬁned and
as tight as possible despite the human nature of each new participant
to want “it” to do one more thing for their speciﬁc domain of concern.
◆It is very common to see one requirement impact or tie back to mul­
tiple strategic goals or objectives, and this is important to map out as
well so that you can use this data to make the tough decisions on what
gets cut when budgets and statements of work (SOWs) are in conﬂict
and something must get cut or put on the shelf for another phase.
◆Feasibility is a key determinant in how things get prioritized as well.
For instance, you may have an executive order to hit one of the major
business objectives within 2 months, but as you begin to scope out
and deﬁne the requirements to get your current idea to market, it will
require 4 months or not be possible for 12 months within that budget
range. This lack of feasibility is a real constraint but is valuable to
uncover because it can cause you to rethink your product strategy or
ﬁnd a whole new way to hit the major business objective. A design
thinker mentality will look at the problem ﬁrst (i.e., “hit this major
business objective in 2 months”) and ﬁnd the most feasible and efﬁ­
cient method to achieve that outcome.

105
The Vision Layer
◆A hidden value of prioritizing and detailing the deﬁned requirements
of your scope with teams is that in some cases you will ﬁnd that
features and efforts you begin to see as requirements will not align
completely to your deﬁned goals section. This is a sign of either a
doomed strategy that has not properly addressed constraints and fea­
sibility and jumped to deﬁning requirements too quickly, or that has
not yet clearly ranked the priority of each major business objective to
provide proper top-down guidance.
The key things to come away with from the Vision Layer of the EMF is a
documented process and aligned rationale as to what the prioritized strategic
goals for the organization are moving forward in the next 12 months in
concrete terms, and not necessarily the proposed means of getting there. You
will likely need to deﬁne scope more than once as you begin to phase into
execution, and ﬁnd ways to approach this process with urgency and accuracy
and agility as environments, people, and markets shift in real time.
A great understanding of design thinking will help you and your teams
navigate this balance, and you can ﬁnd 45 amazing resources on implement­
ing design thinking into your organization.5
Takeaways from the Vision Layer
What: You have deﬁned your three major business goals and aligned 
them to your customer needs. You have audited and mapped your buy­
er’s journey and assessed key areas to improve at certain touch points. 
You have calibrated scope and prioritized projects to budgets and feasible 
timelines, and identiﬁed available internal and external resources. 
Who: Project stakeholders in a cross-functional working group, executive 
sponsor, client/customers, agency partners. 
How: Conducting workshops, ethnographic research, data analysis, 
building project plans and requirement docs, revisiting recommenda­
tions, and making decisions to prioritize. 
Why: The purpose of this layer is to get to a point where you have made 
decisions about how you will attack the coming year and put it all to a 
plan and schedule. 


7 The Success Layer
“Success is not ﬁnal. Failure is not fatal: it is the courage to continue that
counts.”
—Winston Churchill
T
he EMF has been inﬂuenced by a DNA strand that comes from a deep
admiration by both of us for the Japanese philosophy of Kaizen, which
was made most famous in the late 1980s by the Toyota Production
System. Kaizen was the precursor to the widespread adoption of the lean-
manufacturing movement and continues to inspire innovation today, as the
last decade has seen an immense amount of use and press around the lean
startup, lean design, and lean everything movements.
The Kaizen process has been known as the Deming Cycle, the plan-do­
check-act (PDCA) cycle, and the Shewhart Cycle, but regardless of vernacu­
lar, centers around the interplay of these four tenets: Plan, Do, Check, Act.
Kaizen is a philosophy for constant and never-ending improvement.
In the Success Layer (Figure 7.1), we have chosen to simplify that a step
further into a slightly modiﬁed and customer-centric model of Learn. Plan.
Do. We have ordered it this way because, as you read earlier in this book, the
ﬁrst guiding principle of the EMF is that direct customer knowledge drives
tactics. While you are executing you will need to prioritize learning from your
customer and your macroforces environment in real time, because the busi­
ness environment today is shifting and evolving so quickly. When insights
arise, they arrive from this learning- and customer-focused feedback loop.
From there, we have shown you how to plan in the Vision Layer, and now we
will discuss the key components of successful execution to round out the
surface layer of the EMF, which allows you to deliver optimal reliability and
ongoing innovation around your customer experience.
107

108
DIGITAL SENSEA triangle depicting the success layer: execution, where its vertex are representing strategy, data, and tactics. The sides of the triangle are representing purpose, people, and process. A circles inside the triangle is representing data fed iteration.

Figure 7.1 The Success Layer: Execution
The remainder of this book will be about executing and ways to
continue improving the digital sense of your entire team on a daily basis,
so they can run the cycle of learn, plan, do as a lean, mean, customer-
centric machine.
Success is an ongoing journey, and never a destination. It is a marathon
run in daily sprints! In the world of business today, you are truly only as good
as your most recent iteration. The customer is all powerful and loyal to needs
above all else. You don’t want to be the next Yahoo! or Blackberry. (LOL at
Yahoo!, again) Legacy matters only if that legacy is continually built upon
putting the customer center to your decision-making, and using your people
and processes to create holistic data that can be reﬁned to feed all future
iterations. As the architect of your customer experience, you will use the
success layer to implement your purpose-focused social business strategy with
human-centric tactics, and small data (measuring what is valued) versus big
data (valuing what can be measured), to yield relevant audience intelligence.
Relevant intelligence can help you iterate your performance media and your
marketing plan to achieve your stated business objectives.
The Success Layer begins with executing your social business strategy.
There are a handful of key execution elements to your social business strat­
egy, which include your business strategy, marketing strategy (from the

109
The Success LayerA triangle depicting the strategy node of the EMF success layer, where the triangle is representing strategy. A circles inside the triangle is representing business marketing content audience intelligence.

Figure 7.2 The Strategy Node of the EMF Success Layer
Vision Layer), content strategy, and audience intelligence (data) strategy
(Figure 7.2).
Volumes of work and several great operational frameworks exist around
the larger and highly researched concept of social business and developing a
social business strategy. We will mention a few of them below for initial
context; however, we will keep this chapter as common sense as possible,
with some practical exercises to help you understand and execute a content
rich and engaging social business strategy.
One resource we are excited to support and be contributors to is The
Digital Continuum.1 Originated by Universal Mind and launched in late
2016, the Digital Continuum has combined many of the industry’s digital
best practices into a map of what it would look like within a single organi­
zation. Human-Centered Design, the Scaled Agile Framework, the Compet­
ing Values Framework, and Continuous Delivery are just a few of the best
practices that make up this mapping of a digital organization in its ideal state.
We are excited to provide future derivatives of our digital sense thought
leadership and the Experience Marketing Framework to this resource, in
complement to this amazing effort of best practices. This mapping allows
organizations to move beyond the theoretical and into a real example that
they can use as a blueprint. We encourage you to bookmark the site today
and sign up for their newsletter/drip list.
Your social business strategy goes end-to-end from mission and values to
DevOps, deployment, and it encompasses how you communicate, how you

110
DIGITAL SENSE
deploy, and how you drive toward your major business objectives. Social
business strategy is a prominent focus in the area of business transformation
these days because in the past several years digital and social technologies have
reduced the cost of communication by orders of magnitude. All organizations
are nothing more than hives of people communicating and collaborating to
execute business processes “work.”
Prior to digital and social technologies, collaboration and innovation
were slow and expensive. Today, however, if (and it’s a big IF) an organiza­
tion can learn how and when to use them, collaboration can be inexpensive
and innovation cycles can happen rapidly. Since every company and every
industry is dealing with a customer who has unprecedented access to infor­
mation and choice, becoming a digitally transformed social business is an
imperative operational strategy, upon which you can layer the EMF to pro­
duce world-class customer experiences.
What Is a Social Business?
A social business is one built upon a foundation of learning, growing and a
strategy that starts by asking, “What people and environment must we have
to achieve our objectives?” and “What processes must we excel at to deliver
value to our customers and meet our business and ﬁnancial objectives?” It
also asks (as you did at length in the Insight Layer), “What do our customers
value?” and “What do our shareholders expect?”
If you are looking for another great resource to help you map your social
business strategy (Figure 7.3), you can check out the team at
LeaderNetworks.com for some great ideas on how to build your social busi­
ness value chain from development to social selling to delivery.2
Lastly, a great must-read article by Christopher Rollyson goes in-depth
on the most common “Social Business Strategy Use Cases.”3 And it will help
you quickly assess where in the Social Business Life Cycle of transformation
your company is currently residing and what steps are most relevant to take
for continued evolution. The most immediately relevant value from this piece
will be for chief data ofﬁcers (CDOs), chief marketing ofﬁcers (CMOs), chief
compliance ofﬁcers (CCOs), and CEOs, to reﬂect on which choices they are
facing today to either improve ROI or simply remain relevant in volatile
markets moving forward.

Figure 7.3
111

112
DIGITAL SENSE
Begin with the End in Mind
Designing the most practical elements of your social business strategy, as it
relates to your customer experience and marketing efforts, begins with the
end in mind. You will need to look at your business objectives and ﬁgure out
what you stand for and where your company is headed. You really need to
envision all of the ways that social media can help your business. Social media
is not just for marketers. Your customer service should be socially activated.
Your sales team should be activated with social to help them build relation­
ships with your prospects. Your HR team should be activated with social, to
help bring in the top talent that isn’t actively looking for a job. Your opera­
tions team and any other team that is customer facing should be looking for
ways to integrate social within their department, channel, or product.
Our friends at Altimeter Group produce some amazing thought leader­
ship and research around the current and future state of social business, and
you should subscribe to their newsletter and webinars if you are newer to (or
in the middle of) the process of social business transformation and looking for
best practices and benchmarking tools.4 Their infographic (Figure 7.4) on
social business is about as good as it gets.5
• Clear Business Objectives: without them, you don’t know what you’re
shooting for.
• Clear Vision: without it, you don’t know where you’re going
• Buy-in from the C-Suite: without it, you can’t get started.
• Strategic Road Map: without it, your organization’s social business ini­
tiatives won’t align with your organization’s business goals.
• Establish Guidelines and Processes: without them, your social media
team may tell someone to “cc get a clue.”
• Build and Train Your Team: without doing that, you’ll get the wrong
people on the bus.
• Invest in the Right Technologies: without doing this, you’ll end up
buying the newest fandangled technology, which doesn’t serve any real
business goal.
Once you ﬁgure out your objectives, use your data and analytics for
insights. Use those insights to help you map your content strategy and your
audience intelligence strategy. Almost every ﬁber of your day-to-day activity

Figure 7.4
113

114
DIGITAL SENSE
will be inﬂuenced or impaired by the presence or lack of these two things,
your content strategy and your targeted audiences.
It is important to distinguish content strategy from content marketing.
The easiest way to think about this is content strategy is like the blueprint to
a new custom-built house, and content marketing is like the tools you will
use to build it. Each of these serves important but completely different
purposes.
Similarly, audience intelligence strategy is focused primarily on the
activity of deﬁning the processes by which you will collect, measure, and
make sense of the “small data” that you value. Audience intelligence does not
imply the buzzword of big data strategy where you collect and measure every
data point imaginable just because you can.
In his book Small Data, Martin Lindstrom talks about the tiny clues that
uncover huge trends and emphasizes numerous use cases, from Lego to
McDonalds and Euro-Disney, that illustrate the power of blending hard
analytics data with direct ethnographic research. This allows you to laser in
on the metrics that most impact your results within each customer persona.
In 2016 the average shopper required 28 brand interactions before
making a purchase decision, according to aggregated client data gathered
from interviews with the founders of GeniusMonkey.com, a program­
matic platform technology provider.6 Also, the average shopper spends
only 5 percent of their time online searching and 95 percent of their time
engaging with content. You can understand then, why success at the level
of execution requires that a sound content and audience intelligence
strategy (blueprint) of how you will build and deploy your messaging.
You also must measure its impact across the customer journey, and across
every department in your company, with documented and clear processes
for governance in place.
Measuring what matters is the key at this layer. The integration of the
orbiting Operational-Learn, Plan, Do Loop (Figure 7.5) as a rapid way to
optimize reliability, and the Innovation-Discover, Design, Deploy Loop to
operationalize new insights ensures that you will hone in on the most relevant
data to make the most impactful iterations as you execute on the current and
future strategies. Below, we will take a deeper look at how you can customize
and utilize these interlocking loops, as you execute on a day-in and day-out
basis.

The Success Layer
115
Loops, Love, and ROI
As an organizational leader and marketer, your job is often reduced to the
qualitative metric of making customers L-O-V-E your brand, while being
judged by the quantitative metrics of sales, proﬁts, and ROI. The challenge of
innovating and simultaneously providing a positive state of reliability in the
customer experience has many of our clients tripping over each other or in a
codependent relationship between the marketing, IT, and operations silos,
which ultimately causes breakdowns in achieving the desired results while
internal frustrations mount. This effect will be compounded further in the
coming years as platform fragmentation and disintermediation continue to
increase at unprecedented rates of speed. The layers and loops model
(Figures 7.5 and 7.6) with the EMF are an attempt to solve this problem.
These two loops interlocked in orbit (on horizontal and vertical planes),
ensure that there is no need for a matched cadence between your cycles of
innovation and day-to-day execution. In this architecture, a renewable and
prioritized dynamic to operationalize future innovations within your existing
customer experience is possible while you continue to deliver your existing
processes to your customer.
The Operational Loop will be applied to each discipline area for which
you are executing and seeking to create a greater contribution impact to the
overall customer experience. You will have dozens of these across the enter­
prise, each with their own data measures and KPIs, which ultimately roll up
Figure 7.5 Orbiting Loops Inﬂuenced by Buckminster Fuller’s Theory
on Orbiting in Love

116
DIGITAL SENSE
Figure 7.6 The Operational Loop: Execution Reliability
into the overall domain-level strategies and department-level KPIs. Within
this horizontal plane, there may be several micronodes that management
implements as milestone checkpoints between the primary nodes of Learn,
Plan, Do to further illustrate the process by which your team will ultimately
deliver increased reliability over time within each discipline.
As we mentioned earlier, you will, without doubt, discover opportu­
nities for innovation from insights gained while executing. Depending on
the maturity of your business and industry, you will be able to invest in
these insights in varying degree and with varying priority. However, the
key thing is that you have a model by which you understand and can
communicate to all the stakeholders. You will set out to create predictable
cycles of innovation, and operationalize those innovations into the same
execution layer, that you have set up to manage the customer experience
consistently.
In Figure 7.7, you notice the Innovation Loop overlay with its major
nodes of Discover, Design, and Deploy and its micronode milestones that
can be customized in number to ﬁt within whichever innovation methodol­
ogy and process you subscribe. For example, if you were using a lean startup
methodology for innovation, you would likely consider the micronode
number one as “ideation,” number two as “early validation,” number three as
“front end prototyping,” and so on.

117
The Success Layer
Figure 7.7 The Innovation Loop
It is both an offensive and defensive strategy to build the internal model
and infrastructure to listen to the voice of the internal customer (your
employee base), as it relates to insights and ideas for new market opportuni­
ties. Using the EMF to plug in your lean methodology and agile design
processes will give you a powerful yet ﬂexible model by which you can create
more frequent cycles of innovation.
A great example from recent years of a company that has done this bril­
liantly is Mercer. When Julio Portalatin took over as CEO in 2012, the
company was turning 37 years old. Mercer is a nearly $4.5 billion/year,

118
DIGITAL SENSE
wholly owned subsidiary of Marsh & McLennan Companies (NYSE: MMC)
and operates in 140 countries as a leading global consultancy that helps ﬁrms
maximize the health, wealth, and careers of their most precious asset, their
people.
With more than 20,000 employees, this company was not in any way what
you would consider to be a nimble startup, yet under Julio’s leadership, it has
been able to innovate brilliantly and continue to disrupt itself. They have ach­
ieved this by putting processes and business units in place, like the Mercer
Innovation Hub and its internal Global Innovation Challenge launched in 2014
under the leadership of Partner, Jo-Anne Bloch.
The Mercer Innovation Hub received more than 200 ideas from people
across the enterprise in its inaugural challenge. A small number of these
ideas were selected through a rigorous vetting process using lean methodol­
ogy. A diverse innovation team was formed to take these ideas forward to
commercialization.
Along the way some ideas progressed, others were dropped, and new ideas
emerged. Some have become services that have migrated from ideation and
validation through to incubation and soft launch. They are in the market and
available to clients, today as Mercer Match
TM and Mercer Candidate Care
TM.
Mercer continues to maintain a pipeline of new innovation, through this
challenge annually. Mercer has even invested in a dedicated CMO for the
Innovation Hub as of 2016. She works directly with the innovation teams and
reports into the C-Suite of Mercer. The role is to help complete the full
commercialization potential of its new offerings and to ensure these can ﬂow
seamlessly into the overall Mercer customer experience. Mercer executives and
managers continue to draw inspiration and insights by looking at external forces
such as VC capital ﬂows and customer needs.
Mercer Candidate Care was developed based on industry research that
identiﬁed for every open job requisition, roughly 219 people applied. Since
inherently only a handful of people will be contacted to interview, and only
one person will end up with the actual employment, they noticed signiﬁcant
statistical data that brand dilution and loss of equity was occurring in many
companies due to a lack of communication and “care” to the candidates that
did not make the cut.
Think about the problem they discovered this way. Brand XYZ has rav­
ing fan customers and has built a tremendous amount of brand equity over

119
The Success Layer
the years through investment into all the right channels of customer com­
munication and experience. Bob Smith is a loyal brand advocate and notices
that XYZ is expanding or opening up a job in his market for which he is
qualiﬁed in his mind. He begins to feel the excitement as he mentally envi­
sions what it would be like to ﬁnally work for XYZ after being such a raving
fan for all of these years. He completes the online application process and hits
submit. Days, weeks, and months go by and he hears nothing. There are no
personal portals or people following up with him to allow him to know where
he stands in the process. All he has to go on is the autoresponder (DO NOT
REPLY) e-mail he received acknowledging his resume and cover letter sub­
mittal at step one.
This common occurrence was happening hundreds of times per job listing
and causing companies from telecom to consumer electronics to inadvertently
turn raving fan customers into lost souls who felt shunned by their beloved
brand, and nobody had built a solution to solve it. Now when a company
leverages Mercer Candidate Care in its hiring process the other 219 people that
applied for each job not only received personalized communication throughout
the processes but also were made aware of resources such as Mercer Match
TM
so that Mercer can help its client companies ﬁnd other placements for those
candidates outside of the organization as a valued added service.
Mercer’s innovative efforts have taken months off of the average hiring
cycle for candidates out of work and the beneﬁts have been accretive to their
clients’ brand equity versus dilutive. Mercer Match (download the app free at
MercerMatch.com) was launched as an Android and iOS application that
utilizes gamiﬁcation to identify key persona traits, skills, and strengths and
uses algorithms to match speciﬁc talent efﬁciently to jobs and cultures where
they will best thrive. Through the blend of the internal culture of keeping the
customer central in the decision-making process and the investment made to
commercialize the best ideas through the Innovation Hub, Mercer has been
able to open up new markets for their methodology while keeping ahead of
the disruptive forces and capital formations that are impacting the future of
HR, recruiting, and personnel management.
The EMF with its layers and loops works as a ﬂexible and malleable
resource. It will allow you to make decisions based upon your overall assess­
ments, knowledge, and plans derived from the Insights and Vision Layers.
Depending on how mature your business is within your industry and life
cycle, you will put a different weight on how much emphasis and depth you

120
DIGITAL SENSE
leverage the operational loop and innovation loops. EMF is also ﬂexible to
constraints like budgets, bandwidth, and human capital to invest in light or
deep research and development and commercialization efforts. EMF also
ensures that you have a common picture and model for your teams to work
with, when explaining where in the process new innovations are, what
receives prioritization as it relates to resources, and which domains of the
business will be impacted once execution is deployed.
Optimizing the Operational Loop
In business, as in life, there is no way to stop or slow things down so that you
can get to work on something new. In fact, our goal is that you will begin to
see your business in these layers and loops more clearly, so that you can calm
down and speed up.
The easiest node for anyone to enter this framework is actually within the
Success Layer and speciﬁcally, under the node of Learn. This is primarily
because, regardless of your current internal organizational alignment around
customer experience, you are currently executing a marketing and sales
strategy today. This gives you an automatic list of areas where insights can
and will be generated and where learning can occur.
By beginning with your current operation, you can run a series of simple,
but important, audits that will uncover areas and gaps that can begin to be
iterated. The audits serve as a catalyst of mini data points and proof points of
concern, as you make the case for a deeper annual planning cycle to dive
deeper into the Insight and Vision Layers.
Humanizing your tactics starts with a series of audits across your current
digital universe. We will cover some of the high level areas to consider tack­
ling below, that historically have shown to be great fodder for further dis­
covery and organization commitment. We have also provided some resources
or quick exercises you can use to run these audits.
Audit 1: ROT Content Audit
One of the most common issues we ﬁnd with brands today, as it relates to
their digital presence, is that they have invested heavily in content creation
and digital asset creation over the past few years under the idea that “more is

121
The Success Layer
better.” Thus, in many companies, this has resulted in an unnecessary
amount of digital and ﬁnancial waste.
Even some of the largest and most popular brands—from Starbucks
to Disney—have found that their digital presence is ﬁlled with tons of
ROT. ROT is an acronym for Redundant, Out of date, and Trivial
content. ROT is content that lives in the universe of your digital experi­
ence, but serves little to no relevant value to the customer you are seeking
to engage.
Think about your social media feeds ﬁlled with pictures of people’s
food and selﬁes and completely useless drivel or clickbait. How many
times have you considered deleting your Facebook account only to con­
tinue to persist with it? We (all humans) crave better content, not more
content.
The Content Marketing Institute (CMI) surveys show that only 37 per­
cent of companies in 2015 had a documented content strategy while only
10 percent of companies could tell whether the content was effective at
driving increased performance.7 All of this activity leads to piles and piles of
nonperforming content and over the past few years companies have
responded by creating more, using the proverbial “throw spaghetti at the wall
and see what sticks” approach. This resulted in an estimated $1 billion in
wasted investment related to content creation in 2015 according to CMI.
The following exercise was developed by Anna Hrach at Ethology and is
a powerful but simple exercise you can perform immediately to rid your
digital presence and website of ROT.8
R=Redundant (overly wordy and duplicate content)
O=Outdated (expired offers, broken links, out-of-date content and
materials)
T=Trival (not relevant to your brand or customers, doesn’t speak in the
brand voice or tone, doesn’t reﬂect your brand values or adhere to brand
guidelines)
Redundant content examples are most common across channels where
they are not made to feel native to the interface. For example: A blog post
around a certain topic should not be copied and pasted into your Facebook
feed, and a piece of creative around a promotion on Instagram should not be

122
DIGITAL SENSE
reused without thoughtful creative on LinkedIn, Snapchat, Facebook, or
Twitter. Coordinated campaigns across channels requires coordinated cre­
ative that ties everything together but does not lack a relevant and native feel
to the user experience expectation of each channel. A great visual using beer
to explain (Figure 7.8) context before content helps illustrate this to help
improve your digital sense around what would make content feel native and
not redundant across popular channels.9
For a great manual on how to create engaging and native content that is
not redundant across channels, we highly recommend Gary Vaynerchuk’s
Jab, Jab, Jab, Right Hook.10
Outdated content is extremely common in large brands and small brands
alike. It is primarily a result of a lack of proper governance. Out-of-date
content is harder to spot than redundant or trivial content. It can be an old
phone number or extension that no longer works. It is a reference and bio/
headshot of a staff member who is no longer part of the organization. It is the
events that are over and never got removed from your event calendar. It is
the products mentioned on other pages or blog posts that have been dis­
continued. This is the content you will ﬁnd deep within pages or subsections
of your site.
One approach is to archive content such as news and events after an
agreed amount of time in automated way at the time of publication. This
removes the content from site search and navigation but allows it to stay
available for those that need access to it for other internal reasons.
What about content with a less obvious end date? The best approach is
to establish a policy to enforce content review on a frequent basis be it quar­
terly or semiannually depending on the volume you are producing. This will
make sure content producers check their content to ensure it is not out of
date. Another way to automate this internal auditing is to use the last modi­
ﬁed date in your CMS to trigger an e-mail telling the person who created the
page to check it. You should cc the department distribution list and admin as
well so that it is dependent on the system, not an individual, if that original
author has left the company and nobody else is supporting the content. In
either case your content needs ﬂagging.
Since content that produces little trafﬁc is also less valuable, you could
automate a notiﬁcation based upon trafﬁc ﬂows to notify the producers when
it has failed to reach a minimum trafﬁc baseline or dwell time. Be careful with

123
The Success LayerFigure depicting social media explained with beer by jbertho.com.

Figure 7.8 Social Media Explained with Beer by jbertho.com

124
DIGITAL SENSE
this, however, since the trafﬁc and dwell time are soft metrics and not great
indicators for all types of content as it relates to their value.
Trivial content is the hardest to deal with typically because there can be
disparate opinions within the team as to what is trivial. This is where having a
clear and up-to-date document on brand guidelines that includes voice and
tone parameters is valuable. The other three most common criteria by which
you should assess trivial content are below:
• Analytics (trafﬁc, dwell time, etc.)
• Users’ top tasks (that you want them to complete)
• Business objectives (How it maps to achieving your top three)
You can start by looking at how much trafﬁc the content is getting.
Remember however, that this is not the greatest indicator because we have
seen a frozen enchilada product company think that homemade Mexican
food recipes were a great piece of content on their site because it drove tons of
trafﬁc. However, none of that trafﬁc wanted to buy frozen Mexican meals, so
conversions were next to nothing. This is why the assessment of how that
content is doing related to the top tasks you want them to take because of
that content and which business objectives it is mapping to are equally
important markers. It is trivial if it doesn’t have all three and if it has high
trafﬁc but not the other two is potentially decreasing the ﬁndability of more
relevant content.
Some content that is trivial must be there for compliance reasons, so not
all of it needs to be removed. You just want to always ensure that ROT
content is not decreasing the ranking or ﬁndability of your most relevant and
engaging stuff. Flagging these for review and instituting governance around
how content is published and reviewed gives you a good systemized approach
to managing the content monster and ROT.
DIGITAL BIT: For an easy to use ROT content tem­
plate (.xls) from our friend Anna Hrach you can visit
www.DigitalSen.se/ROT.

125
The Success Layer
Base Content vs. Peripheral Content
Sujan Patel, a growth and content hacker, offers us this advice: think about
your content in the terms of base content and peripheral content.
• Base Content: is what your niche is all about. It’s what you do and care
about.
• Peripheral Content: is what your audience cares about.
From his e-book, Content Marketing Playbook, which is a goldmine full
of content marketing nuggets, Sujan gives this example, of you owning a
cooking school that has a niche blog that focuses on baking. Your base con­
tent will be recipes for cupcakes and other content related directly to baking.
Your peripheral content is all about what your audience may like, such as
reviews of baking equipment and ingredients, cookbooks, baking events, and
kitchen apparel, along with diet and health tips. With peripheral content, you
are putting yourself in the mind of your customer and giving them stuff that
suits their interests.11
Audit 2: Brand Guidelines Audit
A deep dive into how to develop your brand guidelines is outside of the scope
of this book, but KISSMetrics offers a great article on why you should do a
brand audit and a simple way to start.12
Audit 3: Heuristic Audit
A heuristic audit will help you uncover what is working and not working on
your site as it relates to overall usability for your intended audience. It will
identify the short and longer term ﬁxes and areas of concern as you prioritize
the touch points you will invest in to drive the most impact.
DIGITAL BIT: You can download a Heuristic Audit
Checklist at DigitalSen.se/heuristicaudit.

126
DIGITAL SENSE
Good Governance Guidelines
What rules and governance do you need for your content strategy? The ideal
content continuum will look something like Figure 7.9 below:
The most basic and powerful rules for good governance around your
content strategy and publishing efforts are to establish the following and
document them for clear awareness, training, and reinforcement within your
teams.
• When are the scheduled cycles for planning and updates?
• When, how, and to what metrics do we assess how content is 
performing? 
• When do we audit our workﬂows and processes?
• When and how often do we update our process?
• When (and by what criteria) does content get prioritized for creation, 
promotion, and featured publication? 
As we conclude this chapter, we want to encourage all of you to think of
yourselves as designers—practical, creative problem solvers. The reality of
what great designers do is they solve problems using a variety of tactics and
tools through a process of discovery, planning, creativity, and execution.
Figure 7.9 Content Strategy Continuum

127
The Success LayerThree intersecting circles denoting desirability, viability, and feasibility, respectively. The common region of these intersecting circles is representing innovation.

Figure 7.10 Design Thinking’s Sweet Spot Graphic
Design thinking is human-centered and integrates the needs of the cus­
tomer, the possibilities of technology, and the requirements for business
success. Figure 7.10 shows the sweet spot where innovation in any process
occurs and design thinkers never lose sight of this and use the EMF to help
deﬁne the problem and opportunities more effectively so that they can focus
their energy and resources on ﬁnding the solution in the center.
As you move on to the remaining sections of this book and begin to
build your ultimate technology stack and arsenal of tactics, we will sunset this
chapter and section with a simple summary of how you can “DO” design
thinking, even if you have never considered yourself to be a design thinker.
The EMF will support each and every one of these functions as a
framework, so you will be well on your way to hacking your way to more
efﬁcient optimizations around your day-to-day efforts and overall customer
experience.
Design thinking operates in three spaces: Inspiration, Ideation, and
Implementation. The EMF mirrors this with its Insights Layer, Vision Layer,
and Success Layer. The design thinker approach to the Insight Layer (Inspi­
ration) would be to gather insights, empathize with the customer, deﬁne the
core problem, and reframe it. At the Vision Layer (Ideation) the design
thinker would then brainstorm to generate ideas around how to achieve the
stated goal, uncover unexpected areas for exploration, prototype a solution,
and gather feedback to validate and iterate design requirements. Lastly, the

128
DIGITAL SENSE
design thinker would begin to implement at the Success Layer by making the
solution real, make it rain, test more ways to make it rain, and iterate.
There is a saying that you can approach the center of town from any
angle and it remains the center of town. You have now been armed with the
framework and mental models for how to design your organization and enroll
all stakeholders around the notion that a great customer experience is the one
metric that matters for continued growth and sustainability.
You know how to keep the Zombies at bay, and now it is time to show
you how to build the customized data and analytics platforms and tactical
plans to go obliterate your competition!
Takeaways from the Success Layer
What: At this layer you have implemented a process to optimize reli­
ability around your customer experience, and implemented repeatable
measurements of value and a culture of iteration based upon the Kaizen
philosophy of never-ending incremental daily improvement.
Who: Discipline leads, executive sponsor, agency partners, front line
teams, analytics department, and customer success team members.
How: Audience intelligence/analytics systems, voice of customer (VOC)
programs, performance media tactics, NPS/eNPS, detractor pipeline,
and ﬁnancial support
Why: The purpose of this layer is to meet your stated business objectives
on time and at/or under budget while creating a ﬂuid feedback and
feedforward loop for future planning and funds for continued
innovation.

Section III
Social Business
Strategies and
Tactics


8 Social Business
Strategy for
Marketing
A
s we dive into the tactics section of the EMF and help you level-up your
overall digital sense of the methodologies at your disposal—many of
which you are already deploying daily—we will again focus on the most
practical and pragmatic approach to integrating these disciplines (Figure 8.1).
Figure 8.1 EMF with Five Core Tactical Methodologies and the Tactics
Excerpt from Success Layer
131

132
DIGITAL SENSEA triangle depicting the tactics node of the EMF success layer, where the triangle is representing tactics. A circles inside the triangle is representing content strategy modern search UX/UI SEM/PPC social.

Figure 8.1 The Tactics Node of the EMF Success Layer
Much has been written on the topic of social media strategy. Many great
minds have conquered that subject. This book is more about customer
experience and social business permeating through your entire organization.
The fact is, we are marketing to humans in a digital world where everyone is
tethered to a mobile device and everyone has the attention span of a goldﬁsh.
Good luck!
Case Study: The $1 Billion Dollar Growth Hack
In many C-suites even today, social media is an afterthought. A tac­
tic tacked on at the end of the campaign, an “oh! by the way . . .”
That doesn’t work. This is less the case in 2017, but it still amazes us
how social media (what Gary Vaynerchuk appropriately refers to as
“the current state of the Internet”) still confuses so many C-suite
leaders.
While at Symantec, Travis was the global social media strategist
for the Norton brand, working directly under Mia Dand, head of
Global Social Media and Analytics, and now, the CEO of Light­
house3; and Rhonda Shantz, the head of Consumer Marketing for
Norton. However, Travis was able to work with more than

133
Social Business Strategy for Marketing
11 different silos within Norton and Symantec, to help be a change
agent. That’s the equivalent of a running back running for a touch­
down in American Football without any offensive line.
One of the major problems that Norton Antivirus had was a
huge churn. Each year, a Norton Antivirus 60-day trial software was
placed on hundreds of millions of original equipment manufacturer
(OEM) equipment, such as Toshiba, Compaq, Dell, and other
desktop and laptop computers. After the 60-day trial, more than 280
million demos were uninstalled or expired. 280,000,000 UNIN­
STALLED OR EXPIRED SOFTWARE TRIALS! That is a huge
number. As Trump might say, YUUUUGE.
Travis thought, “Wow, if we could move the needle even 1 per­
cent, that would be an additional 2.8 million paying customers, at
an average of $64 per sale. That would be new net business revenue
of $179 million. That’s a lot of cheese.”
First they needed to understand why the software trial wasn’t
performing as well, so Travis acted like a customer, installed it on
his laptop, and waited the 60 days to see what was going on.
While experiencing this trial, Travis noticed that it was nearly
invisible the ﬁrst 30 days of the trial. Then on day 31, it started
giving you FUD (fear, uncertainty, and doubt). Trial users would
see messages like:
• “You have 30 days to renew Norton Antivirus to protect your
stuff.”
• “Your computer is in jeopardy of becoming a zombie computer;
your trial ends in 15 days!”
• “Your whole family is going to die a violent death if you don’t
renew now!”
Okay, that last one was hyperbole. The point is, Norton was
trying to scare people into buying their product. Travis had an idea
of wrapping social shareable facts, tips, and the ability to share mes­
sages into the software trial. The hypothesis being, maybe people
(continued)

134
DIGITAL SENSE
(continued)
would ﬁnd more value and have an overall better customer experi­
ence. By weaving social media into their product through the lens of
customer experience, they tested adding more helpful messages and
changing the tone of the messaging from fear to added value. For
example:
Day 1: Welcome to Norton Antivirus. We help you protect
your stuff that matters. We are giving you a 60-day free
trial, instead of our normal 30-day trial.
Day 2: Norton has found over X number of viruses since 1982,
when Peter Norton founded Peter Norton Computing with
$30,000 and an IBM computer.
Day 3: Connect with Norton on Facebook & Twitter for tips
on how to protect your stuff!
Day 7: Norton discovered 87 new threats this week. Your com­
plimentary protection lasts 53 more days.
By changing the tone, during the initial beta test they had
increased conversions by a whopping 4.87 percent! After the initial
tests in messaging and imagery, they continued optimizing the mes­
saging and subsequently, the conversion percentage increased to
6.59 percent. Let’s do the math: 6.59 percent of 280,000,000 is
18,452,000 new conversions worth $1.36 billion. The testing was a
resounding success.
Abruptly in late 2012, the Symantec board decided to ﬁre
Enrique Salem, CEO since 2009. They then hired Steve Bennett,
who eventually called for a complete reorganization of the company.
Under Salem, Norton and Symantec were essentially run as two
different business units that operated independently. During the
reorg, entire organizations were moved or dissolved.
Robert Enderle, of CIO.com, reviewed the reorganization and
noted that Bennett was following the General Electric model of being
product-focused instead of customer-focused. He concluded,

135
Social Business Strategy for Marketing
“Eliminating middle management removes a large number of highly
paid employees. This will tactically improve Symantec’s bottom line
but reduce skills needed to ensure high-quality products in the long
term.”1
In March 2014, Symantec ﬁred Steve Bennett from his CEO
position and named Michael Brown as interim president and chief
executive. Including the interim CEO, Symantec has had 3 CEOs in
less than two years.2
The funny thing is due to the reorganization, Symantec never
fully rolled out the software with revamped social messaging. The
talent needed to make it happen was let go. The data on conversion
increases was documented, but lost in the noise of cutting to proﬁt­
ability. Digital sense, anyone, anyone? Nope.
The lesson: many balls can get dropped and opportunities can
be missed when reorganizations happen and massive layoffs occur
without an attempt at a transferal of knowledge. It was only a billion
dollars or so, though. No big deal, right?
Appropriate Campaign Goals
In marketing, public relations, and communications, there are many different
campaign goals that your organization could be trying to accomplish. Are
you trying to build more awareness? Are you trying to launch a new product?
Are you trying to grow your audience? For the sake of simplicity, the EMF
should be used to help tie your social media marketing goals and other mar­
keting goals directly into your achievement of your major business objectives.
At the most basic level your goals as a marketer should be to:
1. Increase conversions
2. Generate revenue
3. Increase market share
4. Customer acquisition/retention

136
DIGITAL SENSE
SOCIAL MEDIA MARKETING CHECKLIST
Step 1: Do a complete social media audit.
◆Which networks are you currently active on?
◆Are your networks optimized (photo and cover images, bio, URL,
etc.)?
◆Which networks are currently bringing you the most value related to
the four KPIs above?
◆How do your proﬁles compare to your competitors’ proﬁles?
Step 2: Identify your ideal personas (you have heard this before and here
it is again).
If you don’t know who your ideal customer is, how are you
going to market to them? We gave you tips and a template on this
earlier, but Hubspot also has a quick and dirty persona generating
tool at MakeMyPersona.com. It will walk you through a bunch
of questions and then generate a Word document for you.
Step 3: Identify key success metrics for tracking and reporting.
You need to be able to deﬁne your success ahead of time. By
mapping out and identifying your metrics ahead of time, you can
begin working on optimizing those areas of your marketing cam­
paigns. It will help you think about and ask the right questions. Data
don’t lie, baby. A few metrics worth measuring are:
◆Conversion rate
◆Time spent on website
◆Reach
◆Brand mentions
◆Sentiment
◆Total shares
◆Customer acquisition costs (CPC)
◆Likes/fans
◆Clicks

137
Social Business Strategy for Marketing
◆Backlinks to your website
◆E-mails added to your lists
There are many other metrics out there that may be relevant to
your business. Choose wisely and remember to measure what is val­
ued more than you value what is measurable.
Step 4: Create a Dominating Content Marketing Strategy.
Content in the proper context is king. And it really is a driving
force to affect business performance when you have adopted the
philosophy of creating and curating informative, helpful content for
your ideal customer. In fact, content is VITAL to your business.
Content shows up in several ways not limited to the categories
below:
◆Video
◆Images/infographics
◆Text/articles/blog posts
◆Audio/podcasts
◆Links
◆Live events
◆Hiring processes and protocols
◆Paid media and advertisements
◆The social media posts of your employees and executives both per­
sonal and professional
DIGITAL BIT: We strongly recommend that you create
a content marketing calendar to help with your content
strategy and planning. A great tool to check out is
DivvyHQ.com. It will help you organize and schedule
your content in many ways.
There are many types of content out there, as you can see
in the following graphic from Michael King, @iPullRank

138
DIGITAL SENSE
Figure 8.2
(Figure 8.2). So, you’ll want to mix and match it up. Keep it
fresh. Keep it relevant.
Step 5: Invest in Social Media Marketing Tools & Technologies.
Modern marketers use tools to help them in their daily efforts.
As you will see in our accompanying “Marketing Technology
Glossary” (available at www.digitalsen.se/mktgtools), there are hun­
dreds of categories of tools, which reference thousands of actual
tools.
Some of the general types of social media tools that you may
have:
◆Monitor social media conversation.
◆Schedule your content
◆Discover & curate content.
◆Maximize your audience.
◆Interact with inﬂuencers and customers.
◆Measure results

139
Social Business Strategy for Marketing
DIGITAL BIT: We aren’t going to go into all of the
tools in this book, because they are always changing.
However, if you go to DigitalSen.se/mktgtools, there is a
curated collection of some of Travis, Chris, and Kevin
Mullett’s favorite tools. We promise to update this fre­
quently and welcome your comments and crowd­
curation as you become aware and test kickass stuff in
your daily efforts.
Anyone who has been to a social media marketing conference
should know Kevin Mullett, @kmullett. He and Travis are con­
stantly trying to one-up one another on their tools. They ﬁnally
decided to quit competing and work together. You get the beneﬁt of
that collaboration with a frequently updated Digital Bit resource.
Step 6: Track, Analyze, and Optimize your Efforts.
This is key when it comes to succeeding on social media. Even
the most seasoned social marketer will fail; that’s to be expected.
Testing, experimenting, and optimizing campaigns are part of the
fun. It might seem basic, but tracking your results, analyzing the
data, and optimizing is essential to excel in this space. Let the data
ﬂow through you.
Social media strategy has been written about ad nauseam in the
past decade. Many organizations still haven’t ﬁgured out how to
value it across the enterprise and see it as more than just a silo of
tactics in the marketing department. Hopefully, this simple audit
checklist will help you ﬁnally make the plunge to becoming a more
socially integrate business.
Content Marketing and Paid Media Ampliﬁcation
We could talk forever on content marketing, but there are plenty of great
books and blogs out there. ContentMarketingInstitute.com is one of the best

140
DIGITAL SENSE
resources on that topic. QuickSprout has a great deﬁnitive guide on content
marketing, as well.3
We aren’t going to teach you anything that they won’t; however, we can
teach you some sweet content marketing hacks. We will talk about some later
in this chapter in the social selling section, and it rings true with any great
piece of content.
Can you relate to the following? You create a magical piece of content for
your ideal targeted persona, you post it on your blog, and all you get is
crickets chirping. Ever have that happen? It’s infuriating. Well, if you take
that same piece of content, and put a bit of paid media behind it—speciﬁ­
cally Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Pinterest, Instagram, or even Reddit
ads—you have a chance to get that content in front of exactly the right
people. If you have built out your personas, you can target those exact people
with advertising. That’s one more reason why building out personas is an
important task.
One trick for social marketing is creating an idea that can break through
culture, giving you an unfair advantage on earned media reach. Basically,
making an idea that can be digested and pushed around the Internet with
headlines. The key to virality in 2017 is still headlines, not brand pages.
Headlines are the artifact that people can exchange and share. Put the right
paid dollars against something and build an idea that journalists can’t resist.
Many brands have found out that the easiest way to break through and
amplify what they do in social media is by designing the idea to travel
through all channels of media. Designing the idea through a process of writ­
ing the headline ﬁrst. They’ve ﬁgured out that people rarely share posts from
a brand page—what they share most is headlines and links to trusted media
sources. The anti-affectionate term for much of this content is clickbait, but
when it is done strategically and with relevance, it is extremely powerful.
Travis sometimes calls this PR hacking.
Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC) is one brand that we’ve been keeping an
eye on that has really proved themselves to be skillful at this media jujitsu,
with back-to-back headlines about weirdo products that smell like chicken.
Nail polish that tastes like chicken (proving that they’re still ﬁnger-licking
good) and sunscreen that smells like a bucket of extra crispy. The latter was
able to garner over 90 blog posts from medium to large publishers in just
6 hours following the release. These products don’t even have to be real or

141
Social Business Strategy for Marketing
commercially available! Only two bottles of the nail polish were made, but
that’s enough to get a picture, and it makes for a headline that journalists
can’t resist.4
HEADLINE: KFC’s Fried Chicken-Scented Sunscreen 
Will Keep Your Skin From Getting Crispy 
For when you want to make yourself smell
ﬁnger-lickin’ good
During the writing of this book, Travis visited Kansas City–based ad
agency, Barkley, where media hacking has become part of their
offering. “Our job is to bring our brand’s ideas to life in the real
world,” says Joe Cox, head of Consumer Engagement at Barkley.
“To do that, we have to have a deep understanding of what makes
media tick. It’s not just social, it’s the relationship of social, earned,
and paid together that will bring a modern idea to life.”
Barkley worked with Dairy Queen this past Valentine’s Day and
helped them with an idea to promote their February Valentine’s
Blizzard. It’s tough to break through the noise of V-day with a
product, so they built a story around it that made it interesting to
media. It wouldn’t just be a V-day Blizzard, but a Singles Blizzard.
This was based on data, which they had commissioned, saying that
2016 was the ﬁrst time in U.S. history when there were more single
people than married people.
HEADLINE: Dairy Queen Has Something Special For 
Singles This Valentine’s Day 
This headline has a lot more social equity in your feed than a picture
of a DQ Blizzard by itself. DQ trended nationally on Facebook &
Twitter within 12 hours of the release.5
“Things have so massively changed since Oreo did Dunk in the
Dark at the 2013 Super Bowl. Honestly, it’s time for brands to drop
(continued)

Real-Time Marketing isn’t dead, per se, but it’s deﬁnitely more saturated
now. That’s why putting social ampliﬁcation money against content that isn’t
even your own, but articles about how amazing you are from third parties,
works so well.
A great tool to check out that takes social listening, sentiment analysis,
and scoring with automation of the one-to-one communication of triage or
offers is Earshotinc.com. It can even recognize brand logos on clothing and so
on in pictures where the brand may or may not be mentioned. It scores
against relevance, risk, and sentiment and allows for a single dashboard to
automate your promotional and reactive responses in a highly personalized,
one-to-one way at scale.
(continued)
Real-Time Marketing. It’s over. You can’t break through anymore
and the juice isn’t worth the squeeze. Don’t be ambulance chasers of
real time events.” says Joe Cox, Head of Social Media at Barkley.
Joe continued, “Very few brands are able to be publishers.
That’s a ton of resources and money that I’d rather them spend on
updating their digital infrastructure or organizing their purchase
data. Brands can’t speak just to speak, but only need to speak when
they have something to say and then light that shit on ﬁre with really
speciﬁc targeted social ampliﬁcation.”
Barkley has a command center that they call Houston, which is
a wall of televisions and monitors that help them keep up with
what’s going on in real time with their brands. It’s quite impressive.
They have screens that show the sentiments for the various brands,
where you can click the sentiment, see where it is, and then respond.
For community management, it’s badass. They even have a screen
dedicated to the amount each emoji has been used that day. Not
surprisingly, the purple eggplant is used quite frequently. And the 
is typically used most often.
Barkley’s community managers aren’t just looking for that one
moment; they are tracking trending hashtags and their meaning,
what articles are trending, what’s in their community’s feeds, and
how they can be relevant.
142
DIGITAL SENSE

143
Social Business Strategy for Marketing
Another example of content ampliﬁcation, Mike “Jortsy” Gelphman,
CEO of the Disruption Institute, a mobile app and coding school in
Kansas City, puts on a yearly conference called Compute Midwest. This is
a premier event, but not many outside of the region know about it.
Kansas City? That’s right. Hailing from the ﬁrst city chosen for
Google Fiber, Compute Midwest is one of the world’s leading future-
focused tech conferences. More than 1,000 attendees exploring the tech­
nologies transforming tomorrow and learning how the world-class speak­
ers overcame enormous challenges to create breakthrough innovations.
Topics include self-driving cars, robots, space travel, and artiﬁcial
intelligence.
Since this is a great conference, Travis included it in an article on Inc.
magazine featuring seven other top tech conferences happening around the
world.6 Gelphman was then able to use that piece of content to build trust
and convince other people to come to his event. He was even able to leverage
it to gain additional sponsorship dollars. This conference has attracted some
of the world’s most innovative and inﬂuential people in tech over the past 5
years, including Robert Scoble, Alexis Ohanian, Stephen Wolfram, Cynthia
Breazeal, and John Underkofﬂer.
“I’ve been fortunate enough to speak all over the world, but what I found at
ComputeMidwest was something really special—entrepreneurship has a great
stage in KC thanks to this conference.”
—ALEXIS OHANIAN, COFOUNDER OF REDDIT
The key point here is this. It is better to have someone else talk about
how great you are than to blather to everyone about how great you think you
are. If you get a good piece of press, don’t just tweet it a couple of times and
share it on LinkedIn. Put some ad spend behind it and really target the
eyeballs of the people you want to see that content.
This is just one example of what you can do with paid media and con­
tent. Try to think outside the box a bit, and get eyes on some of your more
valuable content. Also, take that content and repost it on your site with a link
back the original work. Why? Because you can tag visitors with a retargeting
pixel and you can market to them all over the web. Keep in mind that
reposting content that was originally posted elsewhere won’t help you with
search rankings at all. But it will help you with amplifying the right content
to the right people, as you build custom advertising audiences, and then

144
DIGITAL SENSE
retargeting them later with Adroll, Facebook ads, or the Google Display
Network.
Case Study: Fort Collins Startup Week Goes Global on $2,500
Chris was able to leverage a strategy like this in 2014, when he and
his wife decided to create, brand, organize, and promote the ﬁrst ever
Fort Collins Startup Week with only 102 days to execute.7 At the
time not too many entrepreneurs or venture capitalists outside of
Colorado could point to Fort Collins on a map. The Snooks had
lived in the city for only 8 months and were on sabbatical, having
moved there from Southern California on a whim with no prior
contacts in the state. However, by creating a multipronged guerrilla-
content heavy marketing and sales strategy, they were able to attract
3,221 attendees from 16 states and the Commonwealth of Puerto
Rico in less than 102 days!
In 2015 they bested that effort with over 3,500 attendees from
25 states and 11 countries on ﬁve of the seven continents. To our
knowledge, no other regional startup week anywhere in the world
has attracted such a broadly dispersed audience of domestic and
international attendees. This was all done on a grassroots budget that
left less than $2,500 for total marketing spend each year.
It started with producing a SlideShare guide aggregating all of
the local resources and startup community players called “The
Deﬁnitive Guide to Fort Collins Startup Scene” (which got 24,709
organic unique views on Chris’s page8 and 16,500 views on
Brianne’s9).
The Snooks placed four paid PR national wires to announce the
event and also highlight key milestones of momentum through the
eReleases.com service to create media pickups nationally that could
be reshared. Against these third-party pickups they ran light retar­
geting and personally sent social media messages to each new fol­
lower as they came alive on the Fort Collins Startup Week Twitter

145
Social Business Strategy for Marketing
feed. They also leveraged ofﬂine efforts by recruiting more than 117
speakers and mentors to be part of the 5-day, 102-event festival. You
have heard of FOMO right? Fear. Of. Missing. Out. It was leveraged
to the hilt and made Fort Collins the place to be Memorial Day
weekend the last two years. The effort impressed Eric Schurenberg,
editor in chief of Inc. magazine, so much that he wrote about it in
his Editor’s Letter in July 2015’s issue “How They Do It In Flyover
Country!”10 Talk about some valuable earned media!
Modern Enterprise Search Marketing
We deﬁne modern search as follows from your customer’s perspective and
from your company’s perspective.
1. Your customer sees it as self-directed real-time problem solving on 
demand. 
2. You see it as the proper blend of SEO, SEM, local search, UI/UX,
Content Marketing, and Analytics to optimize the discovery and post
click engagement with potential customers in their time of need, to gar­
ner more trafﬁc and increase the volume of your potential opportunities
to generate revenue.
Search Engine Optimization (SEO)
Travis started in search engine optimization before it was a thing and well
before Google hit the scene. The under-30 reader just thought “there was
search before Google?” He intuitively knew, for example, that if you were a
plumber living in Kansas City, you should consider owning KCPlumber.
com. While selling yellow page advertising in the mid to late ‘90s, he started
consulted with businesses and working side by side with them to establish
their web presence.
In the beginning, SEO was a black hat cowboy’s uncharted Wild West.
There were so many ways to manipulate the search results, because the search
engines were nowhere near the sophisticated tools we’re used to today. For

146
DIGITAL SENSE
example, Travis quickly ﬁgured out that if you wanted a webpage to rank for
a term like “Britney Spears” all you needed to do was put the words “Britney
Spears” in a <div> that was the same color as the background. Then you
could move that <div> off the edge of the margin, so that only the search
engines would ﬁnd it. Simple hacks like this ruled the SEO industry for the
ﬁrst years, until the search engines smartened up and began rolling out pen­
alties to websites breaking their published guidelines. Those days are long
gone. And Travis hung up his black hat long ago. He now wears a more gray­
ish hat, typically with a KC Royals logo on it.
Search engine optimization has evolved into an entirely different beast
today. With all of the algorithm changes and rules by Google, it’s no longer
about gaming the engines. It’s truly about meeting the customer at the center
of their intention as they query. With Google’s Penguin, Panda, Humming­
bird, and other major search engine algorithm updates, your site’s search
engine rankings can plummet overnight if you aren’t up to speed on the latest
mandates from our Google Master Overlord.
The key to success with the search engines these days is all about the long
game and customer intent. It’s based on establishing a solid foundation of on
page optimization and growing your site’s authority in the eyes of the search
engines as well as providing a solid experience of relevant content for your
customers. A simple way to design a successful website is to constantly review
it for user experience. Not only will your customers be happy but also Google
bases many of its ranking factors on user experience, so it’s a win-win. Now
ask yourself, “What do people looking for something online want?”
Key Determinants Impacting Your Organic Search Ranking
Page Speed: How quickly your site loads is huge for keeping your
customer on your site. Nothing will make someone click away like a
slow page load. Besides it being a ranking factor, speed has become
such an obsession with Google that they’ve recently launched the
Accelerated Mobile Pages (AMP) project. This project has a goal to
shift as many webpages as possible to a simpliﬁed streamlined HTML
page designed to load almost instantly. The issue is that this platform
is only realistic for news sites and those businesses focused on pub­
lishing a lot of content. It’s just not realistic for small businesses or

147
Social Business Strategy for Marketing
ecommerce sites in its current state. However, Google is dedicated to
its success so it won’t take long for AMP to become more user
friendly for all types of websites.
Mobile Friendly: Any website that wants to be successful MUST be
easily accessed from any mobile device. The format endorsed by Google,
as well as all the other search engines, is responsive design. Responsive
design allows the content from your website to automatically format
itself for any sized device, from a desktop computer to your smartphone.
Having a website that is mobile friendly gives you an advantage in the
search results.
Secure Site (HTTPS): Another ranking factor that Google has been
pushing onto sites is the shift from HTTP to HTTPS by installing a
secure certiﬁcate on the server side of your website. This certiﬁcate is
supposed to add a level of authority and trust to your website for your
users. It’s recommended for all sites regardless if you take payments or
not.
Content Quality: Many of Google’s penalties revolve directly around
the quality of a website’s content. It’s a known technique to write poor
quality content full of your chosen keywords in order to manipulate the
algorithms to rank your pages higher in the search results. Well, Google
has gotten so smart about this strategy that not only does it no longer
work but also it’s getting to the point where only the best content gets
those top spots.
There are entire books about creating the right content for your audi­
ence, so we will just tell you that it’s vital that your website is designed to
help your customers solve a problem or answer a question. It needs to provide
them with in-depth unique information on each and every one of the
potential questions they may have to be successful.
As you can see, building a solid search-engine-friendly website is not
something you can do overnight. However, the process is also not a secret
process cloaked in mystery. There are a few trusted places to turn for up-to­
date guidance on how exactly to approach SEO for your website. Here are a
few experts in the SEO industry to explain it . . .
“Long term online success for 2017 and beyond is not about a secret tip, how
much you spend or being sure you do that one thing exactly perfect,” says Kristi

148
DIGITAL SENSE
Hagen, president and senior editor of SearchEngineNews.com. “It’s about get­
ting all of the little things right because in today’s competitive markets the race is
won by inches. So ﬁnd an SEO informational source you can trust and roll up
your sleeves—that’s when the magic happens.”
“What’s the current State of SEO? One focused entirely on User Experience.
Google’s push to Accelerated Mobile Pages (AMP), its recent war on mobile
interstitials, its continual embracing of mobile-friendly content, HTTPS, and
page speed are all about one thing: increasing User Experience. This means fast-
loading pages designed around 1 MB in size that; eliminate interstitials, break
up content into mobile-friendly chunks, and are designed for smaller screens,”
shares Casey Markee, founder, Media Wyse. “SEO isn’t shortcuts and link
schemes. It’s a game of inches and it’s constantly evolving. If you aren’t testing
and retesting your ranking hypotheses and marketing strategies constantly, you
aren’t innovating. Those that do all of this will rank higher now and well into
2017 and beyond.”
As you can imagine, staying abreast of the changes within the search
engines, as well as the trusted long-term ranking strategies, is a business in
itself. That being said, here are some of the resources that we’ve worked with
over the years and have leveraged for much of our own success. The top of
the list is SearchEngineNews.com, a simple Internet-marketing-based mem­
bership site that is worth every penny. Travis has had an active membership
for over a decade. Some others to consider are Search Engine Land, Moz, and
Search Engine Journal.
The SMX, Mozcon, and Pubcon conferences are where you want to go
to network with the brightest minds in the industry.
Finally, the oft-updated book by Eric Enge, Stephan Spencer, and Jessie
Stricchiola, The Art of SEO—now in its third edition—is a must for anyone
who wants complete digital sense.11
Enterprise Paid Search
If you’ve been in the enterprise search game for as long as we have,
you’ve seen many of the same vendors dominate the ecosystem for the
better part of a decade. Marin Software, Kenshoo, Adobe Media Opti­
mizer/Efﬁcient Frontier, Google DoubleClick, and others have been the
major players, but many of these have yet to capitalize on the trend of
using data science to automate the optimization of your pay per click
(PPC).

149
Social Business Strategy for Marketing
Predictive Advertising Management
Predictive advertising management is supposed to improve advertising per­
formance, but if that transition isn’t smooth, chaos ensues—along with lost
revenues and customers. Marketers who take advantage of all the data signals
available have a competitive advantage over those who are using a more lim­
ited set of data. For example, what if you could target searchers based on
keyword, device, time of day, zip code, weather conditions in two days and
the current NASDAQ rates? Today, predictive advertising management
platforms provide this level of granular targeting. When data science
meets search advertising, you can improve advertising ROI dramatically
(Figures 8.3 and 8.4). One of the reasons we personally think QuanticMind
could have a leg up over its rivals is the sheer volume of data points it
optimizes.
Data science, FTW! Digital Marketing Depot’s Enterprise Paid Media
Campaign Management Platforms 2016: A Marketer’s Guide report by Mar­
ketingLand, discusses targeting and using data science on search marketing
platforms, which is one of the cornerstone services that QuanticMind deliv­
ers.12 This method ups the value of a customer for life, by mixing purchase
intent with data.
At CCP Digital, we’ve found that QuanticMind is giving us a competi­
tive advantage for our large clients, so much so that Travis is now advising for
Figure 8.3 Graphic with Data From QuanticMind Graphic

150
DIGITAL SENSE
Figure 8.4 Data Points to Optimize on Your SEM Campaigns
them. If you’re spending more than $1 million a year on enterprise paid
search, it may be worthwhile to your organization to consider moving onto a
platform that uses smart data science to optimize your campaigns and ad
spend.
GEO Targeting and IP-Based Advertising
Imagine if you were able to pick anyone’s physical address, reverse-engineer
it, and translate it into their IP address. You could then target company by
injecting advertising into only that IP range. For example, a client of Travis’s
was hiring engineers. They wanted to target people who were engineers at
Oracle. We ﬁgured out where the engineers in Oracle were located, and we
injected advertising into their building only, so anyone using that Wi-Fi or
the Internet in that IP range saw our ads. We were able to hire some great
engineers with this simple yet somewhat expensive ad hack, using a technol­
ogy by El Toro.13

151
Social Business Strategy for Marketing
DIGITAL BIT: We are both full of marketing hacks,
case studies, and resources around social marketing. The
thing is, they are always changing. To stay up to date
with what’s going on, check DigitalSen.se/marketinghacks
for updated case studies, resources, and deﬁnitive guides.


9 Social Business
Strategy for Sales
“79 percent of sales professionals that used social selling over the past year ach­
ieved quota vs 43 percent of those who did not.”
—Aberdeen Group1
M
uch like other departments in a social business/organization, a social
sales team starts with establishing forecast objectives that line up to the
major business goals and the vision. Then you build your road map, acquire
staff, train the staff, and then deﬁne a set of department KPIs directly related
to the overarching business goals of the company established and cemented in
your EMF Vision Layer.
Along with marketing, customer support, and HR, sales is one of the ﬁrst
departments to adopt social media within a social organization. Since your
sales team is customer facing, as well as revenue generating, having a well-
trained team with digital sense is crucial. Your sales team oftentimes repre­
sents the ﬁrst humans in your company, aside from your content marketing
team, to actually touch and communicate with a potential customer or buyer.
Since you can’t change a ﬁrst impression, it’s critical to ensure salespeople
represent a consistent company brand, use proper etiquette, and understand
how social media both feeds into and accelerates the sales pipeline. This is
where the effort made in going through all layers of the EMF pays dividends
over and over as both a form of governance and repository of key learnings
from your front line feedback that can improve future messaging.
153

154
DIGITAL SENSE
What Is Social Selling?
Social selling is the layering of high-value social media activities over your
existing sales communication process. Social selling was born from a need to
adjust communication strategies with today’s modern buyer, who happens to
be mobile and digitally available 24 hours a day with their smartphone. In
going with the mantra “be where your buyers are,” sales reps have had to
adjust the way they engage, interact with, and nurture their buyers as a result.
Julio Viskovich, VP of Marketing for rFactr, a B2B social selling plat­
form, and one of Forbes’s top social-selling inﬂuencers, has this advice for
sales teams: “Never use social media for the hard sell, it’s for building rela­
tionships, value, trust, and credibility.”
Our friend Jon Ferrara, CEO of Nimble, said this about social selling:
“Social Selling is a natural evolution to the effects social media has had on the
way customers make buying decisions and the way companies and sales­
people need to sell. It has evolved the sales process so it’s focused on buyers
needs and leverages technology to put sales reps in front of the right pros­
pect—at the right time—with the right message.”
Why Is Social Selling Important?
Social selling is just selling with a shiny name, but the name has signiﬁcance
because it calls attention to a huge gap in skills that need to be developed
within a company. Just as you would train your salespeople how to give
presentations or guide a prospect through a sales cycle, you need to train your
salespeople how to make use of the technologies that can generate pipeline.
“The natural reaction is to buy the bright shiny object; not do the hard
work of strategy, planning, goals, and tactics,” offers Jill Rowley, former
Social Selling Evangelist at Eloqua. “It’s all too easy to take a silo approach
versus embedding Social Selling into existing processes, methodologies, sys­
tems, metrics. Culture and executive buy-in/sponsorship are critical.”
Goals for Social Selling
There could be many different objectives for the sales team, but typically they
are to generate more revenue, increase overall sales pipeline, increase contacts,
and add more data on your leads and opportunities from social into the
Customer Relationship Management platform (CRM).

155
Social Business Strategy for Sales
“For any company building a social business strategy, it’s important to
stretch that to any customer facing employees, speciﬁcally sales pro­
fessionals.” Koka Sexton, former head of social for LinkedIn and founder of
Social Selling Labs, says, “All research shows that employees sharing corpo­
rate messages get engaged higher and have an exponentially larger reach. If
this is the case, then companies that fail to involve their sales team are effec­
tively leaving actual money on the table.”
Now that we are talking about leads and opportunities, here is a mind-
bending statistic, from SiriusDecisions. Of qualiﬁed leads, 70 percent make it
to sales get disqualiﬁed or discarded at some point. Up to 80 percent of those
“dead end” prospects will ultimately go on to buy from you—or from a
competitor—within 6–12 months.
Just because that lead or prospect isn’t a sales-qualiﬁed lead—SQL—or a
sales-accepted lead—SAL—doesn’t mean that lead is worthless. It just needs
to be nurtured before your competitor sells them. You have to keep the
funnel growing and you have to engage those already in your funnel. If they
aren’t SQLs yet, and they are an important prospect, you’ll deﬁnitely want to
continue engaging them and adding value to them. Social selling can be
broken down into two speciﬁc activities, ﬁshing and hunting.
1. Fishing is what most people think social selling represents—simply
pushing out content each day and leaving the breadcrumbs that leads
hopefully ﬁnd and follow. The problem is that this activity of broad­
casting content as well as monitoring for new leads or buying signals only
aligns with TOFU (top of funnel) elements of the sales process.
2. Hunting is the speciﬁc use of content and social channels to inﬂuence a
speciﬁc person(s) within your pipeline. An example would be sending a
private LinkedIn message to one of your prospects in the evaluation stage
that includes a contextual message and link to a buyer’s guide comparing
you with your head-to-head competition.
Who Should Own Social Selling?
Social Selling is NOT a marketing campaign. The program should be owned
by sales leadership. The formula for successful Social Selling: Marketing +
Sales Leadership + Sales Enablement & Training to align = SUCCESS!
You also need HR to rethink the capabilities and competencies of the sales
hires—at all levels—leadership, manager, and individual contributors. This will
be covered in depth in the chapter on Social Business Strategies for HR.

156
DIGITAL SENSE
The Social Selling System
Successful and advanced social selling teams that hit KPIs and measure suc­
cess effective mature with the following system, based on the work of Julio
Viskovich:2
1. Presence—it all starts with establishing which social channels you will be
active on and creating a consistent and polished footprint on those channels.
2. Adoption—ensure sales reps have the right training and right tools to be
successful. You will need a way for reps to quickly access sales-ready
content, share, engage, and track their activities. A fool with a tool is still
a fool—but a sniper without a gun is DEAD.
3. Inﬂuence—engage with each prospect according to their placement in
your funnel and don’t just use social media to stay top of mind . . . use
it to strategically shape your buyer’s needs and vision.
4. Revenue—track your sales activities to your CRM system to understand
the exact impact on leads, opportunities, revenue, sales cycle time, and
other key sales metrics
With proper tools, training, and implementation, sales reps who adopt
social selling will be able to:
• turn cold calls into warm leads with superior prospect insights,
• go beyond just being a vendor and begin to establish yourself as their 
trusted advisor, 
• build a bigger pipeline and drive more revenue,
• attribute social-selling actions to revenue through reporting,
• network and attend events remotely through various social interactions
and hashtags, and
• identify buying signals that capture purchase intent from your prospect.
Social Selling Implementation
Step 1: Have each member of the sales team create or update a LinkedIn
and Twitter proﬁle.

157
Social Business Strategy for Sales
Ensure that every rep’s proﬁle is 100 percent completed. This
includes having a professionally done photograph. Marketing should
give some guidelines on language used.
Step 2: Connect with everyone in your company.
This will allow each rep access to the rest of the organization’s
network and increase the number of second and third degree con­
nections. Having these are crucial not only for network growth but
also getting referred or introduced through trusted sources in your
company.
Step 3: Join 10–15 LinkedIn groups
Groups allow you to send messages to those who aren’t your ﬁrst
degree connections, and allow you to join in the conversation with
your prospects. Follow the four-to-one rule: comment on four posts
for every post that you write.
Step 4: Ask your past and current colleagues, customers, or vendors to
recommend you. You’d be surprised at the importance a short recom­
mendation can hold. Potential partners or prospects are likely to check
out your proﬁle when considering doing business with you.
Step 5: Interact at least once a day through your activity stream. Most of
your home page is taken up with updates from your connections. There
are several ways you can interact with these updates, depending on the
type.
• Send a message—When your connections make new connections or
take several actions on LinkedIn, this information shows up in your
activity feed. You can send your connection a message to reengage
them.
• Retweet or Favorite—Posts from other social media sites often enable
you to favorite the posts. For Twitter posts, you can retweet or reply as
well. This is a great tactic to do right before a call to nudge the pros­
pect via a notiﬁcation to their mobile.
• Like/Comment/Endorse—Jump in and engage with prospects regu­
larly through these mini actions to stay relevant and avoid a dark
period of the sales process to take hold. It also shows you as a value-
add and someone who walks the social selling walk.

158
DIGITAL SENSE
Social Selling Challenges
The greatest challenge for the individual is behavioral change, especially for
salespeople, who are not historically digital savvy. The greatest challenge for
the organization is culture change. Cross-functional collaboration is not
optional. This is a change management initiative. (This is why chapter ﬁve
and understanding the stick-person is so important.)
There are major cultural differences between the Baby Boomer genera­
tion and Millennials. Geoffrey Moore says it best: in his generation, collabo­
ration was called “cheating and you got expelled for it”; whereas, the
Millennials are used to living their lives out loud on the web, sharing every­
thing with everyone. Although Millennials lack some of the business pattern
recognition and experience of their Baby Boomer and Gen X peers, they are
deﬁnitely more transparent, collaborative, connected, and digitally savvy.
We’re now living in the age of empowered customer, where buyers are digi­
tally driven, socially connected, and mobile with multiple devices that give
them nearly unlimited access to both information and people.
The modern buyer is proﬁcient in utilizing their own device as a personal
life-remote control, but many sales organizations have been slow to adapt and
evolve their processes, training, and systems of selling to the way most people
want to buy today. This is the BIG opportunity for those of you who take
this serious and implement.
Account-Based Marketing (ABM)
“Account-based marketing: a strategic approach that coordinates personalized mar­
keting and sales efforts to open doors and deepen engagement at speciﬁc accounts.”
—Jon Miller, Engagio
According to Wikipedia, account-based marketing (ABM), also known
as key account marketing, is a strategic approach to business marketing in
which an organization considers and communicates with individual prospect
or customer accounts as markets of one. Account-based marketing is typically
employed in enterprise level sales organizations.
Forrester Research states that less than 1 percent of leads turn into reve­
nue generating customers. Because of this, it’s time to challenge the status

159
Social Business Strategy for Sales
quo and focus your time, budget, and resources on generating quality leads
vs. quantity, especially in B2B.
In business-to-customer marketing and sales, B2C, it’s more of a shotgun
approach; you are casting a wide net from a large demographic of people. In
B2B marketing and sales, it’s a laser approach. You know EXACTLY the
name and job title of your target.
Say, for instance, you’re trying to sell to the CEO of Facebook, and you
know that his name is Mark Zuckerberg. But Mark isn’t the only one we
have to talk to get the sale. We may have to talk with inﬂuencers, some
members of middle management, and end users before we can get to the
decision maker. In some enterprise businesses, there could be up to 17 people
that you need to connect with before getting a yes from the decision maker.
Now, how do you reverse-engineer a relationship with those people? That’s
where ABM comes in.
B2B companies are typically forced to “hunt and ﬁsh” to a narrow list of
prospects. They use a combination of inbound, outbound, and account-
based marketing techniques to make the magic happen.
Megan Heuer at SiriusDecisions has a great presentation on ABM where
she goes over the “new reality” of B2B marketing. She proﬁled the companies
already using ABM, as well as those thinking about starting this year.3
Company size:
• 45 percent less than $100 million are using ABM
• 18 percent between $101 million and $1 billion are using ABM
• 36 percent more than $1.1 billion are using ABM
It’s interesting to see that nearly half of the companies that have $100m or
less in revenue are using ABM to target decision makers on their narrow list of
prospects. Over a third of companies with $1 billion or more in revenue use
ABM, but less than 20 percent in the $101 million–$1 billion range use ABM.
Customer type:
• 75 percent enterprise (more than 1,000 employees)
• 21 percent medium (101 to 1,000 employees)
• 11 percent small (100 or fewer employees)

160
DIGITAL SENSE
The vast majority of ABM-practicing companies are enterprise-level
brands with more than 1,000 employees. Smaller companies can beneﬁt
from it, as well.
Five Steps to Develop an ABM Program
1. Identify target companies
2. Develop personas
3. Find or create the right content
4. Integrate your ABM into your multichannel strategy
5. Measure and optimize
DIGITAL BIT: For deeper insights into ABM, check
out Jon Miller’s Engagio e-book at Engagio.com/guide.4
Case Study: #Closing $Millions for Pennies on the Dollar
We work with many well-funded startups that sell into large enterprises.
Travis worked with one such company that provides an enterprise tag
management solution (TMS). After identifying the top 100 targeted
accounts, he began listening at scale for those companies to talk about
omnichannel marketing, online/ofﬂine data, ecommerce, and so on.
Words that were relevant to his clients’ suite of solutions. One such
company, a Fortune 100 retail company with locations all over the
world, had their annual shareholder meeting and the CEO mentioned
omnichannel and treating their online ecommerce customers the same
as their brick-and-mortar locations. This was the perfect opportunity.
Travis took the news to the content team and worked with them to
create a piece that talked about this retail company. The CEO of the
MarTech company had an author account on MarketingLand, and we
uploaded it as his monthly column. The next month, they did the same
thing around a very large coffee company from Seattle.

161
Social Business Strategy for Sales
Once that article was live, it was shared. The next day, we copied it
and put it on their blog, with a link back to MarketingLand. Why? We
wanted to drive trafﬁc to their blog, not MarketingLand, for the sole
reason of tagging them with our custom retargeting pixel. Everyone
who came to that article from our ad campaign was placed in a custom
audience. We could then advertise to that customer audience all over
the web, like magic.
DIGITAL BIT: We’ve found that if you are advertising an
article or news to a client of yours, it gets way more clicks if
you use a picture of their CEO as the main image.
The result? We targeted 4,100 employees in San Bruno, CA, and
Bentonville, AR, with a sponsored post of this article on Facebook, with an
image of the CEO of the retail company. We drove all of the trafﬁc back to
the client’s site, where our custom tracking pixel ﬁred. In fact, we drove
1,108 people to site, all top employees of this retail company, due to our
initial ad targeting. They were all added to a custom audience and we tar­
geted them all over. Many key employees within that retail company ﬁlled
out a lead-gen form, then marketing and sales began nurturing the relation­
ship. The sales rep eventually closed a $700,000-plus deal, for less than $700
in total ad spend. Is that a good return on ad spend (ROAS)? The bottom
line: B2B account-based marketing and advertising, with paid social ampliﬁ­
cation of relevant, targeted content to targeted prospects, can be a very potent
combo in your social selling arsenal.
DIGITAL BIT: We host monthly webinars on case
study how to’s just like this, and if you would like alerts
to upcoming video presentations, join our list at
DigitalSen.se/webinars.


10 Social Business
Strategy for
Inﬂuencers and
Employee
Advocates
I
nﬂuencer marketing is a hot topic in 2017 and it’s also a “hot mess,”
according to The Wall Street Journal.1 We tend to agree, as it’s a challenge
to build the ideal marketing technology stack. Currently, with inﬂuencer
marketing technology, there isn’t one solution that comprehensively covers
all areas. From discovery to engagement to tracking and reporting, there are
many different solutions, but they don’t always ﬁt together. Sound familiar?
Welcome to MarTech Hell. (That should totally be an AC/DC song, by the
way, with Axl Rose singing as their new front man when he isn’t touring with
the original G N’ R crew.)
As Mia Dand, principal analyst at San Francisco-based market research and
strategy consulting ﬁrm, Lighthouse3, says: “There isn’t one version of truth
out there around inﬂuencer marketing, so most of the information on this
industry comes from inﬂuencers themselves or the vendors, which is biased.
We needed an unbiased and objective perspective on the inﬂuencer space.”2
163

164
DIGITAL SENSE
Inﬂuencer Marketing Tech Is Fragmented
With more than 133 vendors across ﬁve categories, inﬂuencer marketing
is a highly fragmented industry. There is no one-solution-ﬁts-all. Light­
house3’s Inﬂuencer Marketing Technology research report found that
three primary trends are behind the growth in the inﬂuencer marketing
technology arena.3
Key Trend 1: Decline of Advertising Due to the Massive
Increase in Ad Blockers Globally
According to Mary Meeker’s 2016 Internet Trends report (slide 47),4 there
are nearly 640 million devices that are blocking online advertising. With iOS
now allowing for ad blocking, there are currently over 420 million mobile
devices alone that are blocking ads and that number will continue to grow.
That being said, U.S. advertiser spending on digital advertising is expected to
overtake TV in 2016 and hit $103 billion in 2019.5
However, not everyone is blocking ads. In fact, we are using Facebook,
LinkedIn, Twitter, Pinterest, Reddit, and Google AdWords ads to help cli­
ents retarget and amplify inﬂuencer marketing efforts. They can deﬁnitely
work together.
Key Trend 2: Rise of Inﬂuencer Programs Is Leading to
Greater Need for Efﬁciencies and Proving ROI
More than 83 percent of global respondents in a Nielsen survey say they trust
recommendations from people they know, vs. just 42 percent for online
banner ads.6
People don’t trust advertising, but they deﬁnitely trust people they
know. This is why customers and employees are such strong advocates for
your brand. Also, people trust the CEO much less than they trust
employees. We know, big shocker there, as the gap between the 1 percent
and 99 percent continues to widen and be an issue of tension across
society. Lighthouse3 covers that more in-depth in their customer/
employee advocacy technologies landscape report for October 2016 if you
are interested in a deeper dive.

165
Social Business Strategy for Inﬂuencers and Employee Advocates
Key Trend 3: CMOs Are Driving the Budget Increase in
Marketing Technology Spend
If you have seen Scott Brinker’s MarTech landscape, you can tell that it’s a
crowded space.7 And with good reason: CMOs are now outspending their IT
counterparts in many organizations.
The Enterprise MarTech market size is projected to grow to $25 billion this
year, with CMOs driving MarTech spending to $32.4 billion by 2018.8 That’s
a lot of billions. More and more of enterprise marketing budgets are going to
marketing technology, and the year over year (YOY) growth is substantial.
Key Trend 4: Four Critical Factors Are Fueling the Chaos in
Inﬂuencer Marketing
Despite MarTech’s incredible growth, inﬂuencer marketing technology is
facing some key challenges:
• Lack of standard technical capabilities; service offerings and features keep
changing.
• Unstructured, fragmented market with 133 vendors across ﬁve 
categories. 
• With more than 60 percent of platforms launched within the past 
ﬁve years, this is still a nascent space. 
• Lack of scalable enterprise solutions, as many vendors are startups and 
privately funded. 
The Five Categories of Inﬂuencer Marketing Tech
As mentioned earlier this is a fragmented industry with 133 vendors across
ﬁve related but distinct categories. Lighthouse3 broke down the number of
tools in each category:
Inﬂuencer Marketing:
• Inﬂuencer Discovery—17 tools in this category
• Inﬂuencer Outreach—six tools in this category
• Inﬂuencer Marketing—38 tools in this category

166
DIGITAL SENSE
Advocacy/Word of Mouth Tools:
• Customer Advocacy—66 tools in this category
• Employee Advocacy—14 tools in this category 
Note: Inﬂuencer Marketing is different from Employee Advocacy; 
see more at the end of this chapter. They are closely related cousins but
with slightly different attributes.
An Advocate has a positive sentiment toward your brand, whereas an
Inﬂuencer may have a negative, neutral, or positive view. Advocates are not
typically compensated, although they may receive perks, such as new product
trials or coupons. This differentiation impacts the features and capabilities of
their respective technology platforms. For example: Inﬂuencer marketing
technology platforms typically provide an Inﬂuencer rate-sheet, while Advo­
cacy platforms offer gamiﬁcation features to keep advocates engaged.
Inﬂuencer Marketing Platform “5 Capabilities” Model
Lighthouse3 created a “5 Capabilities” model to help marketers ﬁgure out
whether or not a platform is an inﬂuencer technology platform.
These Five Capabilities Include:
1. Discover: Find Inﬂuencers based on user criteria including online/social
metrics, audience, topics (e.g., Inﬂuencer proﬁle).
2. Connect: Communicate with Inﬂuencers via the platform to discuss the
engagement (e.g., e-mail integration).
3. Engage (unpaid): Engage Inﬂuencer for an unpaid activity, such as 
writing a blog post (e.g., reporting dashboard). 
4. Recruit (paid): Engage Inﬂuencer for a paid activity, such as speaking at
an event or creating content (e.g., budget planning).
5. Measure: Advanced metrics and analytics for performance management
(e.g., ROI calculator).
“Inﬂuencer Marketing” technologies typically have all ﬁve capabili­
ties, while others only cover one area—such as “Inﬂuencer Discovery,”
which just covers Discover.

167
Social Business Strategy for Inﬂuencers and Employee Advocates
With the decline of online advertising due to ad blockers and lack of
trust with big brands, now is a good time to begin looking into building an
inﬂuencer marketing program at your company.
DIGITAL BIT: This report on Inﬂuencer Marketing
by Lighthouse3 should help guide you in the right
direction. DigitalSen.se/inﬂuencermktg
The Inﬂuencer Marketing Manifesto
In the recently published Inﬂuencer Marketing Manifesto by the Altimeter
Group, over 67 percent of marketers say their key challenge is inﬂuencer
discovery.9 Finding the right Inﬂuencer is both an art and a science. Here are
some guidelines that marketers should use to select the right inﬂuencer for
your campaign.
Community: Size and Type of Audience
Many “experts” try to justify lack of an audience by claiming that Inﬂu­
encer marketing is not about quantity of followers; it’s about quality.
Actually, successful Inﬂuencer marketing needs both—quantity and qual­
ity of inﬂuence. To be considered inﬂuential, the Inﬂuencer needs to have
critical mass of the RIGHT type of followers, which is deﬁned as the
personas and look-alikes that the brand wants to reach. Start your Inﬂu­
encer selection by taking a close look at the Inﬂuencer’s community and
use the tools below to help.
Technology: TapInﬂuence.com is an inﬂuencer marketing platform that
allows marketers to inﬂuencers based on their proﬁle data (reach, engagement,
topics, etc.) as well as audience data (location, gender, age, etc.). Also Little Bird
(GetLittleBird.com)is a great discovery tool for ﬁnding relevant inﬂuencers.
Content: Format and Type
Long-form (blog), short-form, videos, microvideos, pictures, livestreaming . . .
the options for content format are endless. Product and Consumer Packaged

168
DIGITAL SENSE
Goods (CPG) companies ﬁnd visual formats work better, while service com­
panies may ﬁnd long-form or videos work better with their audience. Start by
understanding which format resonates best with your audience and select the
inﬂuencer that is great at the content type.
Technology: Some inﬂuencer technology platforms, such as Hello Society
(bought by NYT), focus on creator-inﬂuencers who create/curate beautiful
images and have a large following on Pinterest, while others like Roostr
(recently acquired by Chartboost) focus on YouTube gamer-inﬂuencers.
Grapevine focuses on video content creators.10
Channel: Social Networks and Sites
Here’s a key point that both marketers and their agencies often miss—
Inﬂuencers do NOT have the same level of inﬂuence on all social networks.
Marketers should select inﬂuencers based on the channel or social network
where they are most likely to be active.
Technology: Just like Inﬂuencers, the technology platforms also don’t have
the same reach across social networks. Platforms such as Niche (acquired by
Twitter) focus on Viners and Instagrammers, and others, such as Cooper­
atize, focus on inﬂuential bloggers.
Credibility: Topical Relevancy
Please pay special attention here because this can make or break your inﬂu­
encer campaign. Topical relevancy and credibility is extremely important.
This is usually measured through engagement—reshares, retweets, comments,
and so on. Many inﬂuencers with large audiences talk about multiple topics.
Some have lower engagement per post while others are focused on one to two
speciﬁc topics but have much higher engagement. We’ve seen pitches from
agencies for Inﬂuencers with high “average” engagement per post, but those
numbers may be skewed because of their vacation pictures or cat memes.
Technology: Little Bird uses social graph and peer validation to determine
whether or not an Inﬂuencer has credibility on a certain topic. Lumanu is a
newer Inﬂuencer technology platform that allows inﬂuencer discovery
based on content that Inﬂuencers have created and/or shared.

169
Social Business Strategy for Inﬂuencers and Employee Advocates
Chemistry: Brand-Inﬂuencer Fit
Inﬂuencers are human beings, so make sure you work with professionals who
follow through on their commitments. When things don’t go per plan as they
often do, you’ll wish you hadn’t picked an Inﬂuencer who is a prima donna
and a pain to work with. Get to know them in advance. Make sure they are a
good ﬁt for your brand.
Technology: No tool can help you ﬁgure out chemistry, yet, but Inﬂu­
encer technologies like Grapevine allow users to add notes based on their
experience with the Inﬂuencer so you can make sure that history doesn’t
repeat itself with a bad inﬂuencer.
Controversy: Lack of Resonance and Transparency
Inﬂuencers can make headlines because of their controversial views and
sometimes even a benign tweet can set off a ﬁrestorm. Brands need to realize
that it’s not about recruiting the most popular inﬂuencer but rather one that
resonates with your audience.
Another issue we’ve run into is with Inﬂuencers who don’t disclose they
are being paid for their endorsements. And there are others who start pitching
controversial or unrelated messages while still representing the brand. These
are all red ﬂags, and as of late 2016, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
has created new guidelines for disclosing paid endorsements.11
As much as we want Inﬂuencers to be authentic, we also want them to be
ethical and transparent so they are not misleading their audience.12
Technology: Many platforms can track/measure impact of Inﬂuencer
content but few can monitor/audit inﬂuencer content once published.
Proofpoint is a security-as-a-service provider who recently started offering
tools for marketers to scan inﬂuencer accounts and automatically ﬂag any
inappropriate content.
Employee Advocacy
According to the Deloitte Millennial Survey, millennials will constitute 75 per­
cent of the global workforce by 2025.13 And they are all on social media. But
it’s not just millennials. In fact, 50 percent of all employees already post
messages on social media about their employers. Even though these employees

170
DIGITAL SENSE
are proud to share messages about their companies, it’s almost impossible for
brands to get their employees approved content efﬁciently to share externally.
Employees Are the Most Credible Voices in Your Organization
As mentioned in the Edelman Trust Barometer report, “Employees are the
most credible voices on multiple topics, including the company’s work envi­
ronment, integrity, innovation and business practices.” This means that no
matter how often your PR team is out there sharing the gospel or the CEO is
on television, Inc. Magazine or TechCrunch talking about your company,
nothing is more effective than the voice of your employees.14
In addition to building brand awareness and improving company cul­
ture, employee advocacy has been proven to have a signiﬁcant impact on
revenue. From a lead generation perspective, employee advocacy is an “always
on” marketing channel that results in ﬁve times more web trafﬁc and
25 percent more leads.
Employee Advocacy Drives Sales
With some of our clients, we’ve personally engaged their employees to get the
top tweet at over 50 different events, including competitor events! We’ve
engaged employees to amplify content to gain mind share and inﬂuence, and
where it’s most important, helped them increase sales. Employee advocacy
should be a vital part of any social business strategy.
Employee advocacy tools allow sales professionals to establish and extend
relationships with prospects and customers via social media. In fact, 72.6 percent
of salespeople using social selling as part of their sales process outperformed their
sales peers and exceeded quotas 23 percent more often.15
“In today’s social world, every person has an extended circle of personal
inﬂuence and an opportunity to build their own personal ‘brand.’ By helping
your employees build that brand rather than squelching individuality, you
can build an army of very powerful advocates,” says Ted Rubin, author of
Return on Relationship #RonR and Dynamic Signal adviser.16
“Most people, when given the opportunity, will advocate for their brands, when
they feel good about where they work. Two thousand employees, 2,000 followers
each, you do the math.”
—TED RUBIN

171
Social Business Strategy for Inﬂuencers and Employee Advocates
Who Is Doing Employee Advocacy Right?
One such company in the employee advocacy space is Dynamic Signal. It
helps solve this disconnect by giving communications and marketing pros
the ability to curate and upload company-approved content, so their
employees can pick what interests them and share it in just a few clicks.
This helps transform them into experts, advocates, and contributors.
Employees can also submit their own content or industry content to be
shared by others. Since people listen more to their social connections
(those they trust) than to ofﬁcial marketing campaigns, brands can
increase content engagement by as much as 700 times and brand aware­
ness by as much as 24 times.
“One of the most underutilized and yet powerful things a company can
do for itself is ﬁnd a way to activate its employee base to socially tell its brand
story,” said Pavey Purewal, CMO, Dynamic Signal in a phone interview,
who went on to say, “If employees are a company’s best brand advocates,
then why not let them share on behalf of the brand?”
Major global brands such as IBM, Humana, Pitney Bowes, GameStop,
and SAP have all used employee advocacy tools to harness their employees’
social reach to amplify company content. This type of tool keeps employees
informed of company news and strengthens the brand. By extending their
social media strategies, these companies ignite brand awareness, employee
engagement, and revenue.
In a subsequent phone interview during the writing of this book, Tim
Peacock, director of digital marketing, Ensighten said, “Everyone’s busy, so
tools like Dynamic Signal, Inﬂuitive, or GaggleAMP make it easy for
employees to share coordinated content on a regular basis, boosting the
impact of our social media efforts.”
Keep in mind, there are many tools out there to choose from that can
help engage your employees. The most important thing is to pick a solution
and begin engaging your employees as soon as possible. The EMF has pro­
vided you the high level structure of Purpose, People, and Process. Now you
have drilled deeper in these past few chapters to learn how to speciﬁcally
evaluate some of these tools, and internal/external voice of customer listening
paths to implement the proper data infrastructures and more human-centric
tactics. In the ﬁnal chapters we will bring it all home with the Social Business
Strategy for human resources and a guide to building your ultimate market­
ing technology stack.


11 Social Business
Strategy for HR
Social Recruiting
There are a few other areas where social media can have as tremendous an
impact than in customer service and human resources. In this chapter we will
brieﬂy touch on some strategies, resources, and tactics for making those areas
of your business socially savvy and ﬁlled with digital sense.
According to the Jobvite Recruiter Nation survey of 2015, relationships
are the key to most hires at the organizations surveyed. Recruiters are facing
an increasingly demanding and competitive talent market.1 Consider the
following statistics:
• 95 percent of recruiters anticipate the job market to remain or get more
competitive.
• Over a quarter of companies anticipate hiring 100-plus people in the
next 12 months.
• 30 percent of recruiters report an average employee tenure of just 1 to
3 years.
Today’s dynamic recruiter uses every tool available to connect with job
seekers.
• Only 4 percent of recruiters are not using social media in recruiting
efforts (Figure 11.1).
173

174
DIGITAL SENSE
Figure 11.1 Social Media Recruiting by the Numbers2
• 72 percent of recruiters say data analytics is somewhat or very important
in the hiring process.
• 19 percent of recruiters ﬁnd quality hires via mobile career sites.
To recruit and retain the perfect ﬁt, recruiters must prioritize
relationships.
• After referrals (78 percent), recruiters ﬁnd their best candidates through
social and professional networks (56 percent) and intern-to-hire pro­
grams (55 percent).
• 69 percent of recruiters have increased their initial salary offers in the last
year.
• 63 percent note that offering employees beneﬁts like medical and dental
care is the most attractive incentive for new candidates, over perks like
free snacks or casual dress code.
It should come as no shock but it turns out that your business is all
about relationships in recruiting, as well. Almost every part of your business
deals with relationships which is why the EMF structure is held up and
together by the three walls of Purpose, People, and Process. Isn’t it crystal
clear, by now, why we have invested such an ample amount of real estate in
this book to improving your understanding of the archetypes of people in
your organization, self, and the power of your mind to become a more
effective communicator and leader? As Chris likes to say, “Stevie Wonder
could see that.”

175
Social Business Strategy for HR
Use Social Media to Evaluate Cultural Fit
Social media works both ways in social recruiting. If you are a job candidate
and you are a total jackass online, guess what, you ain’t getting the job at a
reputable brand. Likewise, if you are curious whether a brand is a ﬁt for you,
you can do efﬁcient research by following the brand and listening to the
voice, tone, and message delivery and matching it up against your personal
style and core values. Using your digital sense and these listening channels is a
common sense way to sort through candidates and opportunities.
MILESTONE: Since most people statistically will not
have reached this point in the book, we assume that you
are in the top 10 percent of all purchasers of this book
(i.e., “Ampliﬁers and Inﬂuencers,” so congratulations and
THANK YOU for your attention. Please Tweet
#10percent to @teedubya @chrisjsnook, and we will
celebrate your amazing accomplishment of getting to
Chapter 11 with a surprise response to show our #gratitude.
The other reason that social media is a great tool to leverage in your
hiring process is that you could be hiring Zombies into your organization
unknowingly. Perusing their social media can give you a peek into their per­
sonality, their circle of inﬂuence (peers they hang around), lifestyle habits,
and so on. There are also some sentiment analysis tools out there than can
help you out.
BIG BOLD LEGAL DISCLAIMER: WE ARE
BOTH AWARE THAT PLENTY OF ANTI­
DISCRIMINATION LAWS AND POLICIES THAT
NEED TO BE CONSIDERED IN THIS REGARD
AND ARE IN NO WAY GIVING YOU ADVICE
RELATED TO HOW TO USE THESE SOCIAL
TOOLS WITHIN THE LETTER OF THOSE LAWS.
YOU MUST CONSULT YOUR LAWYER BEFORE
YOU PUT ANY OF THESE INTO PRACTICE. WE
(continued )

176
DIGITAL SENSE
(continued )
ARE NOT EXPERTS NOR ARE WE QUALIFIED TO OFFER 
YOU SOUND ADVICE RELATED TO STAYING COMPLIANT 
WITH CURRENT LEGISLATION. 
DIGITAL BIT: We highly recommend using
MercerMatch
TM and Mercer Candidate Care
TM for
assessing ﬁt to role. We also recommend using the
Recruitics.com programmatic platform if you are
running PPC campaigns for recruitment. Lastly, check
out SocialTalent.co—a recruiting hub that teaches your
team to become more socially savvy.
As you go about your talent hunt, focus on converting passive candidates
to your brand. Most talented candidates already have jobs and anyone worth
getting is typically not on the sideline for very long, but they may not be in
the best vehicle for their goals or talents (remember the story about Ampli­
ﬁers from Chapter 2). This means that they are passive in their job search. So
you have to actively ﬁnd ways (Figure 11.1) to get in front of them. Facebook
ads work very well, which we will talk about in a bit.
The New Face of Social Recruitment
For many recruitment agencies, the days are gone when a well-placed ad in a
newspaper was the go-to way to collect prospective employee information
and build a pool of applicants. Social media has changed the way we recruit
and the data that’s available. This means more than posting a Facebook ad or
letting a static job posting on LinkedIn do the work. HR recruiters now have
more information about applicants than ever before. As it is with super­
heroes, with great power comes great responsibility.
It might seem like navigating endless information is akin to under­
standing biotech vapor compression. It turns out there is such a thing as too

177
Social Business Strategy for HR
much data. Understanding when to collect social media data and when to go
bare-bones is critical.
Are You Totally LinkedIn? Casting a job announcement to the LinkedIn
world might get you ﬂooded with responses. Some of the candidates might be
appropriate ﬁts and some are completely out of left ﬁeld. If you have the time
and staff, and if the position requires extensive knowledge or experience, take
advantage of everything LinkedIn has to offer.
Many candidates will have references, sample projects, bibliographies,
and photos. While it may not be acceptable in the United States to ask for
photographs of applicants, if it’s readily supplied on LinkedIn it’s bound to
make an impression. This kind of data is highly subjective. However, if there
is a photo, try to stick to gauging the professionalism of the photo. Does the
person have a professional headshot or is it a blurry self-portrait?
Play Sherlock
When you’re charged with ﬁlling an important position, you’re free to use
whatever means are at your disposal (reminder to see our legal disclaimer
from earlier that we are not offering you direct advice). This might mean
Googling shortlisted candidates’ full names or ﬁnding them on Facebook.
Playing fair here is also subjective, but try to give everyone a fair shot by
conducting the same level of investigation for every candidate. It’s common
knowledge nowadays that people should either keep their Facebook proﬁles
private or make sure nothing “inappropriate” is on the page. “Inappropriate”
can mean anything from the Mardi Gras proﬁle pic to a page riddled
with poor grammar and spelling. Is it fair to use this kind of social media
data when ﬁlling a position? That’s up to HR (and your legal team) to decide.
Another great resource on the subject is the blog Recruiting Daily.
The editor in chief, Matt Charney, published an e-book called Structure
Hiring: The Advantage of the New People Team. He has been at the forefront
of the social recruiting space, and his book lays out the structure and pro­
cesses necessary to lead a social business initiative in the human resources
dept.
“Without structure and training, even the most strategic or innovative of
recruiting processes fall apart.”
—MATT CHARNEY, EDITOR OF RECRUITING DAILY.3

178
DIGITAL SENSE
Case Study: #Hirecarlos: 
How to Get Your Dream Gig with Social Media 
In early January 2015, Carlos Gil lost his job with the Save-A-Lot
grocery chain out of St. Louis, MO. At the time, Carlos was video­
blogging and reaching out to his network to see if anyone had a
connection for a social media leader position. Since he and Travis
were connected on LinkedIn, he had TW’s e-mail address, as he
downloaded his LinkedIn connections. Carlos began reaching out to
his connections who he felt had some inﬂuence or who might be
able to help him, and then he set up phone meetings to chat.
Travis shot him a response and they scheduled a call through his
scheduler tool, Calendly.com. This allowed him to pick a block of
15 minutes that Travis had free on his calendar. On the phone call,
Travis mentioned that he had this idea that he’d like to test. “Let’s
create a Facebook page called, ‘Hire Carlos’. We can run Facebook
ads targeting only HR and talent acquisition specialists at the com­
panies that you most want to work for.”4 (Figure 11.2)
People Who Match the Following Job titles:
Stafﬁng specialist, ManPower, IT training and stafﬁng ﬁrm,
human resources, recruiter admin, talent manager, HR recruiter,
talent acquisition-HR, chief human resources ofﬁcer, recruiter,
talent acquisition, or HR-resource management group
Travis had Carlos go to Indeed.com, LinkedIn, and Angel.co Jobs
pages to pick out the top jobs that he thought he would most enjoy.
Travis then set up Facebook ads targeting HR and talent acquisition
titles at the companies he was interested in pursuing. Carlos came
back with a segmented list of his top companies (Figure 11.3).
They both thought it would be an interesting case study to test.
They agreed that after Carlos got a job, he would write about the
experience of using paid ads for helping him ﬁnd a job. Travis ran
the “Hire Carlos” ad for almost 9 days, at $20 per day. Travis cov­
ered the cost of nearly $180 dollars; the ad was seen by 1,053 people
and clicked on 53 times. More important, it got Carlos 25–30
phone interviews and face-to-face interviews.

179
Social Business Strategy for HRFigure depicting a screenshot of Carlos Gil for hire post.

Figure 11.2 Carlos Gil for Hire Post
At around this same time, Travis was interviewing for a speciﬁc
role at LinkedIn, head of Social Media Strategy–Sales. Travis wasn’t
actually looking for a job, as he was building an agency, but thought
his business partners and team could handle it if he got the LinkedIn
gig. And quite frankly, it appealed to Travis’s ego to be the head of
Social Media Strategy for one of the social media networks! Travis ﬂew
out to LinkedIn to their downtown San Francisco ofﬁces and just
killed the interviews. The head recruiter informed him that it was
down to him and a woman from Twitter, and that he’d be hearing
back early the next week, as they wanted to move fast on this role.
(continued )

180
DIGITAL SENSE
(continued )Figure depicting Carlos Gil detailed targeting screenshot.

Figure 11.3 Carlos Gil Detailed Targeting Screenshot
That same day, Carlos Gil was in the Bay Area on a face-to-face
interview with Clorox out somewhere near Oakland. They had seen
his “Hire Carlos” page and ﬂew him out to interview with them. He
tweeted at Travis that he was in town, and Travis recommended a
bar to come hang out and meet. They hung out and actually met for
the ﬁrst time. Social media has a way of creating friendships without
requiring meetings in person, at times.
Travis asked how Carlos’s interview at Clorox went. He then
mentioned that he was a ﬁnalist for a LinkedIn Social Media Strate­
gist role. They hung out for about an hour, drinking beer and bull­
shitting. After the bar, they left in different Uber rides. Carlos was in
an Uber Pool, where you can share rides with other random Uber
customers. Tonight, as luck would have it, Carlos was in the Uber
with a recruiter from LinkedIn.

181
Social Business Strategy for HR
Carlos then remembered that Travis was in town for a LinkedIn
role, and works his mojo on the recruiter. He sat in an Uber with the
very recruiter who had told Travis that he was a ﬁnalist for the role.
Of all of the people in San Francisco to get an Uber with Carlos Gil
that night, what were the odds?
As a result of their in-Uber conversation, Carlos ended up getting
an interview at LinkedIn for the very same role. He mentioned that he
used to curate jobs in a job group on LinkedIn called JobsDirectUSA,
and had a community of over 35,000 job seekers. Bottom line? Car­
los, not Travis or the gal from Twitter, got the job at LinkedIn.
LinkedIn said the tipping point for them choosing Carlos was the
innovative use of Facebook ads to target the HR professionals at jobs
he was interested in. The idea that Travis had around the “Hire Car­
los” Facebook page helped Carlos get the job at LinkedIn over Travis.5
Then Travis had to see this stuff in his newsfeed (Figure 11.4).Figure depicing the screenshot of Carlos Gil welcome to LinkedIn post.

Figure 11.4 Carlos Gil Welcome to LinkedIn Post
(continued )

182
DIGITAL SENSE
(continued )
The irony is thick on this one. Carlos was at LinkedIn for
around three months before he moved over to BMC as their global
head of Social Media. To hear this story from Travis and Carlos
directly, here’s their Snapchat Story of “The Secret Job Interview”
from February 2016 at Social Media Strategies Summit.6
Guess what? Travis never heard back from LinkedIn. Of all
companies, LinkedIn should know better than to ignore their
declined applicants. LinkedIn needs to call Mercer and implement
Mercer Candidate Care.7 Note: Travis was also a ﬁnalist for jobs at
Facebook in 2010 as an SEO director. Travis was a ﬁnalist for a role in
digital at Amazon in 2011. Travis was a ﬁnalist for a role with Google
Local/Maps and had 14 interviews. Turns out he was only 13/14ths
Googley, as one person didn’t quite like him. Symantec did hire him. Of
all of those companies, only Google actually got back to Travis to tell him
the bad news. Travis has yet to apply to Twitter or Snapchat. Travis is
always passively looking to level up (hint, hint).
Case Study: Finding 500,000 Worth of Talent for $250 in Ads
Using social media advertising in clever ways is what makes Travis a
true marketing hacker. He is always coming up with unique ways to
get visibility for your project or product, including using FB ads to
target speciﬁc types of people to their job postings.
When you are building ads, think of different images to capture
their attention. Videos work very well on Faceboook, as long as you
caption the words on the video. The vast majority of people on
Facebook don’t turn on the sound for the videos, so you need to
display the words. Testing different types of images and targeting
can help make or break your campaign (Figure 11.5 and 11.6).

183
Social Business Strategy for HRA screenshot depicting job title targeting.

Figure 11.5 Job Title TargetingA screenshot depicting social affinity.

Figure 11.6 Social Afﬁnity
Themes for Your Advertising
An analytics client that needed to hire 100 data scientists in one year came to
CCP Digital to have them ﬁnd some data scientists around certain parts of
the world. We used a hero image (Figure 11.7), an image showcasing culture,
a woman engineer, and various other pictures and themes to test them out to
different demographics and see what worked.
Another client, Ensighten (Figure 11.8), wanted to hire an operation
manager, a UI developer, and a director of Product Marketing Management.

184
DIGITAL SENSE
Figure 11.7 Data Scientists Hire Ad
These represent roughly a $90K–$100K role, a $145K–$175K role, and a
$115K–$140K role. In total, it added up to roughly $400K–$450K in sala­
ries. It’s crazy how quick half a million dollars goes in Silicon Valley. Sad thing is
all four of these folks probably ended up sharing a two-bedroom apartment
since they couldn’t afford to live alone on such paltry incomes in the Valley.
Yes, that was a not-so-subtle recruiting plug by both of us for talent that
wants to build something great in Phoenix and KC (Chris and Travis’s
respective markets).
So we targeted ads for people that were the right kind of candidates. And
to top it off, Travis and his team narrowed it down to only these types of
persona characteristics: “PLUS they like Star Wars.” The CEO of Ensighten,A screenshot depicting operations manager hire ad.

Figure 11.8 Operations Manager Hire Ad

185
Social Business Strategy for HR
Josh Manion, is a huge Star Wars fan. The Ensighten HQ conference rooms
are all named after places in the Star Wars universe. One room is the Death
Star, one is Dagobah, one is Tatooine, and so on. It’s part of the culture ﬁt
and was able to be part of the targeting effort.
On this particular campaign, we reached 14,576 people, got 456 clicks,
and 17 resumes. Total ad spend: $209.15. Imagine if Ensighten would have
used a headhunter to ﬁnd you those employees, and took 20–30 percent of
their annual salary for helping them? That would have cost around $100,000
in fees alone. That’s another person’s salary that they could be using!
Ensighten actually ﬁlled all of those roles on just $209.15 and they remain
employed today.
Having digital sense and creativity allows you to come up with different
ideas to help utilize social media in your business as it relates to the most
important foundational aspect of your EMF structure, your people.


12 Social Business
Strategy for
Customer Service
E
ighty-six percent of consumers will pay more for a better customer
experience.1
Customer service is a speciﬁc touch point in the overall customer expe­
rience. It is oftentimes where the lofty and effective front end marketing
promises, made through your digital tactics, get fumbled through nonhuman
interfaces. It is also where you can shine!
For example, think of your favorite robotic phone tree that has you
pounding the zero key repeatedly or yelling “representative, representa­
tive . . . OPERATOR!!” to get into a place where you can actually have a
conversation. Companies that have mastered customer service invest
heavily in the training and infrastructure and culture to ensure continued
success.
One of our favorite and most recommended experiences the next time
you are in Las Vegas is the Zappos Cultural Tour. When you want to
understand what a commitment it takes to nail the customer-centric service
side of your operation, there is no better or more inspiring 2-hour tour in this
country. Those who want to take it a step further may want to look into the
Zappos Insights culture camps offering at ZapposInsights.com.
187

188
DIGITAL SENSE
The nuances of how your customers want to be served depends on
limitless factors including their past experiences (positive and negative),
their personality type, their mood (which can be inﬂuenced by some­
thing like the weather that day), or as minor as whether they got their
morning coffee. Their cultural background also plays a role. Fortunately
today there are endless amounts of tools from IBM’s Watson and the
weather.com application program interface (API) that can provide you
technologically efﬁcient ways to personalize at scale, but before you can
put the tools to work you have to begin with the same assets you
uncovered at the Insights Layer around your customer needs and
persona.
Providing great customer service really just means providing a variety of
service approaches and doing your best to intuit what each customer wants.
Some customers aren’t even sure what they want themselves! We will discuss
how to build your marketing technology and customer experience stack in
the following chapter, but several great tools exist to consider depending on
the size of your enterprise and budget. For call-center heavy businesses, such
as health care, insurance, ﬁnancial services, and so on, we strongly recom­
mend you look into a solution such as the software offered by Aspect.com to
provide you with a strategic and technical partner with enterprise level infra­
structure designed to secure and personalize the channels of your customer
success teams.
However, regardless of your size, there are some standard “best practices”
that offer a great starting point. Begin here, gauge the reaction of your cus­
tomer, and if possible personalize the next interaction based on each cus­
tomer’s reaction to the last one.
We All Want the Same Simple Pleasures
“Customers who engage with companies over social media spend 20 to
40 percent more money with those companies than other customers.”2
Ready to put the “customer” back into the customer service touch point?
The following fundamentals are a great place to start.
1. Transparency: Customers want price and support transparency in their
shopping experience (at least that’s true of Western customers—

189
Social Business Strategy for Customer Service
customers from countries such as South Korea and India may prefer
negotiating). Make prices fair and readily available, and honor sales that
may take place immediately after a big purchase. Don’t make everything
your customers’ fault on the support side. Train and empower your
agents to empathize and be empowered to solve problems. Transparency
is akin to honesty. It is authentic unscripted communication that stays
within the boundaries of your brand guidelines but doesn’t feel robotic
or generic.
2. Genuine hospitality: A customer can instantly see through a sales pitch
or a forced greeting. Hire customer service reps who actually enjoy
interacting with customers, and who don’t bring their personal problems
to work. Everyone will have off days, including sales reps, but they
should be minimal. A warm welcome and genuine relationship building
is what creates loyal customers.
3. Zero pressure: The day of pushy sales tactics are over. The “I am
sorry, I can’t help you, I just work here,” response is no longer a
sufﬁcient reason to end the call either, regardless of your metrics
around call processing time. Zappos has succeeded because they lit­
erally removed any constraints that cause service reps to pressure
someone off of the call or into a cross sale script that is unnatural or
unwarranted. Your products or services should speak for themselves.
Pressure will make a client never want to come back. Speed doesn’t
require pressure.
4. Easy secure transactions: This is true in brick-and-mortar shops as
well as online shops, but especially the latter. The virtual shopping
cart should be easy to manage, customize, and check out. Take as
many forms of payment as you can, including new online services
such as Venmo. You should make it as easy as possible to accept
money. After all, no sale is ﬁnal until that happens. Remember that
the Ubers and Amazons of the world have changed all of our expect­
ations and that anything harder than checking out on those platforms
feels like a dinosaur. Life isn’t fair, we know, but if you want to
compete you have to invest in updating your UX/UI across all trans­
actional platforms.
You may think it is too expensive now, but a failure to do so will be
catastrophically expensive later. The customer is not going to go back in

190
DIGITAL SENSE
time with their expectations. They will judge you harshly and deal with
your archaic interface only until they discover an alternative means to
solve that problem and be gone to you forever.
5. A comfortable shopping experience: A great visual merchandiser and/
or web designer can make or break your business. In a physical store,
customers should be able to intuit where to ﬁnd what they need. Online,
the website should have easy navigate, be user friendly, and boast mobile
readiness and responsive design. The more comfortable a shopping
experience is, the longer a person will stay. Empowering in-store
personnel with the same technology tools as your customer so that they
can provide on-the-ﬂoor checkout or accurate in-store inventory num­
bers leveraging beacons and tablets is a must.
6. Empathy: Training your staff across the board on the lost art of sit­
uational awareness and emotional intelligence will be a worthy
investment. Understand where you customer is coming from and try
to defuse situations. Train your people to remember that everyone is
right from their own perspective and that the easiest way to get
someone to potentially see something your way is to ﬁrst invest the
energy into trying to see it from the perspective they are looking
through. However, don’t put up with abuse. There’s a thin line here,
and one that should be considered on a case by case basis. Zombies
buy stuff too. Have protocols in place that keep your employee health
as a priority and have clearly established core values that allow your
brand to take an effective stand that strengthens its bond with core
customers and employees alike.
Relevant Goals for Customer Service with Social Media
1. Increase customer satisfaction
2. Lower customer service costs
3. Improve efﬁciency
4. Increase NPS (Net Promoter Score)
5. Reduce call volume by increased social care

191
Social Business Strategy for Customer Service
Social Media Triage
It has been noted that in European countries, customer service is akin to
courtship, whereas in North America we tend to think of it more as triage.
What is “triage?” Typically, it’s a medical term, deﬁned by Wikipedia as “a
process of prioritizing patients based on the severity of their condition so as to
treat as many as possible when resources are insufﬁcient for all to be treated
immediately.”2
Sounds like an inspiring place to start, right? So how does the concept of
“triage” apply to social media monitoring?
The number of social posts that mention brands continually increases. In
2012, 53 percent of social media users complimented brands at least once a
month.3 In addition, 50-plus percent of social media users expressed con­
cerns or complaints about brands at least once a month. That was 5 years ago.
The amount of noise coming through social channels is now at an all-time
high.
If your organization has a social media monitoring program, you are
likely becoming overwhelmed with incoming mentions. How is a smart
social business to deal with all of the growing volume?
One solution is to use Social Monitoring Automation Triage to separate
incoming signal from the staggering amount of Internet noise. Travis worked
closely with Tristan Bishop at Symantec. He is now the head of Social Media
for Informatica.
Tristan set up and managed the triage for Norton customer support. Can
you imagine how many complaints and comments came through each day? It
was off the charts. Tristan and team chose Radian6 for social listening, cus­
tomer support, and triage.
Once this initial triage phase is complete, you can use manual triage to
sort the signal, separating posts that require immediate company response
from those that simply require research. Finally, a third level of triage can
help you connect the optimal employee to the customer, based on the
content of the social mention.
“Failure to respond via social channels can lead to up to a 15 percent increase in
churn rate for existing customers.”
—GARTNER4

192
DIGITAL SENSE
What you are looking for are the messages that come through that you
can act on. You can direct these to the employee in your organization who
can best solve your customer’s issue.
We chose to segment actionable posts into seven data classes:
1. Case: Request for help resolving real-time issue
2. Query: Question that doesn’t require support resource
3. Rant: Insult that merits brand management consideration
4. Rave: Praise from your brand advocate
5. Lead: Pronouncement of near-term purchase decision
6. RFE: Request to enhance a product with a new feature
7. Fraud: Communication from an unauthorized provider of your 
products 
Tristan helped set up the Symantec Global Triage team (Figure 12.1).
They were like the British Empire, as the sun never set on them.5Figure depicting symantic timezone calculator.

Figure 12.1 Symantic Timezone Calculator

193
Social Business Strategy for Customer Service
We had people around the world helping sort, manage, and route posts
of each class of customer message to a different business function for
response, as follows:
1. Case: Routed to Technical Support for immediate interaction
2. Query: Routed to Information Developers and Technical Writers
3. Rant: Routed to PR for brand protection assessment
4. Rave: Routed to Marketing for proactive engagement with advocates
5. Lead: Routed to Sales for pipeline consideration
6. RFE: Routed to Product Management for road map consideration
7. Fraud: Routed to Legal for follow-up and ofﬁcial action
“By using Social Media Monitoring Triage, wise brands can reach cus­
tomers on their channel of choice, connecting them to the employees best
equipped to meet their needs. This attentive strategy improves customer
experience and builds customer loyalty,” says Tristan Bishop.
Audit Your CX Center of Excellence
The deﬁnition of a Center of Excellence (COE) is a team, a shared facility, or
an entity that provides leadership, best practices, research, support and/or
training for the customer experience and social business domain within your
organization.6
As you have already done with your earlier efforts in the Vision Layer of
the EMF, we suggest you start with a clear list of goals, and the list below are
the most common found across our client base. We hope they give you a
good starting point or secondary source of external validation if you are
auditing your current COE.
Goals of the Social/CX Center of Excellence
1. Provide best practices
2. Education and training
3. Administration control
4. Governance and compliance

194
DIGITAL SENSE
5. Policy adherence
6. Executive visibility and buy-in
Where to Begin?
1. Start creating a social business COE by gathering a team of leaders from
the various lines of business as well as representation from corporate
communications and legal.
2. Next, deﬁne an operating model for the COE. This will include deﬁning
the mission and vision of the COE, tools, content strategy, stafﬁng,
training, education, and measures of success.
3. There is one thing that all COEs have in common: namely, assuming the
role of change agent.
“I look at my role more as an enabler than anything else. The only way
you’re going to get true scale is by allowing people to have accountability for
their efforts and ownership of their own programs, where they beneﬁt,” said
Don Bulmer, VP of Communication Strategy at Shell.
“We’re able to then have a dialogue where they [business] see the beneﬁts
of working with our Center of Excellence because we give them data and
information and context that allows them to be able to run with their pro­
grams beneﬁting from this platform that we’ve established. It’s one company,
right? It’s one brand.”7
One of the core social business functions for your organization is
community management. The community manager is the social face to
your customers. The community manager role may fall under the COE or
more frequently in the marketing department, although subject matter-
speciﬁc community managers do tend to remain distributed across the
company.
Executives are also key stakeholders of the Center of Excellence.
Their participation in the COE can be instrumental in making your
organization a true social business. They can use the COE to better exert
oversight and social media governance directives, set goals, and monitor
the transformation of the organization into a social business.8 Michael

195
Social Business Strategy for Customer Service
Brito wrote a great book called Your Brand that walks through this
in depth.
Your brand’s business pulse doesn’t stop at 5 PM; why should you?
Don’t miss a beat. Having a COE helps keep your key players plugged
in on-the-go, engaged with your community, and monitoring your brand
in real-time 24/7/365.


Section IV
Data and
Automation


13 Designing Your
Ultimate
Marketing Stack
N
ow that you have clearly stated goals, objectives, a vision, executive buy-
in, and a strategy in place, it’s time to looks at some tools and tech­
nologies to make your life easier and more efﬁcient.
Marketing technology—MarTech—is a hot topic, but actually adopting
these tech items can be intimidating for most business owners and executive
leaders. The intimidation makes sense. New technology can be scary, and
you don’t want to struggle with a tool that has a steep learning curve.
Unfortunately, this means companies are missing out on some great products
that can make life and business so much easier.
Consider this: What if you created your own MarTech starter kit with
several key solutions (Figure 13.1) that you could use to optimize your mar­
keting and tech departments? You could grow revenue, give your employees a
break, and optimize your time, money, and efforts. If you apply it correctly,
you create the magic bullet.
Here’s how you might begin to build your own MarTech stack so that
you can make data-fed iterations to optimize reliability within your customer
experience and uncover new insights for ongoing innovation. We’ve included
some potential software products in each category to point you in the right
direction. Keep in mind, no two tech stacks are the same.
199

200
DIGITAL SENSEA triangle depicting the data node of the EMF success layer, where the triangle is representing data. A circles inside the triangle is representing marketing technology CRM web analytics.

Figure 13.1 The Data Node of the EMF Success Layer
How to Build a Solid MarTech Stack
Just as you can’t build a solid, long-lasting ediﬁce on a foundation of mucky
soil, the foundation of the marketing technology stack is critical to its efﬁcacy
and long-term beneﬁt to the organization. You need to build on bedrock, and
for MarTech,1 that means customer relationship management (CRM), mar­
keting automation, and tag management.
“The stack”2 at any given company was likely conceived by the chief
marketing ofﬁcer (CMO) and chief technology ofﬁcer (CTO), but in many
businesses—from startups to enterprises—it now stands alone in a marketing
technology department. And given recent rapid changes in marketing tech­
nology, it may have been built on shaky ground (by today’s standards).
That’s where you come in.
Ideally, the various tools in your stack take your data and turn it into
customized marketing programs that are (1) automated and (2) measurable.
Ultimately, this means happier customers because they’re getting exactly
what they want at exactly the right time. Plus, the CEO is happy, which
means you’re happy. Everyone wins.
To achieve that goal, however, you need to ensure you’re building on a
rock-solid technological foundation.
Bottoms Up
A foundational principle of this book and the EMF is that you need to focus
on customers ﬁrst. As it relates to your MarTech stack, enter CRM, the place
where you keep your customer information organized.

201
Designing Your Ultimate Marketing Stack
CRM
You should be able to import data that you ﬁnd, create, or buy so that it can
be marketed—automatically. This ties into customer management, which
can overlap with CRM but is also part of the stack in its own right. You can
use an enterprise-level CRM, like Salesforce, or an SMB-level CRM like
Nimble, and there are many others to choose from. The key is to start col­
lecting your customer data so that your sales and marketing efforts will work
more effectively.
Remember that it’s more of an approach than a speciﬁc technology—
there are oodles of great, speciﬁc options out there. There’s tech to automate,
sync, and/or organize everything from actual customer service to sales or tech
support. CRM should be customer-oriented and usually features sales force
automation, data warehouse technology to aggregate data, and opportunity
management.
Marketing Automation
Marketing automation is designed for marketing departments and organiza­
tions to more effectively market on multiple channels online (such as e-mail,
social media, and websites) and automate repetitive tasks.3 It’s what gets you
there, and it’s made up of all kinds of campaigns, activities, and other goodies
that help you follow leads while relying on the criteria you need. Lead nur­
turing via sales funnels, all ending with an automatic CRM update? Yes,
please.
We’ve worked with Eloqua, Marketo, Pardot, Silverpop, and many other
marketing automation platforms. Pick one that you feel works best for your
organization.
Tag Management
Finally, tag management4 rounds out the MarTech stack foundation trifecta.
Did you know there are well over 2,000 marketing technologies5 out there and
counting? If you can nail these three, you are well on your way. How is that
for taking away some overwhelm?
Tag management helps you deploy tags on your websites with ease. If
you’re not tagging, you’re not providing a link between your customers and

202
DIGITAL SENSE
your online presence. You want to be agile, quick, and nimble. Deploying
marketing technologies through a tag management system (TMS) makes it
quick and painless. This also allows you to test multiple competitive tools at
the same time and get real data to show you which is the best.
Analytics and Tracking: You Need to Track Your
Performance, Ads, Technology, and Everything Else
How else will you know what’s working—and what isn’t? You need to be
data-driven, so you need to have your analytics in place to track everything.
By far, Google Analytics is your best weapon, which is why more than
80 percent of smaller businesses use it. They’ve also released Google Analytics
360, which is a comprehensive suite of tools. You might also want to check
out Adobe Analytics, especially if you’re an enterprise or headed in that
direction.
Invest in Keeping Your Stack Open
While the large Frankenstein marketing clouds (Figure 13.2) being built
through acquisition are getting great mind share, their promise of supposedly
fulﬁlling everything an advertiser needs within one company/cloud seems to
be more and more disjointed (from what the market wants), rather than
connected.
For instance, advertisers who want to use Adobe’s Experience Manager
and Site Catalyst—but also try Oracle’s new Maxymiser acquisition,6 IBM’s
Silverpop, Salesforce’s Radian6, or any other number of marketing tech­
nologies from the MarTech landscape—are able to do so when they’re
deployed through an independently owned premium tag management tool
like Ensighten, Tealium, or Signal.
New automation and marketing capabilities are being added all the time,
and agile marketers need to be able to deploy whatever they want, wherever
they want, and to remove it if it’s not delivering. They also need to collect,
own, and act on all of their marketing data. To do that, they must use tools
that work well with others, rather than those that lock them into a certain
“system.”

203
Designing Your Ultimate Marketing StackFigure depicting the marketing cloud that travis created.

Figure 13.2 The Marketing Cloud That Travis Created
As the Chief Marketing Technology Ofﬁcer at a technology consulting
ﬁrm and digital ad agency, CCP Digital, Travis always suggests to his clients
that they build their own custom, scalable marketing cloud, starting with the
foundational tools of CRM, marketing automation and tag management.
Sometimes, they don’t have the resources for that; however, that is the aspi­
rational goal. Once you have a solid MarTech stack foundation, it’s time to
start building up the rest of your marketing structure in earnest.
Your marketing technology stack will likely depend on your business
model, size of your company, if you’re ecommerce versus media or B2B, for
example. Here are some other key areas of focus for your marketing tech­
nology stack aside from analytics, tag management, CRM, and marketing
automation.
Data Management Platform (DMP)
In lay terms, a data management platform is a data warehouse. It’s software
that grabs, sorts, and stores information—and then spits it out in a way that’s
useful for marketers, publishers, advertisers, and other businesses.

204
DIGITAL SENSE
Vendors that sell DMP technology to the digital media world currently
include Adobe, Krux, Lotame, Aggregate Knowledge, BlueKai, and others.
Content Delivery Network (CDN)
A CDN works by providing alternate server nodes for users to download
resources (usually content like images and JavaScript). These nodes are spread
throughout the globe and are therefore physically closer to the end users,
which ensures a faster response and content download time. While CDNs are
a great solution for websites looking for speed improvements, not every site
needs a CDN. Akamai is a popular CDN, but there are many CDN vendors
from which to choose.
Conversion Optimization
Getting someone to your website is just the beginning of the battle. You can
lose your prospect with an unattractive layout, long forms, or a slow site.
Conversion optimization can easily double how many people ﬁll out online
forms, getting you that invaluable big data. Try out Optimizely or Conver­
sioner for A/B testing of your pages, the complimentary Landing Page Grader
from WordStream, or Ion Interactive to easily craft marketing apps with
absolutely no tech background required.
Enterprise businesses should consider Maxymiser, which was recently
acquired by Oracle, Monetate, or the original Adobe Target. With the right
conversion optimization tool, such as Adobe Target, you can change the
content of a site based on the content of the visitor coming to your site. This
is huge. For example, look at Figure 13.3. This is a layered look at Facebook;
on a typical ecommerce site, you can switch out any of those areas for other
content based on what you know about the visitor. Facebook is a complex
site, as everyone has a completely unique, personalized experience. All of
these areas are different based on your user proﬁle.
Campaign Management
Campaign management applications help organizations segment, target, and
manage multichannel marketing messages. Elements of functionality include
attribution, data mining, customer segmentation, customer-event triggering,
next-best-action recommendation engines, and campaign optimization.

205
Designing Your Ultimate Marketing Stack
Figure  dep ict ing the ma ny  layers of a website.

Many of these components may be in your marketing automation platform,
but not necessarily. Some of the better campaign management platforms are
Integrate, Ensighten, Pardot, and Adobe Campaign.
E-mail Marketing
E-mail marketing isn’t going anywhere, but most people aren’t using it as
well as they could be. One of the most important opportunities in delivering
great customer experience is how you strategically utilize and craft your nur­
ture streams and e-mail. This isn’t about spam, but about genuine e-mails
sent to people who have opted in because they are interested in your offer­
ings. Only send valuable materials—period. Content should be personalized
and sent in just the right doses. Some fantastic tools include Constant Con­
tact, ExactTarget/Salesforce Marketing Cloud, Emﬂuence, and MailChimp,
all pillars in the world of e-mail marketing. Infusionsoft is the king of the
solutions for businesses with fewer than 20 employees. Keep in mind that

206
DIGITAL SENSE
most marketing automation tools already have great e-mail marketing tools
within them, so you might already be sitting on a goldmine!
Mobile Optimization
The majority of people now use their smartphones or other mobile devices to
do just about everything. This means your site has to be easy to navigate and
view on mobile devices. Deploy responsive design from a designer who
knows the importance of mobile readiness. You can also create a mobile site
that’s totally different from your “desktop site” and/or an app to help with
mobile access. Mobile tag management is also a thing to manage aggressively.
Advertising Networks
There are many types of advertising tracking codes that you may want to use
on your site, as there are tons of ways to advertise. If you’re a smaller busi­
ness, you probably use Google AdWords, or maybe Google Retargeting or
DoubleClick. You probably use Facebook for ads, as well. If you don’t, you
should. Who knows more about your potential customers than Google and
Facebook? You want to optimize your Facebook ad campaigns using a variety
of tools and retargeting platforms. It works incredibly well for B2C and B2B.
Remarketing
You may not think you know it, but you already know ﬁrsthand what
remarketing is. If you visit a website and then later see an ad for that website
somewhere else, it’s most likely no coincidence. Remarketing helps you reach
people who have already searched for your offering—or something very sim­
ilar. You pay for these connections via a CPM approach, snagging a bundle of
impressions. You can use Google AdWords, AdRoll, or Perfect Audience to
get started.
Search Engine Marketing
Search engine optimization (SEO) is optimizing your site for good rankings
in Google and other search engines. Of course, SEO demands regular, origi­
nal, valuable content. Many companies depend on WordStream, gShiftLabs,
or BrightEdge to complement Google’s tools—and don’t forget that Bing
and YouTube are search engines that deserve a little SEO too.

207
Designing Your Ultimate Marketing Stack
Search Engine Advertising
You have to be where people are searching for products or services like yours.
Search ads let you test and improve copy, forms, and keywords, then track
potential customers via Google AdWords and Analytics. Bing Ads is a great
platform, as well. You can use the internal ad management platform within
Google or Bing, but it’s much more effective to use a third party. Many
search advertising platforms have popped up over the past couple of decades.
One that is really standing out is QuanticMind, based out of Redwood City.
QuanticMind been instrumental in ﬁnding efﬁciencies in our client’s paid
search campaigns. Sometimes as much as 40 percent lift in results and efﬁ­
ciencies, by using data science with your search marketing. We are big fans of
QuanticMind.
Monitoring the MarTech Stack
Looking at other sites’ MarTech stacks can help you imagine your own.
Here is a great example of a MarTech stack that is organized well, according
to data pulled by Ghostery. Figure 13.4 refers to HomeDepot.com. They
have many of the right pieces in place.
Here is another example: FoxNews.com (Figure 13.5) You can see that
they don’t have a tag management solution serving as a centralized hub for
managing vendors and customer data, so many of their tags are all over the place.
Figure 13.4 HomeDepot Technologies as of September 2015

208
DIGITAL SENSE
Figure 13.5 Fox News
These Ghostery graphics can also be fascinating for competitive analysis
as you work through the competitor research node of the Insights Layer. One
more example (Figure 13.6) is the worst marketing technology stack that
we’ve seen so far and it may come as somewhat of a shock given the nature of
their business. Whoever is managing TMZ.com is clearly a fan of duct tape,
Band-Aids, hope, and prayers, because it sure doesn’t look like there is a solid
plan behind their stack. They have Google Tag Manager, but nothing is
deployed through it. This stack is cringe-worthy.
Another great tool for competitive analysis is BuiltWith. It allows you to
see all of the technologies on any site, which sites have those technologies,
and which other technologies are present on those sites.
Figure 13.6 The Worst MarTech Stack Ever?! TMZ

209
Designing Your Ultimate Marketing Stack
Figure 13.7 BuiltWith Graph of Which Technologies Are Also on Sites
That Also Use Ensighten
Figure 13.7 shows which technologies are present on sites that are also
using Ensighten technology.
DIGITAL BIT: If you want to discover all of the mar­
keting technologies in the landscape, check out our full
MarTech Glossary: DigitalSen.se/martechglossary.7 We
have mapped out more than 300 categories of tools with
the help of CabinetM, a MarTech stack conﬁguration
tool. Or if you like something a bit more interactive,
explore GrowthVerse.com, as it has a dynamic visual­
ization mapping the whole marketing technology
ecosystem.

210
DIGITAL SENSE
There is no doubt about the exponential growth in the marketing tech­
nology landscape. It is very obvious both in terms of the sheer breadth of the
types of marketing as well as the number of marketing technology vendors. It
just continues to explode (Figure 13.8).
From 150 marketing technology vendors in 2011 to 5,500-plus in 2017
and counting. Just 5 short years ago we were still striving to deﬁne the role of
a marketing technologist, where marketing technology should sit within an
organization, and who owned the budget (the CMO or the CIO)? Look at
where we are now: most Fortune 500 companies and beyond have either a
chief marketing technologist or at least a marketing technology function
within their respective models. Several have implemented a chief customer
ofﬁcer to ensure that all of the silos are aligned with the same end game in
mind and yet there is still plenty of progress to make. We have come a long
way in a short time, however, and we hope that your efforts to raise the
digital sense of your organization continue that trend.
Despite that exponential growth of MarTech, the response from brands
and marketers has been rather slow and algorithmic. Technology has over­
shadowed the fundamental promise and has made us technology obsessed.
There has been a rush to adopt a high number of these marketing tech­
nologies, putting a tick on most areas. Yet in the rush to go after these shiny
objects, we are missing three key aspects of marketing and customer
Figure 13.8 The March 2016 Marketing Technology Landscape by
Scott Brinker8

211
Designing Your Ultimate Marketing Stack
experiences and genuine relationships. Two glaring needs remain for further
focus and integration:
• The need to deliver human experiences that will change behaviors and
lives and inspire participation
• The need to “apply” these technologies to drive tangible business growth
Needless to say, the whole landscape has been so overwhelming, that
marketers don’t know where to start, how to plan, prioritize, budget, and
scale especially if the technologies themselves change and evolve every few
months. They either diversify or consolidate.
MarTech That Drives Business Growth
While the solution may be easier said than done, here are keys to pierce
through the clutter and focus on the “application” of these technologies to
drive business growth and transformation (see Figure 13.9).
Find the “human” within your marketing technology landscape. We
need to ﬂip the equation, shift from a technology-led approach to a human-
and consumer-obsessed mindset. The opportunity is in the “application” of
these marketing technologies to solve business challenges like:
• Increase market share
• Maximize lifetime value
Figure 13.9 The Ultimate Goal by Mayur Gupta

212
DIGITAL SENSE
• Increase share of wallet
• Drive household penetration
Or drive behavioral change for instance:
• Drive trial
• Increase loyalty
• Build trust
• Or resolve for issues such as stigma as a behavioral problem, related to
adoption and usage for certain type of products
Design a stack that will address these needs. The KPIs should center on
the customer need and the business challenge. Instead, most times we focus
on delivering a personalized experience to an underdeﬁned persona or
adopting programmatic media buying capability because it seems more efﬁ­
cient. That needs to change.
Agile Is Your Savior
There is no such thing as a static road map. With an ever-changing
landscape that diversiﬁes faster than it converges, does anything like a
road map exist anymore? How do you plan, prioritize, and budget for
these technologies? The competitive ecosystem gets more fragmented
each day, and smaller players are able to move faster as they have no
historical baggage. So how do you compete and stay ahead of the curve?
These are very real challenges that require a fundamental shift across a
few aspects:
Marketing Technology Frameworks and the EMF
Within your overarching EMF you must establish an internal framework that
allows you to map and prioritize the marketing technology landscape against
your needs. A process to execute a current state assessment across different
dimensions:
• Mapped against consumer journeys—the most efﬁcient process

213
Designing Your Ultimate Marketing Stack
Figure 13.10 MarTech Framework
• Mapped against key technology categories and buckets—you could 
summarize the entire landscape within these categories; data, media, 
content and commerce 
• Mapped against horizontal layers
Relying on a MarTech framework like the one in Figure 13.10, you
identify the high-, medium-, and low-focus areas based on business priorities
and consumer needs. No more “business or functional requirements”—move
away from a technologist waiting for requirements, the traditional speciﬁca­
tions and needs. The marketing technologist needs to think and operate like a
product owner, a product evangelist who understands the only require-
ment—the most optimized, secure, and reliable customer experience.
Always-On Assessment, Evaluation, and Adoption
There cannot be an end date to your road map. You need to be always
assessing and evaluating new capabilities, technologies, and partnerships.
Dedicate a small percentage of your resources to scouting, industry analysis,
thought leadership, and building external partnerships.
No Single Platform Winner aka “Marketing Operating System”
Many had hoped the big four—IBM, Adobe, Salesforce, and Oracle—would
do to marketing what Apple and iPhone did to the smartphone industry;
provide a marketing operating system (mOS) that could provide a develop­
ment kit to marketers and technologists to build on. It would provide all the
fundamental pieces including the universal view of the consumer, the

214
DIGITAL SENSE
necessary connection points across different components. The marketer
could extend and build more creative applications on top of it. That did not
happen. The landscape exploded at a faster rate than these players could
build, acquire, and integrate. So how do you survive in all this fragmentation
until there is a consolidation in the future?
Answer: make APIs and service-oriented architecture your best friend.
Invest in and establish an API service layer in a loosely coupled architecture
giving you extendibility and ﬂexibility to plug in and plug out technologies as
necessary. Believe in “data is the new oil,” the only lynchpin that can wire
your ecosystem, and tie the customer journey together with your customized
MarTech stack. We recommend using a service layer such as Cloud­
Elements.com to connect your entire app ecosystem.
Build, Buy, or Rent?
It’s fascinating to see how many organizations still invest in building com­
moditized capabilities that are available outside at probably half the cost,
while containing more advanced feature sets and that could be adopted and
scaled at 10 times the speed. It’s the traditional false notion of “control” and
“ownership.” Unless:
• it’s something you will sell in the market at scale,
• it’s your core competency and it represents who you are,
• it makes you unique and differentiated, or
• no one else can solve it for you
“DO NOT build it; just rent it or buy it. The price for commodity capability in
market is cheap. Your strategic headcount is priceless. Apply that in your core
competency. You may not ﬁnd the perfect match but by the time you build per­
fection on your own, the world would have changed another 10 times. In mar­
keting today, the need for speed is much higher than the desire for perfection.”
—MAYUR GUPTA
Mobile Marketing Technology Stacks
VB Insight recently did some new research about mobile marketers about
mobile marketing in general. Hundreds of respondents told us that more
than half of their signiﬁcantly sized budgets are going into mobile.

215
Designing Your Ultimate Marketing Stack
Where Are Marketers Spending Their Mobile Dollars?
43 percent are spending their budgets on user acquisition.
20 percent on branding and awareness
12 percent customer retention
5 percent customer advocacy
It is surprisingly bad that companies are pouring so much into acquisi­
tion when customer retention and advocacy are what drive the long-term
value of your company. You want to build great long-term relationships with
your customers. Keep them. Loyal customers are gold. And listen to this
shocking stat: Sixty percent of the mobile marketers who responded to the
VB Insights questionnaire shared that mobile was a complete silo as a channel
strategy in their organization. “Many organizations miss mobile and lack
mobile expertise in-house,” Stewart Rogers said.9
During a recent VB Engage podcast, Roland Smart, VP of Social and
Community at Oracle, said, “Marketers, in general, are overwhelmed by the
sheer volume of marketing technologies that are coming into the market. A
signiﬁcant share of that relates to mobile. And because of that, there is not
enough maturity within their organizations. Many people at the organization
have no idea on how to maximize these mobile marketing technologies.
Many marketers are still thinking solely about campaigns, which is
incomplete and suboptimal.”10
He was alluding to the fact that even a lot of marketers lack digital sense.
Roland Smart is a smart man (pun not intended). He is a fellow Wiley author
of the book The Agile Marketer. Get it, if you want to have your mind blown.
Drive Internal Buy-In and Stakeholder Inﬂuence by
Measured ROI
Just like marketing and sales, marketing technology needs to be measur­
able and accountable to deliver the major business objectives within your
EMF. Quantify the impact of your marketing technology investment.
This is the proof point of tying marketing technologies to business
objectives and consumer behavioral change. The only way you drive
inﬂuence internally within the leadership is by measuring, analyzing, and
continuously optimizing the ROI.

216
DIGITAL SENSE
Within the S-Curve of innovation for marketing technology, we are only
through the early stage of adoption. We have overcome reasonable technol­
ogy obstacles and have seen early returns and efﬁciencies. The real application
and exponential “business growth and progress” is yet to come, but well
underway. In the coming years with a clear alignment around the customer as
the number one asset and the EMF as a model to build on, we believe mar­
keting technology leaders will continue to innovate and shape the future of
marketing with their cross-departmental peers in unprecedented ways. We
hope to learn and tell your stories of brilliance in future editions and
podcasts.

Section V
Future-Prooﬁng


14 Building a
Personal Brand,
BRO
L
ike all great loves in your life, when you look at your career and your
company as a relationship, it won’t feel like work to put the effort in. If
you have ever seen Travis speak or conduct a workshop, he drills his point
home humorously with his philosophy of Business Relationship Optimiza­
tion. You need to optimize the relationships in your life.
Business Relationship Optimization
You become who you hang around. Travis realized while working on a cou­
ple of startups that he didn’t have enough connections and business rela­
tionships outside of Kansas City. In 2007, Travis was working on a startup
called AdiQus. The inspiration for the company was to create Advertising
Intelligence. Ad IQ, get it?
219

220
DIGITAL SENSE
Quite frankly, most ads suck. Both of us have a deep hatred for shitty
advertising and marketing but Travis and his partners at the time decided to
do something about it.
What about ads that could be targeted on hundreds of various
parameters and geo-based? AdiQus was to be a cross between Gowalla
and Groupon, neither of which existed yet. Partners Gary Jones, Joey
Knight, and Travis had built quite a team in Kansas City. Kansas City
has been historically conservative with its capital allocations. The Kauff­
man Entrepreneurial Foundation in Kansas City wasn’t as accessible to
the community then, as it is now. When Kansas City was chosen as
Google Fiber’s ﬁrst Gigabit City in 2012, the town erupted with entre­
preneurship. Having superfast Internet connectivity has been great for
the area.
In the 2007 version of Kansas City there were few investors, but through
mentors, AdiQus was introduced to an unnamed angel capital ﬁrm in Texas.
AdiQus was to get a check for $500,000 in four days, when the FBI came to
the ofﬁce.
What?????
1. The principal of the capital ﬁrm gets arrested by the FBI for a Financial
Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) stock market violation.
2. AdiQus doesn’t get the funding and
3. Travis had already trained his replacement at Centriq Training.
4. Travis gets really f#%king drunk that night.
5. Travis wakes up next day and hustles on to what’s next.
6. Travis starts doing freelance web-dev and marketing.
7. ???
8. Proﬁt!
Instead of crying about his First World problem, Travis got up, put
on his big-boy pants, and found a way to not sink. Economy be
damned. Travis was able to choose one conference to go to, and he chose
the Web 2.0 Expo, an O’Reilly event April 2007, at Moscone Center in

221
Building a Personal Brand, BRO
San Francisco. Biz Stone was a presenter and that’s when Travis ﬁrst
heard about Twitter. Also during the week, Travis got a ticket to attend
the Digg 1 Millionth User Party with founder Kevin Rose and Jay
Adelson.
Travis had an epiphany at the Digg 1 Million User Party. “It’s all about
who you know, what you know, and who knows that you know what you
know.”
Travis needed to know people who knew people, because he didn’t know
anyone outside of Kansas City.
Travis needed to optimize his business relationships. Business Relationship
Optimization. Boom goes the dynamite. Building, growing, and nurturing
relationships with inﬂuencers is genius. Social media helps you build the hell
out of online relationships. Who knew? Well, once he did there was no going
back.
Ass Kiss it Forward
As a standard rule of thumb, you need more and better relationships with
experts, thought leaders, practitioners, and inﬂuencers in your chosen
ﬁeld. It’s real life PR hacking for your personal brand. Who do you want
to know? First, ﬁnd ways to add value to them. Add lots and lots of value.
Optimize the relationships. Engage with them on social media. Tweet or
retweet them, comment on their blogs, maybe interview them for a pod-
cast. Give them some publicity. Do favors for your customers, partners,
vendors, friends, and so on. Ass kiss it forward; do a favor for them ﬁrst.
As Chris says, #GiveFirst, #GiveOften, #GiveTilItHurts, and then
#GiveSomeMore.
Both us will rarely ask anyone for anything up front, but we’ll provide all
types of value. This is a great habit because when you actually do need a
favor, you’re withdrawing from a bank account that has plenty of good will
already banked.
Relationships are like a bank account. You can deposit into it, or with­
draw from it. If you overdraw on your account, you will probably lose that
friendship. You need to optimize your business relationships, not just around

222
DIGITAL SENSE
social media, but in all mediums. Spend time with people, not just on e-mail
or messenger, but on video call or human to human (H2H), in person at
events.
It’s one more reason that Zappos is such a great company. They kiss their
customers’ asses. They have hassle-free shipping and returns. The CEO,
Tony Hsieh, wrote a book called Delivering Happiness. That’s all about cus­
tomer experience. Business in the twenty-ﬁrst century requires that you nur­
ture relationships with your customers, employees, partners, vendors, and
industry inﬂuencers. It’s crucial, bro. Seriously though, isn’t BRO a great
acronym?
After he started his post-apocalyptic rebuild in 2008, Travis began con­
necting with the top thought leaders in the marketing industry, following
them on various social media sites. Twitter was huge as a tool and just gain­
ing real traction so he rode that wave of attention. The ability to read what
the smartest minds in Silicon Valley, NYC, and Hollywood had to say was
fascinating.
In Kansas City, a great community of like minds were also assembling via
social media. The community grew rapidly. Amazing entrepreneurs and
marketing minds like John Jantsch, Shelly Kramer, Shawn Elledge, Davyeon
Ross, Mike “Jortsy” Gelphman, Lisa Qualls, Alisha Templeton, and Jessica
Best began to percolate in the city.
You’ve heard the adage, “You become who you hang around.” Your
circle of inﬂuence is crucial to deﬁning your moral compass, and helps shape
who you become. So, choose wisely. We both tell are kids that in life, you
should ﬂush the turds. Don’t let the turds or—Zombies—bring you into the
toilet with them.
Social media has helped connect the world with the best and the
brightest. Web 2.0 and social media has brought the world together.
You can communicate with almost anyone, almost anywhere, at almost
any time of day. Over time and over 35,000 tweets later, Travis grew
this huge network, optimized the relationships, and has grown and
helped several businesses as a direct result of those relationships. As a
matter of fact, to show the power of these platforms, this entire book
was written using Google Docs and Facebook Messenger; Travis and

223
Building a Personal Brand, BRO
Chris never sat face to face in the same city once during the entire
process. The ﬁnal day before submitting this manuscript to Wiley,
Chris was online for 15 straight hours editing and formatting away in
the Google Doc while Travis was 37,000 feet in the air on a ﬂight to
Shanghai connected to the in-ﬂight Wi-Fi. What an amazing time to be
alive!
The Internet today is social. Proximity is now possible from anywhere in
the world. It is because of this new reality that there are three types of ROI
you must measure. They have an interrelated relationship over time to your
personal and enterprise value.
• ROI=Return on Investment
• ROI=Return on Inﬂuence (aka, “ROR”=Return on Relationships fans
of Ted Rubin)
• ROI=Risk of Inactivity
According to Deloitte, the average human being alive today (age 18–74)
with a smartphone checks it an average of 46 times per day.1 Those in the
18–24 age bracket check it an average of 74 times per day. Other reports have
shown even higher volumes of more than 150 times a day, but the point is
every 6 to 15 minutes of a normal waking day, human beings are interacting
with their mobile devices.
This unprecedented and ever-compounding habitual thirst for engage­
ment is the current state of the Internet. It is not a fad or a phase, but a new
reality. An always-on demand level that is ubiquitously available to the
majority of western society. By 2018, 3 billion more people that have lived
on this planet outside of the commercial market will come online via the
mobile web. In the new reality none of us are actually just employees or
consumers.
ProSumerTribuDucers
With the power and processing speed in our hands and the addiction we
all have to this digital sixth sense, we are now all what Chris likes to call

224
DIGITAL SENSE
“ProSumerTribuDucers” living in an age of opportunity. Say that three
times quickly. Every human now has the ability to produce, consume,
distribute data, curate information, and create content, goods, and ser­
vices, in real time with nothing more than a mobile web connection and
their voice or thumbs.
DIGITAL BIT: This would be a great time to subscribe
to the Digital Sense e-mail: DigitalSen.se/email. The
e-mail newsletter is where we produce, consume, and
distribute data, curate information, and create content,
goods, and services, in real time with nothing more than
our mobile web connection and our voice or thumbs
weekly! After all we are ProSumerTribuDucers just
like you.
With an additional 3 billion people joining this new truth in the coming
few years, we have an unprecedented challenge and opportunity to build or
lose our relationships value at scale at the speed of trust.
H2H was an old-school yet unscalable way of doing business in the pre-
Internet era. As we are ﬁrmly embedded in the third decade of a World Wide
Web, it is now not only scalable but imperative for brands that wish to
succeed. Bryan Kramer speaks about human-to-human at scale in his book,
There is no B2B or B2C: It’s Human to Human #H2H.
Where big data has failed, small data has become more relevant than
ever. Personalization is an expected commodity because of machine learning,
search, AI, cookies, pixel tracking, etc. This all boils back down to the fact
that your business is a relationship before it is anything else. Like all rela­
tionships that last, there must be a consistent and mutually beneﬁcial return
on the investment of time, energy, and money put into the maintenance of
that endeavor. It requires constant, consistent, and clear communication in
good times and bad.

225
Building a Personal Brand, BRO
Return on investment is now completely dictated by how great
you are at engagement at the right time with the right information to
generate a return on inﬂuence. You have spent the bulk of this book
learning how to apply these social business strategies to your business,
but you must apply it to your personal brand of relationship building
as well.


15 Avoiding
Obsolescence and
the Road Ahead
C
ongratulations on making it through the entire book and to the ﬁnal
chapter. By now you probably feel as though you just drank water at
point blank range from a ﬁre hose. We appreciate your participation more
than you know. As you can tell we had a lot to say. But anyone who knows
the two of us won’t be surprised.
We thought the best way to wrap up this book was to ﬁnish up with a
few thoughts on the future that highlight the amazing opportunity and eth­
ical challenges we face as we all endeavor to elevate the digital sense of
humanity.
Dead Ideas
Let’s start with a chart in Figure 15.1 that shows the newest paradigm
shifts of what Chris called “the Opportunity Age” in a blog post back in
2013. These are important shifts to noodle on as a business leader and
marketer, as they will inﬂuence and shape your thinking around every­
thing from where the gaps in your market will be in the years ahead and
227

228
DIGITAL SENSE
Figure 15.1 Chart from Chris J Snook’s Blog R.I.P. Information
Age . . . Welcome the Opportunity Age1
where your organization must mentally move on to broken “x” type ideas
that no longer hold value or merit.
It’s estimated by Forrester Research in their “Death of a B2B Sales­
man” report that 1 million B2B salespeople in the United States will be
obsolete in the next four years. The report says that buyers in this market
“overwhelmingly prefer” a DIY approach.2 After all, they’re one of the
Bs in that equation, and marketing automation is delivering increasingly
personalized and relevant value without the annoyance of the dreaded
salesperson follow-up voice mails and inbox notes with “just touching
base” in the subject line.

229
Avoiding Obsolescence and the Road Ahead
With online research readily available, it’s often not necessary to talk
to a salesperson anymore. You can manage the entire sales process by
yourself, at home, and never with the awkwardness of “dealing” with a
human who is worried about the end of month number. It’s said that
websites, not people, are what’s keeping the B2B sales process
ticking now.
Experts Evolve into Sensemakers!
Okay, buyers might not need “salespeople,” but they will always need experts
in the form of sensemakers. Sensemakers are able to rapidly learn, assimilate,
leverage their network, and customize a solution to the buyer’s problem and
architecture. The role of trusted advisor/sensemaker is your goal to avoiding
obsolescence.
There’s another study from SiriusDecisions in 2015 that argues
against Forrester’s research, stating that “Buyers interact with sales repre­
sentatives at every stage of the buyer’s journey.”3 It’s a false perception
that salespeople are “declining due to disintermediation by digital buying
behaviors.”
Instead, this research encourages the B2B community to remember
human interaction can and will happen no matter what. Digital marketing
doesn’t equate to human interactions leaving entirely, according to Senior
Research Director Jennifer Ross. She says, “It just means that buyers and
providers are interacting in new digital ways. Just because buying behavior is
done digitally does not mean that sales representatives are no longer required
to instigate or facilitate a buying process.”
The business world is moving forward faster and faster, and as a marketer
or sales leaders you need to position yourself as the person who can help
organizations make sense of it all and to keep pace.
Lifelong Learning as a Habit
Good leaders all have at least one thing in common: you need to develop the
childlike curiosity of your youth again and see learning as a daily habit. The
other area you must invest in developing more of is your emotional

230
DIGITAL SENSE
intelligence, because at least for the next several decades, it will be the only
advantage and form of intelligence humans will have in exclusivity from the
machines and deep learning protocols.
If you consider the idea that 70 percent of learning happens at work,
20 percent via mentoring, and 10 percent in classroom settings, the mes­
sage is clear: we need to be learning more at work since it’s prime time to
do so. To try and appease this formula, we’ve embraced the concept of
incremental learning at work. Basically, we get an idea, practice it (maybe
with some feedback), and eventually “master” it. This kind of learning is
easy, obvious, can be addictive, and is a culture worth cultivating in your
ofﬁce.
5G, IOT, AI, VR, and Drones, Oh My!
Are you feeling excited and ready? 5G is coming soon! Get ready to feel
like that Colonial soldier we spoke of at the outset of this book. In many
ways, the world will become more open, transparent, and amazing. It will
also be ﬁlled with more examples of chaos, polarization, and violence as
humanity adjusts and deals with the terror barrier en masse. Some will be
well equipped emotionally and intellectually and many will not. Leader­
ship will be needed at all levels across society. We all face an amazing
opportunity to move beyond the cyclical norms of violence and war, and
in other ways, if we aren’t careful, it could become a bit dystopian. The
extra effort we need to make now as you have upgraded your digital sense
is truly “thinking” about what Humarithms said: we need to embed in
our methodology as much as we have obsessed over our proprietary algo­
rithms.4 The ethics and moral center will be tested and are uniquely ours
as humans to keep at the heart of all we design moving forward. Tech­
nology, like money, is a great tool, but can be a horribly dangerous God/
master.
On the positive side of near-term technology upgrades, as 5G rolls out to
everyone with 10Gbits/sec connections, information will ﬂow to us faster
than ever. We will be able to stream gigantic ﬁles at impeccable quality.
Factor in virtual and augmented reality, and we’ll be able to stream virtual
worlds that are virtually indistinguishable from our true reality (no pun

231
Avoiding Obsolescence and the Road Ahead
intended). Dominique Bonte, VP of ABI Research, recently produced a
report on 5G that envisions three versions of 5G:
• Enhanced mobile broadband for higher-bandwidth mobile applications
• Low-bandwidth, high-latency connections designed for supporting hun­
dreds of millions of devices on the Internet of Things
• Ultrareliable, low-latency connections, which is best for automotive 
applications 
In October 2015, Huawei and NTT DOCOMO partnered to test
5G wireless data at a large scale, using sub-6GHz bands. Unlike previous lab
experiments, the entire test was conducted in a public place. Huawei and
NTT DOCOMO were able to reach data speeds of 3.6Gbps! The Interna­
tional Telecommunication Union recently standardized that 5G data speeds
should reach up to 20Gbps speeds.5 However, Nokia believes that 5G can be
as fast as 30Gbps. This is like having Internet speeds of a faucet drip and
moving to a ﬁrehose!
In late June 2016, U.S. FCC Chairman Tom Wheeler circulated a pro­
posal to kick off 5G wireless for the United States. “If the Commission
approves my proposal next month, the United States will be the ﬁrst country
in the world to open up high-band spectrum for 5G networks and applica­
tions,” Wheeler stated in prepared remarks. “And that’s damn important
because it means U.S. companies will be ﬁrst out of the gate.”
Lightning-fast Internet. Everything connected to the cloud. Mixed real­
ity headsets and 360 cameras becoming a commoditized norm. Connected
autonomous cars driving in unison. Everything with a battery linking to 5G.
Wow. This is your next decade in real time.
The Fourth Industrial Revolution
With all of these technologies rolling out, there will be a mass elimination of
jobs performed by actual human beings. Gerd Leonhard has predicted that
50 percent of the jobs that exist in 2017 will be eliminated within 5 years,
never to return, while 50 percent of the jobs needed in 5 years have not even
been conceived of yet. Take restaurants for example: we are already seeing
kiosks eliminating order takers. Manufacturing jobs, truck drivers, repetitive

232
DIGITAL SENSE
tasks from accounting to tax preparation and paralegal reviews will all be
replaced by machine learning AI.
In fact, look to the survey date from the 2016 World Economic Forum
in Davos, Switzerland. At this gathering of world political and economic
leaders, the Fourth Industrial Revolution was a central topic.6 The forum
surveyed senior executives from over 350 of the world’s largest companies
and found that as many as 7.1 million jobs in the world’s richest countries
could be lost through technology advancements, redundancy, and automa­
tion. These losses could be partially offset by the creation of 2.1 million new
opportunities in various sectors, but current estimates show that in the short
term there will be a gap of 5 million jobs until we come through the other
side of the curve and ﬁgure out the true need there.
There is a large chance that even the concept of money will need to be
rethought or will face a forced disruption as 7 billion-plus people try to nav­
igate continued survival in a world where crony capitalism and central bank­
ing theory has become completely inequitable and unsustainable as a faux
free-market ideology that creates far too many losers and far too few winners.
Innovation can be stiﬂed but it is highly unlikely at this point, since we are
ofﬁcially in the knee bend of the technology curve, and the dark side of the
Force has fewer and fewer places to hide as hackers for humanity begin to
appear in deeper density around the globe.
Virtual Reality Mini-VRcations
It seems unlikely for many who have not seen how powerful VR simulations
have become, but we could take minivacations in the middle of the after­
noon, while our robots work! We call them “VRcations.” You can put on
your virtual reality headset, sit on a hammock in your ofﬁce, put on
your headphones, spray some coconut scent, turn on a fan, and relax for
15 minutes (okay, 30) or so before getting back to work.
Our actual reality may be a bit polluted with smog, and many humans
may lack the ﬁnancial health to take a real vacation, but in virtual reality we
would be sitting in a lovely location somewhere in the world. With 4K and
8K video resolution streaming via 5G download speeds, we will be able to
“teleport” to any destination on Earth at a moment’s notice. As we perfect
the scale of suborbital ﬂights it will also be very likely that transcontinental air

233
Avoiding Obsolescence and the Road Ahead
ﬂight in the future will be reduced to hours or minutes versus half of your
day. Once affordable you could hop in a Virgin Galactic ship in Los Angeles
(or similar) and head straight up into suborbital space to allow the world to
spin below you and then reinsert right back down in an hour or two to
Dubai.
No need to worry about translation, either, because according to Baidu
Research voice recognition will jump to 99 percent accuracy from 95 percent
within the next few years, and that will mean that language translation and
dialect interpretation will be as good as our normal language processing,
making cross-cultural communication a breeze and replacing the need for
typing forever. We can’t wait and have agreed not to write another book until
that is a reality LOL.
Virtual Reality Masterminds and Uploadable
Consciousness
One area where we are particularly excited about the potential of VR and
5G is the prospect for a new type of mastermind meeting area. If you’ve
ever seen Travis’s business card, on the back of it he has a group of about
50 people who have inspired him throughout time. Ray Kurzweil has
discussed the possibility of digital immortality within the coming two
decades. There will come a day when each member in the mastermind
group is fully integrated with artiﬁcial intelligence and we are all able to
interact with each other and legends of the past (Figure 15.2). Their
audio, writings, books, and videos from the past will detail their person­
alities. You could eventually have conversations with them—or at least
their AI twins. Who do you wish you had the chance to meet? Soon you
will be able to have virtual coffee with anyone in the history of humanity.
Imagine what happens to disease when your medical doctor can download
the totality of the world’s best surgeons in that practice area from around
the world before they operate on your loved one.
Do you remember the scene from The Matrix where Trinity down­
loads the knowledge of how to ﬂy a helicopter in seconds? The singularity
is predicted to occur somewhere around 2023. This will all become real in
the next 6 or 7 years and it will all become widely affordable shortly
thereafter.

234
DIGITAL SENSEPhotograph depicting Travis Wright’s personally customized virtual mastermind.

Figure 15.2 Travis Wright’s Personally Customized Virtual Mastermind
5G Allows Minimal Latency
Another thing that fascinates us is the prospect for vehicles in the future
being interlocked in an autonomous grid. The minimal latency of 5G will
allow ﬂeets of cars to communicate with each other on a massive scale.
With only a 1-millisecond latency, your car can adjust slightly and all of
the cars nearby will be able to react in almost real time. This could
potentially eliminate many car accidents. It also comes with a major
opportunity to secure the gaps in security to prevent a large terror hack
that can be executed from a remote location with catastrophic conse­
quences. There are two sides to every coin but solving some of the more
humanistic aspects of these scenarios ﬁrst for the beneﬁt of all humanity
and not just for proﬁt will also provide us an unprecedented shot at peace
on a large scale.
“5G could also open up other commercial applications, including life-
cycle management, enabling car manufacturers to update vehicle ﬁrmware
wirelessly, in the not so distant future,” said Dominique Bonte of ABI
Research.

235
Avoiding Obsolescence and the Road Ahead
A “Hilton hotel car” with no driver will pick you up at the airport and
take you to the hotel. As of the writing of this manuscript Uber had already
launched its driverless pilot project in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Your vaca­
tion or business trip will begin with minimal transportation stress.
The Dark Side of Drones
Drones will unfortunately begin to litter the sky. You may actually need to
put on virtual reality goggles just to see a peaceful blue sky with scattered
clouds if we aren’t careful. Google has a top secret project called “Project
Skybender,” and it aims to deliver 5G Internet from solar drones; it is also
experimenting with millimeter-wave radio transmissions.
One concern for many civilians is drones becoming so connected. Israeli
startup Airobotics recently launched their autonomous industrial drones and
announced $28.5 million in funding. It makes drones that ﬂy, with very little
human involvement, thanks to a series of breakthroughs in robotics, sensors,
and navigation systems.
Why is this important? Well, these
OpenAI is a nonproﬁt artiﬁcial
aren’t consumer drones that are retro­
intelligence (AI) research company,
ﬁtted; these are fully redesigned auton­
associated with business magnate Elon
omous drones that ﬂy in squadrons.
Musk, that aims to carefully promote
They can handle much larger payloads
and develop open-source friendly AI
in such a way as to beneﬁt, rather
than consumer drones, allowing them
than harm, humanity as a whole.
to become weaponized. And if you
The organization aims to “freely
think you could escape them by jump-
collaborate” with other institutions and
ing into a body of water, well, enter the
researchers by making its patents and
Hydroswarm: the drone that can swim
research open to the public. The
in water. For some reason humans have
company is supported by over US$1
billion in commitments; however, only a
always designed technology to create
tiny fraction of the $1 billion pledged is
more efﬁcient and better ways to elimi­
expected to be spent in the ﬁrst few
nate our existence before we move to
years. Many of the employees and board
more productive uses. With nanobot
members are motivated by concerns
technology becoming more prevalent as
about existential risk from artiﬁcial
well, we could have swarms of mos-
general intelligence.7
quito-sized nanobots ﬂying around on
various military missions.

236
DIGITAL SENSE
This is an area where we could take a wrong turn in the future. As
marketers and business leaders, we are only sharing these potential dark
futures so that you are not marketing or developing paths to proﬁtability
today that will have an unlikely chance of being benign in the future. One of
the most important open source projects out there right now is OPENAI and
we encourage you to follow the blog at OpenAI.org/blog.
We should always strive to use technology for the betterment of
humanity, not for killing or controlling people. That would openly lead to
our extinction as machines reach superintelligence in three decades.
5G Possibilities
5G wireless networks will connect 50 billion people and things by 2020.
Only the next generation of networks optimized for 5G will able to meet
the speed, latency, and energy efﬁciency required to deliver the Internet of
Things (IoT) experiences of the future. “5G will give birth to the next
phase of human possibilities, bringing about the automation of every­
thing,” said Marcus Weldon, chief technology ofﬁcer at Nokia. “This
automation, driven by a smart, invisible network, will create new busi­
nesses, give rise to new services and, ultimately, free up more time for
people.”8
The future is set up to be one helluva ride for all of us. There are some
dangerous roads that civilization could go down, but personally, we are
hopeful that digital sense will continue to spread as you solve the short term
needs of your business sustainability and focus on putting the human touch
back into every interaction and decision point using the EMF.
You may look around and feel as though we are living a real world
version of that movie Idiocracy, but we see much more progress in the
opposite direction. Youth have always held humanity’s future promise.
The next 9 to 10 years will be ﬁlled with evidence that can be interpreted
as the end of the world, but if you read The Fourth Turning by Neil
Howe and William Strauss and The Watchman’s Rattle by Rebecca Costa,
you will be gifted with more knowledge on what dynamics are at play as
humans navigate our evolutionary biology within times of quantum
technology.

237
Avoiding Obsolescence and the Road Ahead
We have enjoyed giving you a thorough and practical model for
upgrading your human software layer with more digital sense, and thank you
for joining us on the journey to bring more light to humanity and commerce
with each action we take as a collective from this day forward.
The End (and The Beginning)


NOTES  
Preface
1. Travis Wright’s tweet to the Chiefs, “The Tweet Hear ’Round the World,” https:// 
twitter.com/teedubya/status/245324813265145857. 
2. Jay Baer, Hug Your Haters (Penguin Publishing Group, 2016), www.jaybaer.com/ 
hug-haters. 
3. Joel Thorman, “Chiefs Have Plenty of Salary Cap Space Entering 2012 Season,” SB
Nation, September 4, 2012, http://www.arrowheadpride.com/2012/9/4/3290986/ 
chiefs-salary-cap-space. 
4. Jason La Canfora, “Updated Cap Space for All 32 Teams,” NFL.com, August 16, 
2011, http://blogs.nﬂ.com/2011/08/16/updated-cap-space-for-all-32-teams. 
5. Sam Laird, “Dissed Fan Teaches NFL Team a Social Media Lesson on Twitter,”
Mashable, September 12, 2012, http://mashable.com/2012/09/12/nﬂ-fan-chiefs.  
6. Save Our Chiefs Facebook Fan Page, https://www.facebook.com/SaveOurChiefs/ 
Chiefs. 
7. Joel Thorman, “Kansas City Chiefs Break Guinness World Record against Patriots 
with 142.2 Decibels: A New Record for Arrowhead Stadium and Chiefs Fans.” SB
Nation, September 29, 2014, http://www.arrowheadpride.com/2014/9/29/ 
6870283/kansas-city-chiefs-guinness-world-record-crowd-noise-decibels-patriots­
mnf. 
8. Travis Wright, “Data Strategy Symposium,” Ashton Media, YouTube video, 59:24, 
from Data Strategy Symposium, February 9, 2015, https://www.youtube.com/ 
watch?v=xosapBvUeQ4. 
9. Optus Twitter page and Travis Wright’s Twitter feed, accessed May 14 2015,  
https://twitter.com/search?q=%40teedubya%20%40optus&src=typd.  
10. Klaus Schwab, “The Fourth Industrial Revolution: What It Means, How to 
Respond,” World Economic Forum, January 14, 2016, www.weforum.org/agenda/ 
2016/01/the-fourth-industrial-revolution-what-it-means-and-how-to-respond. 
Chapter One
1. Greg Ferenstein, “Futuristic Simulation Finds Self-Driving ‘Taxibots’ Will Elimi­
nate 90% of Cars, Open Acres of Public Space,” Medium.com, April 24, 2015, 
239

240
NOTES
https://medium.com/the-ferenstein-wire/futuristic-simulation-ﬁnds-self-driving­
taxibots-will-eliminate-90-of-cars-open-acres-of-618a8aeff01#.oma4n6sbf. 
Chapter Two
1. Customer Experience Professionals Association, www.cxpa.org. 
2. Lizette Borreli, “Human Attention Span Shortens to 8 Seconds Due to Digital 
Technology: Three Ways to Stay Focused,” Medical Daily, May 14, 2015, www 
.medicaldaily.com/human-attention-span-shortens-8-seconds-due-digital­
technology-3-ways-stay-focused-333474. 
Chapter Three
1. “16 Famous Songs Written in 30 Minutes or Less,” Tone Deaf, June 26, 2015, 
http://www.tonedeaf.com.au/346979/16-famous-songs-written-in-30-minutes-or­
less.htm. 
2. Jeanne Bliss, Chief Customer Ofﬁcer 2.0 (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2015). 
Chapter Four
1. Fletch, “It’s All Ball-Bearings,” Ditto Greetings, December 2, 2014, https://www. 
youtube.com/watch?v=pbWWxGmbS9s. 
2. “Driving Marketing Performance with Multi-Channel Content, Communications 
and Analytics,” CEB, accessed October 4, 2016, https://www.cebglobal.com/ 
marketing-communications/digital-evolution.html. 
3. The Economist Intelligence Unit, “The Future of Marketing: Six Visionaries 
Speak,” Marketo, accessed October 26, 2016, https://www.marketo.com/articles/ 
the-future-of-marketing-six-visionaries-speak. 
4. “Screenshot,” accessed July 31, 2016, www.aa.com/newamerican. 
5. Brian Solis, X: The Experience Where Business Meets Design (Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley & Sons, 2015). 
6. Gartner Research Methodologies, “Gartner Magic Quadrant,” accessed October 26, 
2016, http://www.gartner.com/technology/research/methodologies/research_mq.jsp. 
7. G. KoﬁAnnan, “Reaching 50 Million Users,” accessed October 4, 2016, www 
.gkoﬁannan.com. 
8. “50 Million Users: The Making of an ‘Angry Birds’ Internet Meme,” Real Time Eco­
nomics (blog), The Wall Street Journal, March 20, 2015, http://blogs.wsj.com/ 
economics/2015/03/20/50-million-users-the-making-of-an-angry-birds-internet­
meme. 
9. Geoff Fripp, “Limitations of the BCG Matrix, accessed October 4, 2016, http:// 
www.thebcgmatrix.com/bcg-matrix-theory/limitations-of-the-bcg-matrix. 

Notes
241
10. Marc Andreessen, “Why Software Is Eating the World,” The Wall Street Journal, 
August 20, 2011, http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424053111903480904 
576512250915629460. 
11. “24 Things Made Obsolete by Smartphones,” ET Bureau, April 21, 2015, http:// 
telecom.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/internet/24-things-made-obsolete-by­
smartphones/46995729. 
Chapter Five
1. “Elon Musk, Full Interview, Code Conference 2016,” YouTube video, 1:24:14, 
June 2 2016, 1:24:14, https://youtu.be/wsixsRI-Sz4. 
2. Dogs of the Dow, “Largest Companies by Market Cap Today” accessed October 4, 
2016, http://dogsofthedow.com/largest-companies-by-market-cap.htm. 
3. Chris J. Snook, The 7 Universal Laws, www.digitalsen.se/the7laws. 
4. Maxwell Maltz, Psycho-Cybernetics (New York, Simon & Schuster, 1989). 
5. Joseph Murphy, The Power of Your Subconscious Mind (Courier Corporation, 2012). 
6. “Bell Telephone v Western Union (1879),” The Guardian, August 6, 2007, accessed 
October 4, 2016, https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2007/aug/06/ 
bellvwestern. 
7. David A. Vise, The Google Story (Dell Publishing, 2005). 
8. Napoleon Hill, Think and Grow Rich (BN Publishing, 2007). 
9. Malcolm Gladwell, The Tipping Point (Back Bay Books, 2002); Malcolm Gladwell, 
Outliers (Back Bay Books, 2011); Malcolm Gladwell, Blink: The Power of Thinking
without Thinking (Back Bay Books, 2007). 
10. Russell Conwell and John Wanamaker, Acres of Diamonds (Tremendous Life Books, 
2004). 
11. Charles F Haanel, The Master Key System (SoHo Books, 2013). 
12. Maltz, Psycho-Cybernetics.
Chapter Six
1. “Business,” Wikipedia, accessed October 4, 2016, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ 
Business. 
2. Dan Poynter, “Book Publishing Statistics,” http://www.textetc.com/resources/book­
publishing-statistics.html. 
3. Mike Negami, “Lean Six Sigma Has to Start from Voice of Customer: VOC,” June 
17, 2016, www.linkedin.com/pulse/lean-six-sigma-has-start-from-voice-customer­
voc-excel-mike-negami. 
4. Brian Solis, X: The Experience Where Business Meets Design (Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley & Sons, 2015). 

242
NOTES
5. Saga Briggs, “45 Design Thinking Resources for Educators,” July 29, 2016, http:// 
www.opencolleges.edu.au/informed/features/45-design-thinking-resources-for­
educators. 
Chapter Seven
1. “The Digital Continuum: The Digital Organization in Its Ideal State,” www  
.digitalcontinuum.com.  
2. “The Social Business Strategy Map by Leader Networks,” http://www.leadernetworks 
.com/resources. 
3. “Market Drivers: Why ‘the Economy’ Is Better Than You Think,” http://rollyson 
.net/social-business-strategy-use-cases. 
4. Brian Solis, “The Race against Digital Darwinism: Six Stages of Digital Transfor­
mation,” Principal Analyst, last accessed on October 4, 2016, http://www2.prophet 
.com/sixstagesofdigitaltransformation. 
5. Charlene Li and Brian Solis, “The 7 Success Factors of Social Business Strategy,”
Altimeter Group, April 5, 2015, https://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/briansolis/170440 
11632/sizes/l. 
6. Jeremy Hudgens, “Programmatic Marketing Slideshare,” Genius Monkey, 46 slides, 
February 2015, www.digitalsen.se/geniusmonkey. 
7. Joe Pulizzi and Ann Handley, “B2B Content Marketing: 2016 Benchmarks, Bud­
gets, and Trends—North America,” The Content Marketing Institute (CMI), 
accessed October 4, 2016, http://contentmarketinginstitute.com/wp-content/ 
uploads/2015/09/2016_B2B_Report_Final.pdf. 
8. Anna Hrach’s ROT Content Worksheet template at Ethology, www.etho.me/rot. 
9. Dean Montandon, “Don’t Get Social Media? Here’s Each Network Explained with 
Beer,” June 2015, https://blog.red-website-design.co.uk/2015/06/19/dont-get­
social-media-heres-each-network-explained-with-beer. 
10. Gary Vaynerchuk, Jab, Jab, Jab, Right Hook (New York: HarperBusiness, 2013). 
11. Sujan Patel and Rob Wormley, Content Marketing Playbook (ebook), 2015, accessed 
October 4, 2016, http://sujanpatel.com/content-marketing-ebook. 
12. Azmat Batool, “How and Why You Should Conduct a Brand Audit,” Kissmetrics, 
December 13, 2013, https://blog.kissmetrics.com/conducting-a-brand-audit. 
Chapter Eight
1. Symantec Wikipedia page, accessed October 4, 2016, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ 
Symantec#cite_note-15. 
2. Symantec Wikipedia page, accessed October 4, 2016, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ 
Symantec#cite_note-16. 

Notes
243
3. Quicksprout, “Advanced Content Marketing Guide,” accessed October 4, 2016, 
www.quicksprout.com/the-advanced-guide-to-content-marketing. 
4. Grace Caffyn, “How KFC Gets the Media to Do Their Marketing for Them,”
August 23, 2016, http://digiday.com/brands/kfc-gets-media-marketing. 
5. Audrey Bruno, “Dairy Queen Has Something Special for Singles This Valentine’s 
Day,” Delish, February 10, 2016, http://www.delish.com/food-news/a45719/dairy­
queen-valentines-day-specials. 
6. Travis Wright, “8 Top Tech Conferences You Can’t Miss This Fall,” Inc. magazine, 
August 16, 2016, http://www.inc.com/travis-wright/8-can-t-miss-tech-conferences­
remaining-in-2016.html. 
7. Chris J. Snook, “15 Lessons for Success from the Organizers of Fort Collins Startup 
Week,” LinkedIn SlideShare, May 29, 2014, http://www.slideshare.net/chrisjsnook/ 
15-lessons-for-successfrom-the-organizers-of-fort-collins-startup-week-fcsw14. 
8. Chris J. Snook and Brianne Snook, “The Deﬁnitive Guide to Fort Collins Startup 
Scene,” LinkedIn SlideShare, September 23, 2013, http://www.slideshare.net/ 
chrisjsnook/pdf-deﬁnitiveguidetofortcollinsstartupscene. 
9. Chris J. Snook and Brianne Snook, “The Deﬁnitive Guide to Fort Collins 
Startup Scene,” LinkedIn SlideShare, September 23, 2013, http://www 
.slideshare.net/BrianneSnook/the-deﬁnitive-guide-to-the-fort-collins-startup-scene? 
qid=ea410b2d-0ca4–459d-8a7a-d22efca7ffc3&v=&b=&from_search=1. 
10. Eric Schurenberg, “How They Do It in Flyover Country,” Inc. magazine, July/ 
August 2015, http://www.inc.com/magazine/201507/eric-schurenberg/how-they­
do-it-in-ﬂyover-country.html. 
11. Eric Enge, Stephan Spencer, and Jessie Stricchiola, The Art of SEO (O’Reilly Media, 
2015). 
12. MarketingLand, Enterprise Paid Media Campaign Management Platforms: A
Marketer’s Guide, Sixth Edition, 2016, accessed October 4, 2016, http://downloads 
.digitalmarketingdepot.com/MIR_1602_PaidMediaR_landingpagebuersguide.html. 
13. “Welcome to El Toro, the Only One-to-One 100% Cookie Free IP Targeting 
Solution,” accessed October 26, 2016, http://Eltoro.com. 
Chapter Nine
1. Aberdeen Group, “Social Selling: Leveraging the Power of User-Generated Content 
to Optimize Sales Results,” February 2013, accessed October 4, 2016, https:// 
business.linkedin.com/content/dam/business/sales-solutions/global/en_US/site/pdf/ 
ti/linkedin_social_selling_impact_aberdeen_report_us_en_130702.pdf. 
2. Julio Viskovich home page, accessed October 26, 2016, http://www.julioviskovich 
.com. 
3. Megan Heur, “Account-Based Marketing: Welcome to the New Reality,” LinkedIn
SlideShare, April 30, 2015, http://www.slideshare.net/Demandbase/siriusdecisions­
account-based-marketing-welcome-to-the-new-reality-inb2b. 

244
NOTES
4. Engagio, “The Clear and Complete Guide to Account Based Marketing,” accessed 
October 4, 2016, www.Engagio.com/guide. 
Chapter Ten
1. Mike Shields, “The Danger of Automating Social Inﬂuencer Marketing,” The Wall
Street Journal, June 16, 2016, http://www.wsj.com/articles/the-danger-of­
automating-social-inﬂuencer-marketing-1466071200. 
2. Mia Dand quote via in-person interview by Travis Wright, June 9, 2016, http:// 
digitalsen.se/inﬂuencermktg. 
3. Mia Dand, “Everything You Need to Know about the Inﬂuencer Tech Market,”
Lighthouse3.com, accessed October 4, 2016, https://lighthouse3.com/inﬂuencertech. 
4. Mary Meeker, “Internet Trends 2016–Code Conference,” KPCB, June 1, 2016, slide 
47, http://www.kpcb.com/blog/2016-internet-trends-report. 
5. “Digital AD Spend to Reach $103B by 2019,” Forrester Research, press release, 
November 4, 2014, https://www.forrester.com/digital+ad+spend+to+reach+103b+
by+2019/-/e-pre7448. 
6. “Global Trust in Advertising: Winning Strategies for an Evolving Media Land­
scape,” Nielsen, September 2015, https://www.nielsen.com/content/dam/  
nielsenglobal/apac/docs/reports/2015/nielsen-global-trust-in-advertising-report­
september-2015.pdf.  
7. Scott Brinker, “Marketing Technology Landscape Supergraphic (2016),” accessed 
October 4, 2016, http://chiefmartec.com/2016/03/marketing-technology­
landscape-supergraphic-2016. 
8. Rich Vancil, Kathleen Schaub, and Gerry Murray, “IDC’s Worldwide Marketing 
Technology 2014–2018 Forecast: $20 Billion and Growing Fast,” October 17, 
2014, http://techmarketingblog.blogspot.com/2014/10/idcs-worldwide-marketing­
technology.html. 
9. Brian Solis and Altimeter Group, “Free Industry Report: The Inﬂuencer Marketing 
Manifesto,” accessed October 4, 2016, http://pages.tapinﬂuence.com/altimeter­
report-inﬂuencer-marketing-manifesto. 
10. Anthony Ha, “The New York Times Acquires Inﬂuencer Marketing Agency 
HelloSociety,” TechCrunch, March 11, 2016, https://techcrunch.com/2016/03/11/ 
new-york-times-acquires-hellosociety. 
11. “The FTC’s Endorsement Guides: What People Are Asking: Inﬂuencer marketing 
FAQs update,” Federal Trade Commission, accessed October 4, 2016, https://www 
.ftc.gov/tips-advice/business-center/guidance/ftcs-endorsement-guides-what-people­
are-asking. 
12. Jeff John Roberts, “This Hollywood Studio Got Busted for Social Media Market­
ing,” Fortune, July 11, 2016, http://fortune.com/2016/07/11/warner-bros-social­
media. 

Notes
245
13. Deloitte, “The Millennial Survey 2014: Big Demands and High Expectations,”
accessed October 4, 2016, http://www2.deloitte.com/al/en/pages/about-deloitte/ 
articles/2014-millennial-survey-positive-impact.html. 
14. Edelman, “Credibility from Within: Harnessing Trust in Employees to Strengthen 
Business’s License to Lead,” LinkedIn SlideShare, January 2014, http://www 
.edelman.com/insights/intellectual-property/2014-edelman-trust-barometer/trust­
in-business/trust-employee-engagement. 
15. Aberdeen Group, “Crossing the Chaos: Managing Content Marketing Transfor­
mation,” LinkedIn SlideShare, August 2013, https://www.slideshare.net/secret/ 
kFdU767zyWS30G. 
16. Kathryn Rose and Ted Rubin, Return on Relationship (New York: Tate, 2013). 
Chapter Eleven
1. The Jobvite Recruiter Nation Survey 2015, Jobvite, January 2015, https://www 
.jobvite.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/jobvite_recruiter_nation_2015.pdf. 
2. Social Talent home page, www.socialtalent.co. 
3. Matt Charney, Structured Hiring: The Advantage of the New People Team (Recrui­
tingDaily, 2015), http://recruitingdaily.com/structured-hiring. 
4. The Hire Carlos Facebook Fanpage, accessed October 4, 2016, www.fb.com/ 
hirecarlos. 
5. LinkedIn, JobsDirectUSA Linkedin Group Admin Carlos Gil, https://www 
.linkedin.com/groups/1880575. 
6. Case Study, www.digitalsen.se/hirecarlos. 
7. Mercer Candidate Care
TM, http://mercercandidatecare.com. 
Chapter Twelve
1. Oracle, 2011 Customer Experience Impact Report, 2012, http://www.oracle.com/us/ 
products/applications/cust-exp-impact-report-epss-1560493.pdf. 
2. “Triage (disambiguation),” Wikipedia, last modiﬁed October 13, 2016, https://en 
.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triage_(disambiguation). 
3. Chris Barry, Rob Markey, Eric Almquist, and Chris Brahm, “Putting Social Media 
to Work,” Bain Brief, Bain & Company, September 12, 2011, http://www.bain 
.com/publications/articles/putting-social-media-to-work.aspx. 
4. Jasmine Jaume, “How We Use Social: Highlights from the Social Media Report 
2012,” Brandwatch Blog, December 19, 2012, http://www.brandwatch.com/2012/ 
12/how-we-use-social-highlights-from-the-social-media-report-2012. 
5. Gartner, “Gartner Predicts That Refusing to Communicate by Social Media Will Be 
as Harmful to Companies as Ignoring Phone Calls or Emails Is Today,” press 
release, August 1, 2012, http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2101515. 

246
NOTES
6. Tristan Bishop, “Loyalty and Social CRM,” Symantec, LinkedIn SlideShare, February 5, 
2012, www 
.slideshare.net/KnowledgeBishop/nps-13-loyaltyandsocialcrmatsymantec. 
7. “Center of Excellence,” Wikipedia, last modiﬁed October 26, 2016, https://en 
.wikipedia.org/wiki/Center_of_excellence. 
8. Oracle, “White Paper: The Socially Driven Collaboration in Enterprise,” 2013, 
https://go.oracle.com/LP=2970?elqCampaignId=6074. 
Chapter Thirteen
1. Scott Brinker, “Martech and the Marketing Technology Landscape,” Marketing-
Land, September 21, 2016, http://MarketingLand.com/library/martech-news. 
2. Bill Peatman, “What Is a Marketing Technology Stack and Why Should You Care?”
Ensighten, April 29, 2014, www.ensighten.com/blog/what-marketing-technology­
stack-and-why-should-you-care. 
3. Paul Roetzer, “The Missing Piece of Marketing Automation That Could Change 
Everything,” March 4, 2015, http://martechtoday.com/missing-piece-marketing­
automation-change-everything-120143. 
4. MarketingLand, “What Is Tag Management,” May 11, 2016, http://Marketing 
Land.com/library/analytics-news/tag-management. 
5. MarketingLand, “Infographic: The 2016 Marketing Technology Landscape,”
March 21, 2016, http://MarketingLand.com/infographic-marketing-technology­
landscape-113956. 
6. “Oracle and Maxymiser,” Oracle Acquisitions feed, August 20, 2015, https://www 
.oracle.com/corporate/acquisitions/maxymiser/index.html. 
7. Travis Wright and Chris J. Snook, The Marketing Technology Glossary (ebook), www 
.digitalsen.se/martechglossary. 
8. Scott Brinker, “Marketing Technology? Digital? It Should Be #HumanFirst,”
Chiefmartec.com, September 15, 2015, http://chiefmartec.com/2015/09/marketing­
technology-digital-humanﬁrst. 
9. Stewart Rogers, “Mobile Marketing: What’s Wrong, What’s at Stake, and How to 
Build a Strategy for Success,” VentureBeat, May 19, 2016, http://insight 
.venturebeat.com/report/mobile-marketing-whats-wrong-whats-stake-and-how­
build-strategy-success. 
10. Roland Smart, The Agile Marketer (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2016). 
Chapter Fourteen
1. Deloitte, 2015 Global Mobile Consumer Survey: US Edition, 2015, https://www2 
.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/us/Documents/technology-media­
telecommunications/us-tmt-global-mobile-executive-summary-2015.pdf. 

Notes
247
Chapter Fifteen
1. Chris J. Snook’s Blog Post, February 12, 2016, http://www.chrisjsnook.com/my­
rants/2015/2/12/rip-information-age-1989-2013welcome-the-opportunity-age. 
2. Andy Hoar et al., “Death of a (B2B) Salesman: One Million US B2B Salespeople 
Will Lose Their Jobs to Self-Service eCommerce by 2020,” Forrester Research, 
April 13, 2015, https://www.forrester.com/report/Death+Of+A+B2B+
Salesman/-/E-RES122288. 
3. Ibid. 
4. Gerd Leonhard, “Algorithms and Humarithms: Futurist Speaker Gerd Leonhard 
Digital Transformation (Short)” YouTube video 1:13, excerpt from his speech at the 
KPMG 2015 Executive Symposium on Robotics and Automation, September 16, 
2015, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kbsfc1MvOS0. 
5. Dominique Bonte, VP of ABI Research, recently produced a report on 5G that 
envisions three versions of 5G. 
6. Klaus Schwab, “The Fourth Industrial Revolution: What It Means, How to 
Respond,” World Economic Forum, January 14, 2016, www.weforum.org/agenda/ 
2016/01/the-fourth-industrial-revolution-what-it-means-and-how-to-respond. 
7. “Open AI,” Wikipedia, October 25, 2016, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenAI. 
8. Marcus Weldon, chief technology ofﬁcer at Nokia. 


ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Travis Wright is a marketing technologist, digital marketing strategist and
consultant, keynote speaker, entrepreneur, data and analytics geek, tech
journalist, startup growth hacker, podcast host, and standup comic. He is the
former global digital and social strategist at Symantec for the Norton brand.
Over the past 20 years, Wright has helped hundreds of B2B and B2C
companies, from well-funded startups and SMBs to Fortune 10.
Travis has given more than 100 keynote presentations, webinars, and
workshops since 2012, in the United States and internationally. Wright
works globally with company executives and company inﬂuencers on digital
media ad spend, social business strategies for marketing, sales, and HR, as
well as marketing technology consulting. When Travis isn’t working, he is
thinking about working, traveling, or taking one of his two kids, Jharek and
Liliana, to some school event.
Chris J. Snook is an award-winning entrepreneur, venture catalyst, and the
executive brand humanizer at large Ethology heading up corporate
development for his agency. He is also cofounder at Launch Haus whose
purpose is “to solve problems in sustainable ways for the betterment of all
humanity through entrepreneurship and technology.”
He has been decaffeinated since March 2016 but still runs Mach 5 with
his hair on ﬁre. Chris racks up A-List preferred status on Southwest Airlines
speaking at dozens of events each year and produces and curates the invite-
only loopthinkCXO (for marketers, CX, and technology leaders) and
Offshorepreneur (for digital nomads) events in Phoenix, Arizona and Grand
Cayman.
Outside of working voraciously on any projects that involve future
technologies, content strategy, digital marketing, customer-centric organiza­
tional design, venture capital ﬁnance, M&A, IoT, and publishing, his hobbies
are mentoring startups and teaching entrepreneurship around the world. He
249

250
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
is an active mentor supporting HacksForHumanity at ASU and Founder
Institute, traveling with his two favorite people (Brianne and Beckett), and
being an avid foodie.
On Sundays in the fall he indulges in his only true pop culture vice for
three hours as a die-hard Dallas Cowboys fan.

INDEX
Note: Page references in italics refer to ﬁgures.
A
Aberdeen Group, 153
ABI Research, 231, 234
Accelerated Mobile Pages (AMP) project
(Google), 146–147, 148
account based marketing (ABM),
158–160
Acres of Diamonds (Conwell), 82
acts of God questions, 57
ad decline (Inﬂuencer Marketing key
trend 1), 164
Adelson, Jay, 221
AdiQus, 219–221
Adobe, 148, 204, 213
adoption (social selling system), 156
advertising
Business Relationship Optimization,
219–221
decline in (Inﬂuencer Marketing key
trend 1), 164
on Facebook, 176, 178–183, 179,
180, 181, 206
MarTech and advertising networks,
206
predictive advertising management,
149, 149–150, 150
return on ad spend (ROAS), 161
search engine advertising, 207
See also human resources (HR)
recruiting; social media
advice, rejecting, 4
AdWords (Google), 206, 207
Agile Marketer (Roland Smart), 215
agility, of marketing technology
(MarTech), 212
agreement, inﬂuence and, 12–14
Airbnb, 53
Airobotics, 235
alignment
with company’s purpose, 35–36
of goals, 105
Altimeter Group, 91–92, 112, 113,
167
American Airlines, 39, 40
Ampliﬁers (A)
deﬁned, 18
overview, 16–21, 17
reasoning by, 75
Analytics (Google), 202, 207
Andreesen, Marc, 51
Angel.co, 178
Apple, xxxvi, 77
archetypes of people
Ampliﬁers (A), 18
Inﬂuencers (I), 17–18
interaction between, 20–21
Motivatables (M), 18–19
overview, 16–17, 17
Zombies (Z), 19
See also individual archetype names
251

252
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), future of, 61,
230–231, 233
Art of SEO, The (Enge, Spencer,
Stricchiola), 148
Ashton Media, xxxiv
“ass kiss it forward,” 221–223
attention, 14–16
audience, size and type, 167
audience development exercise, 41–43,
42
audit
brand guidelines audit, 125
of business goals (exercise), 93–97, 94
for Centers of Excellence (COE),
193–194
heuristic audit, 125
ROT (Redundant, Out of date,
Trivial) content audit, 120–125,
123
social media marketing checklist, 136
B
Baby Boomers, cultural differences from
Millennials, 158
Baer, Jay, xxii–xxiii
Barkley, 141–142
base content, 125
BCG Matrix (Boston Consulting
Group), 43, 47, 47, 48, 49, 49
Belcher, Jovan, xxxii
belief, need for, xviii
Bell, Alexander Graham, 76
Bennett, Steve, 134, 135
Bing, 206, 207
Bliss, Jeanne, 7, 29
Blockbuster, 54
blockchain ledger, 54
body, subconscious mind and, 72,
72–73
BOLD (Diamandis), 51–59
INDEX
Bonte, Dominique, 231, 234
Boston Consulting Group, 43, 47, 47,
48, 49, 49
brain, deﬁned, 62
brand
brand guidelines audit, 125
brand-inﬂuencer ﬁt of Inﬂuencer
Marketing, 169
building a personal brand, 219–225
living the brand, xviii
BrightEdge, 206
Brin, Sergey, 63, 76
Brinker, Scott, 210
Brinkworth, Christ, xxxiv
Brito, Michael, 195
Brown, Michael, 135
BuiltWith, 208, 209
business goal exercises, 93–97, 94
Business Relationship Optimization,
219–221
buyer persona, 99
C
Calendly.com, 178
campaign management applications,
204
“Can Pioli” (campaign), xxxi–xxxii
CareerArcTM, 118–119, 176
case studies
#Closing $Millions for Pennies on the
Dollar, 160–161
Finding 500,000 Worth of Talent for
250 In ADS (case study), 182, 183
Fort Collins Startup Week goes
Global on $2,500, 144–145
#Hirecarlos How to Get Your Dream
Gig with Social Media (case study),
178–182, 179, 180, 181
$1 Billion Dollar Growth Hack,
132–135

253
Index
cause and effect (law of laws), 88, 89
CCP Digital, xxxvii, 150, 203
CCXPTM (Customer Experience
Professional’s Association), 14
CEB Global, 37
Centers of Excellence (COE), 193–194
challengers (Gartner Magic Quadrant), 45
change
as constant, 11, 81–89, 82, 83, 85,
87, 89
rate of, 3–9
resistance to, 11
channels, for Inﬂuencer Marketing, 168
Charney, Matt, 177
Chief Customer Ofﬁcer 2.0 (Bliss), 29
“Chiefs Kingdom,” xxxiv
ChiefsPlanet.com, xxix–xxx
Churchill, Winston, 107
Church of Lazlo, The (radio show),
xvii–xviii
CIO.com, 134–135
#Closing $Millions for Pennies on the
Dollar (case study), 160–161
cognitive dissonance, 27
collective organizational mind, 62
comfort zone, breaking through, 80–81
competitors
honest evaluation of, 43–47, 44, 45,
46, 47, 48–49
Insights Layer and, 34, 37–38
Compute Midwest (Disruption
Institute), 143
Concept Therapy movement, 66
conditioning, 84
conscious mind, 68, 71, 83–84, 86
Constant Contact, 205
content
base versus peripheral, 125
content delivery network (CDN),
204
content marketing and paid media
ampliﬁcation, 139–145
content strategy versus content
marketing, 114
governance guidelines, 126, 126–128,
127
marketing strategy, social media
marketing checklist, 137
quality of, for search engine
optimization (SEO), 147
ROT (Redundant, Out of date,
Trivial) content audit, 120–125,
123
See also Success Layer
Content Marketing Institute (CMI),
121, 139–140
Content Marketing Playbook (Patel),
125
conversion optimization, 204
Conwell, Russell, 82
Costa, Rebecca, 236
Covey, Stephen, 34
Cox, Joe, 141–142
creativity
creative imagination and synthetic
imagination, 79
imagination and, 78–79
substance and, 64–66
credibility, for Inﬂuencer Marketing,
168
Crennel, Romeo, xxxiii
C-suite
CMOs driving budget increase in
spend (Inﬂuencer Marketing key
trend 3), 165
decision making by, 16
including CEO’s photo for
advertising, 161
social business strategy and, 110
social media used by, 132

254
culture
cultural ﬁt and social media for
evaluation, 175–176
cultural forces questions, 57
as group habit, 75
See also organizational culture
CustomerBliss.com, 7
customer experience
digital sense importance to, 3–4
“satisﬁed” customers, 4–8, 5
Customer Experience Professional’s
Association (CXPA), 14
customer journeys
Journey Map Touch Point Exercise,
100–102
key touch points, 98, 98–100
customerrelationshipmanagement(CRM)
goals for social selling, 154–155
for marketing technology (MarTech),
200, 201
customers
as asset, 47–51, 48, 49, 50
competitors and forces, 34, 37–38
customer-centric organization,
building (See Experience Marketing
Framework TM (EMF))
persona and customer journey
mapping, 40–41
Purpose, People, and Process, 34,
34–37, 38–40, 39, 40
See also customer service; Insights
Layer
customer service, 187–195
audit for Centers of Excellence
(COE), 193–194
fundamentals of, 188–190
goals for, 190, 193
overview, 187–188
prioritization for, 194–195
customization, 7, 8
INDEX
D
Dairy Queen, 141–142
Dand, Mia, xxxv, 132–135, 163
data management platform (DMP),
203–204
deception (6D phase), 51–53, 52
decision making
archetypes of people and, 16–17
customer-centric, 119
deductive reasoning, 75
Delivering Happiness (Hsieh), 222
Deloitte, 223
dematerialization (6D phase), 54, 55
Deming Cycle, 107
democratization (6D phase), 54–56
demonetization (6D phase), 53–54
Denver Startup Week (2013), xxxvii
design thinking
for all departments, 7
Garrett on, 30
Inspiration, Ideation, Implementation
spaces of, 127
Success Layer, 127
Vision Layer, 104, 105
Diamandis, Peter, 51–59
Digg 1 Million User Party, 221
Digital Bits, overview, 8–9
Digital Continuum, 109
digital sense
digital transformation and, 11–21, 17
guiding principles of, 31, 107 (See also
Experience Marketing
FrameworkTM (EMF))
importance of, 3–4
overview, xvii–xix, 3–9
as sixth sense AI invention, 61
See also future-prooﬁng
Digital Sense (Wright, Snook)
audience of, 8–9
inception of, xxxvii–xxxviii

255
Index
DigitalSen.se
BCG Matrix template, 49
e-mail subscription, 224
Heuristic Audit Checklist, 125
marketing hacks, case studies,
resources, 151, 167
marketing tools, 139
MarTech Glossary, 209
monthly webinars, 161
newsletter, 8
The Not-So-Secret-Guid to ALL Our
Secrets (Ethology), 99
ROT content template, 124
7 Laws of Awareness (podcast),
84
7 Universal Laws (podcast), 68
digital transformation, 11–21
attention and trust, 14–16
Inﬂuencers (I), Ampliﬁers (A),
Motivatables (M), and Zombies
(Z), 16–21, 17
overview, 11–14
digitization (6D phase), 51
Direct Customer Knowledge Drives
Tactics (guiding principle), 31,
107
“Discover, Design, Deploy” approach,
of EMF, 29, 116, 117
discovery, in Inﬂuencer Marketing, 165,
166
disruption (6D phase), 53
Disruption Institution, 143
distributed ledger, 54
DivvyHQ.com, 137
Docs (Google), 222–223
Dorsey, John, xxxii–xxxiii
DoubleClick (Google), 148, 206
driverless cars, 235
drones, 235–236
Dynamic Signal, 171
E
Earshot.com, 142
Edelman Trust Barometer, 170
efﬁciencies, need for (Inﬂuencer
Marketing key trend 2), 164
Elements of User Experience (Garrett),
30
Eloqua, 154
El Toro, 151
e-mail marketing, 205–206
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 87, 88
Emﬂuence, 205
emotion
stories to connect to, 12
understanding mind and, 69–74, 70,
72, 74
empathy (EQ)
audience development exercise,
41–43, 42
as fundamental customer service,
190
importance of, xviii, 7
Employee Net Promoter Score (eNPS),
40–41
employees
archetypes of people and, 17
hiring (See human resources (HR)
recruiting)
Inﬂuencer Marketing, employee
advocacy, 170, 171
as internal customers, 7
Enderle, Robert, 134–135
Engagio, 158, 160
Enge, Eric, 148
enjoyment, of work, 96
Ensighten, 171, 183–185, 184, 202
Enterprise Paid Media Campaign
Management Platforms 2016
(MarketingLand), 149
enterprise paid search, 148

256
Ethology
EMF creation by, 27 (See also
Experience Marketing
FrameworkTM (EMF))
The Not-So-Secret-Guide to ALL Our
Secrets, 99
overview, xxxvii
purpose statement, 97
ROT (Redundant, Outdated, Trivial)
content audit, 120–125, 123
ExactTarget/Salesforce Marketing
Cloud, 205
execution. See Success Layer
exercises
audience development, 41–43,
42
Journey Map Touch Point Exercise,
100–102
Penny or $1 Million Dollars Exercise,
52, 52
ROT (Redundant, Outdated,
Trivial) content audit, 120–125,
123
Vision Layer audit of business goals,
93–97, 94
Experience Marketing FrameworkTM
(EMF), 25–31
MarTech frameworks and the
EMF, 212–213, 213
(See also marketing technology
(MarTech))
overview, 26–31
three agreements to customer-centric
accountability cultures, 25–26
See also Insights Layer; organizational
mind; social business strategy and
tactics; Success Layer; Vision
Layer
exponential thinking, linear thinking
versus, 51–52
INDEX
F
Facebook
advertising on, 176, 178–183, 179,
180, 181, 183, 206
layered look, 204, 205
Messenger, 222–223
proﬁles of job candidates, 177
videos on, 182
FCC, 231
fear
Feeling Excited and Ready! (FEAR),
86
Terror Barrier as, 83, 83–84, 86
feasibility, 104
Ferrara, Jon, 154
Fiber (Google), 220
“5 Capabilities” Model, 166–167
5G, future of, 230–231, 234–235,
236–237
Fleet, Thurman, 66
Focus on Measurable Results (guiding
principle), 31
Forrester Research, 158–159, 228
Fort Collins Startup Week goes Global
on $2,500 (case study), 144–145
Fourth Industrial Revolution, xxxviii,
231–232
Fourth Turning, The (Howe, Strauss),
236
FoxNews.com, 207, 208
free will, 67, 70
Fuller, Buckminster, 115
future-prooﬁng
by avoiding obsolescence, 227–237,
228, 234
building a personal brand, 219–225
G
Gandhi, Mahatma, 35
Garrett, Jesse James, 30

257
Index
Gartner, 191
Gartner Magic Quadrant, 43–46, 45,
46, 49
Gelphman, Mike “Jortsy,” 143
GeniusMonkey.com, 114
GenX, cultural differences from
Millennials, 158
GEO targeting, 150–151
GetAround, 6
Ghostery, 207, 207, 208
Gil, Carlos, 178–182, 179, 180, 181
Gladwell, Malcolm, 77
Global Triage (Symantec), 192, 192
goals
appropriate campaign goals,
135–139, 138
audit of (exercise), 93–97, 94
beginning with end in mind,
112–114, 113
for customer service, 190, 193
scope of, 102, 102–105
for social selling, 154–155
See also Vision Layer
Google
Accelerated Mobile Pages (AMP)
project, 146–147, 148
AdWords, 206, 207
Analytics, 202, 207
Docs, 222–223
DoubleClick, 148, 206
Fiber, 220
founding of, 63
Project Skybender, 235
Retargeting, 206
Yahoo! and, 76
Google Story, The (Vise), 76
governance guidelines, 126, 126–128,
127
Granell, Eric, xxx
Gretzky, Wayne, xxxviii
GrowthVerse.com, 209
gShiftLabs, 206
Guns N’ Roses, 26, 27
Gupta, Mayur, 211
H
Haanel, Charles, 83
Hagen, Kristi, 147–148
Have a System for Ongoing Innovation
(guiding principle), 31
headlines, for social media, 140
Heaton, Gavin, 39
Heuer, Meg, 159
heuristic audit, 125
Hill, Napoleon, 35–36, 77, 79
HomeDepot, 207
hospitality, as fundamental customer
service, 189
Howe, Neil, 236
Hrach, Anna, 121
Hsieh, Tony, 222
Huawei, 231
Hug Your Haters (Baer), xxii–xxiii
Huizenga, Wayne, 54
human resources (HR), social selling by,
155
human resources (HR) recruiting,
173–185
advertising themes for, 183–185, 184
Finding 500,000 Worth of Talent for
250 In ADS (case study), 182,
183
#Hirecarlos How to Get Your
Dream Gig with Social Media
(case study), 178–182, 179, 180,
181
new strategies for, 176–177
overview, 173–174, 174
social media to evaluate cultural ﬁt,
175–176

258
Humarithms, 230
Hunt, Clark, xxxi, xxxii–xxxiii
“hunt and ﬁsh,” 155, 159
Hydroswarm, 235
I
IBM, 187, 213
ideation. See Vision Layer
imagination
deﬁned, 78–79
six intellectual faculties, overview,
74–80
Inc. magazine, xxxvii, 143, 145, 170
Indeed.com, 178
Inevitable: Understanding the 12
Technological Forces That Will
Shape Our Future, The (Kelly), 56
inﬂuence
shock, awe/fascination, and
agreement methods of, 12–14
Inﬂuencer Marketing, 163–171
advertising decline (key trend 1), 164
audience size and type, 167
brand-inﬂuencer ﬁt of, 169
categories of, 165–166
channels for, 168
CMOs driving budget increase in
spend (key trend 3), 165
content format and type, 167–168
credibility and topical relevancy for,
168
employee advocacy, 170, 171
employees for credibility, 170
factors fueling chaos in (key trend 4),
165
“5 Capabilities” Model, 166–167
Inﬂuencer Marketing Manifesto
(Altimeter Group), 167
Inﬂuencer Marketing Technology
report (Lighthouse3), 164
INDEX
lack of resonance and transparency
controversy, 169
need for efﬁciencies and proving ROI
(key trend 2), 164
overview, 163
sales, 171
Inﬂuencer Marketing Technology report
(Lighthouse3), 164
Inﬂuencers (I)
deﬁned, 17–18
overview, 16–21, 17
See also Inﬂuencer Marketing
information, accessibility of, 52–53
Infusionsoft, 205
innovation
EMF and, 29, 29
Have a System for Ongoing
Innovation (guiding principle), 31
living the brand for, xviii
Innovation Hub (Mercer), 118
Innovation Loop, 114, 115, 115–120, 117
Insights Layer, 33–59
audience development exercise,
41–43, 42
competitive landscape, evaluating,
43–47, 44, 45, 46, 47
customer as asset, 47–51, 48, 49, 50
customers, competitors, and forces,
37–38
EMF, overview, 26, 27, 29, 30
(See also Experience Marketing
FrameworkTM (EMF))
feasibility of goals, 104
overview, 33
persona and customer journey
mapping, 40–41
Purpose, People, and Process, 34,
34–37, 38–40, 39, 40
6Ds (phases), as classiﬁed by
Diamandis, 51–59, 52, 55

259
Index
Inspiration, Ideation, Implementation
(design thinking spaces), 127
Internet of Things (IoT), 236
intuition
deﬁned, 76–77
six intellectual faculties, overview,
74–80
IP-based advertising, 150–151
J
Jab, Jab, Jab, Right Hook (Vaynerchuk),
122
Jobs, Steve, 13, 77, 91
Jobvite Recruiter Nation, 173
Journey Map Touch Point Exercise,
100–102
K
Kaizen, 107
Kansas City Chiefs, xxi, xxi–xxxiv, xxii,
xxv, xxxi, xxxii, xxxiii
Kansas City Royals, 91–92
Kauffman Entrepreneurial Foundation,
220
KCT (Keep, Change, or Trash),
37
Kelly, Kevin, 4, 56
Kenshoo, 148
Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC),
140–141
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs)
Bliss on, 7
orbiting loops, 116
touch point map for, 98, 98–100
Vision Layer, 94
Khanna, Parag, 61
King, Michael, 137–138, 138
KISSMetrics, 125
Kloster, Phil, xxxi–xxxii
Kramer, Bryan, 224
L
Lao Tzu, 43
Law of Compensation, 5–6
law of laws, 88–89, 89
law of polarity, 67
Lazlo (disc jockey), xvii–xxviii
LeaderNetworks.com, 110
leaders (Gartner Magic Quadrant), 44
Lean Six Sigma, 95
“Learn, Plan, Do” approach, of EMF,
28–29
legislative forces questions, 58
Leonhard, Gerd, 3–4, 61, 231
Li, Charlene, 91–92, 112, 113
lifelong learning, 229–230
Lighthouse3, 132, 164
Lindstrom, Martin, 114
linear thinking, exponential thinking
versus, 51–52
LinkedIn, 9, 155, 156–157, 177, 178,
179–182
lip service, 39, 40
M
magniﬁcation, by mind, 78
MailChimp, 205
Maltz, Maxwell, 71, 86
Manion Josh, 185
ManPower, 178
Marin Software, 148
Markee, Casey, 148
marketing automation, 201
marketing cloud, 202–203, 203
MarketingLand, 149, 160–161
“marketing operating system,” 213–214
marketing technology (MarTech),
199–216
agility of, 212
always-on assessment, evaluation, and
adoption for, 213

260
marketing technology (MarTech)
(continued )
analytics and tracking, 202
building solid MarTech stack, 199,
200
CRM for, 200, 201
for driving business growth, 211,
211–212
driving internal buy-in and
stakeholder inﬂuence, 215–216
fragmentation of, 164
frameworks of, and EMF, 212–213,
213
investment in, 202–207, 203, 205,
214
marketing automation, 201
“marketing operating system,”
213–214
mobile marketing technology stacks,
206, 214–215
monitoring MarTech stack, 207,
207–211, 208, 209, 210
overview, 199, 200
tag management, 201–202
See also Inﬂuencer Marketing
Master Key System, The (Haanel), 83
Matrix, The (ﬁlm), 233
Maxymiser, 204
Mead, Margaret, 96
meaning, perception as, 77–78
measurement
Focus on Measurable Results (guiding
principle), 31
MarTech analytics and tracking, 202
social media marketing checklist,
136–137
for Success Layer, 114
Vision Layer scope, 102, 102–105
See also audit
Media Wyse, 148
INDEX
memory
deﬁned, 79–80
six intellectual faculties, overview,
74–80
Mercer, 117–119, 176
Michelangelo, 64
Microsoft, 15
Millennials, cultural differences from
Baby Boomers/Gen X, 158
Miller, Jon, 158, 160
mind
body and, 72, 72–73
conscious mind, 68, 71, 83–84, 86
over organizational matter (See
organizational mind)
senses, 73, 74
subconscious mind, 70, 71–73,
86–87, 87
understanding, 67–68, 68, 69–74,
70, 72, 74
mobile-friendly websites, 147
mobile marketing technology stacks,
206, 214–215
Moore, Geoffrey, 158
Moses, 67
Motivatables (M)
deﬁned, 18–19
overview, 16–21, 17
reasoning by, 75
motivators. See Inﬂuencers (I)
Mozcon, 148
Mullett, Kevin, 139
Murphy, Joseph, 72
Musk, Elon, 61, 62
N
nanobot technology, 235
Napster, 53
negative-feedback servomechanism,
71

261
Index
news organizations, “Breaking News”
alerts of, 13
niche players (Gartner Magic
Quadrant), 45
Nielsen, 164
Nimble, 154
nodes
Learn (Success Layer node), 120
“learn, plan, do” approach, of EMF,
28–29, 29
micronodes, 116
See also Success Layer; Vision Layer
Norton, 132–135
Not-So-Secret-Guide to ALL Our Secrets,
The (Ethology), 99
NTT DOCOMO, 231
O
objectives
Success Layer and, 112–114, 113
(See also goals)
tactics, 135–139, 138
Ohanian, Alexis, 143
$1 Billion Dollar Growth Hack (case
study), 132–135
Operational Loop, 114, 115–120, 116,
117
Opportunity Age, 227–229, 228
Optus (story), xxxiv–xxxvii, xxxv, xxxvi, 3
Oracle, 150, 203, 215
orbiting loops, 114, 115, 115–120, 116,
117
O’Reilly, 220–221
organizational culture
culture as group habit, 75
sense-making organizations, 8
See also organizational mind
organizational mind, 61–89
breaking through comfort zone,
80–81
constant change for, 81–89, 82, 83,
85, 87, 89
dealing with Zombie attacks, 73, 80
intellectual faculties, 74–80
mind and brain mechanics, 62–64
overview, 61–62
six largest companies, 63, 63
substance and creativity, 64–66
visualization with stick-person
graphic, 67–68, 68, 69–74, 70, 72,
74
“Other People’s Opinions” (OPO), 80
Ottaviano, Lia, xxxvii
outreach, in Inﬂuencer Marketing, 165
P
Page, Larry, 63, 76
page speed, 146–147
paradigm, Terror Barrier as, 83, 83–84,
86
Patel, Sujan, 125
pay per click (PPC), 148
Peacock, Tim, 171
Penny or $1 Million Dollars Exercise,
52, 52
perception
deﬁned, 77–78
six intellectual faculties, overview,
74–80
peripheral content, 125
persona
audience development exercise,
41–43, 42
of buyer, 99
customer journey mapping and,
40–41
identifying ideal personas, social
media marketing checklist, 136
persuasion. See Inﬂuencers (I)
photos of CEOs, for advertising, 161

262
Pioli, Scott, xxx–xxxiii
Plan, Do, Check, Act, 107
planning. See Vision Layer
Playa’s Anthem, 61
Portalatin, Julio, 117–119
Power of Your Subconscious Mind, The
(Murphy), 72
Poynter, Dan, 92
predictive advertising management, 149,
149–150, 150
presence (social selling system), 156
pressure, removing, 189
PR hacking, 140
prioritization
alignment of goals, 105
for customer service, 194–195
feasibility of goals, 104
overview, 7
for Success Layer, 107
for vision, 92
Proctor, Bob, 66
Project Skybender (Google), 235
“ProSumerTribuDucers,” 223–224
Pruitt, Jeffrey, 27
PsychoCybernetics (Maltz), 71, 86
Pubcon, 148
Purewal, Pavey, 171
Purpose, People, and Process approach
deﬁned, 29–30, 30
Inﬂuencer Marketing and employee
advocacy, 171
for recruiting, 174 (See also human
resources (HR) recruiting)
purpose statement, 97
Q
Qualcomm, 13
QuanticMind, 149, 149, 150, 207
questions
acts of God, 57
INDEX
to assess technological forces, 56–57
cultural forces, 57
legislative forces, 58
QuickSprout, 140
Quiroz, Tony, 27
R
rate of change, 3–9
Real-Time Marketing, 141–142
reasoning, 75–76
RE/CODE (2016), 62
recruiting. See human resources (HR)
recruiting
Recruiting Daily (blog), 177
Reid, Andy, xxxii
relationships
“ass kiss it forward,” 221–223
business as, 91–92
Business Relationship Optimization,
219–221
CRM for MarTech, 200, 201
Customer Relationship Marketing
(CRM), 154–155
enjoyment of work, 96
personalization of, 223–225
in recruiting, 174
reliability, 28–29, 29
remarketing, 206
reorganization
caution about, 134–135
shock (impact) of, 13
research. See Insights Layer
resonance, lack of, 169
Retargeting (Google), 206
return on investment (ROI)
efﬁciencies and ROI (Inﬂuencer
Marketing key trend 2), 164
MarTech for driving internal buy-in
and stakeholder inﬂuence,
215–216

263
Index
Operational Loop and Innovation
Loop for, 114, 115, 115–120, 116,
117
return on ad spend (ROAS), 161
social media and personalization,
224–225
social media and proximity, 223
revenue (social selling system), 156
rFactr, 154
Rogers, Stewart, xxxvii
Rollyson, Christopher, 110
Rose, Kevin, 221
Ross, Jennifer, 229
ROT (Redundant, Out of date, Trivial)
content audit, 120–125, 123
Rowley, Jill, 154
Rubin, Ted, 170
S
Salem, Enrique, 134
sales. See social selling
Salesforce, 203
“satisﬁed” customers, 4–8, 5
Save Our Chiefs
SOC social media movement,
xxix–xxxiv
story of, xxi, xxi–xxxiv, xxii, xxv, xxxi,
xxxii, xxxiii, 3
Schurenberg, Eric, 145
Schwab, Klaus, xxxviii
scope, of Vision Layer, 102, 102–105
search engine optimization (SEO)
content quality, 147
enterprise paid search, 148
GEO targeting and IP-based
advertising, 150–151
key determinants affecting search
ranking, 146–148
MarTech for, 206, 207
overview, 145–146
predictive advertising management,
149, 149–150, 150
“Secret Job Interview, The” (Snapchat
story), 182
secure transactions
as fundamental customer service,
189–190
secure sites (HTTPS), 147
self-image, 69, 86
self-interest, enlightened, 96–97
sense-making organizations, 8, 229
senses, 73, 74
7 Laws of Awareness (podcast), 84
7 Success Factors of Social Business
Strategy (Li, Solis), 112, 113
7 Universal Laws (podcast), 68
Sexton, Koka, 155
Shantz, Rhonda, 132–135
Shewhart Cycle, 107
shock (impact), inﬂuence and, 12–14
shopping experience, as fundamental
customer service, 190
Signal, 202
SiriusDecisions, 155, 159, 229
6Ds (phases)
deception, 51–53, 52
dematerialization, 54, 55
democratization, 54–56
demonetization, 53–54
digitization, 51
disruption, 53
Skurt, 6
Small Data (Lindstrom), 114
Smart, Roland, 215
smartphones, as modern “necessity,”
63
SMX Social Media Conference, xxix,
148
Snapchat, 53–54, 182
Snook, Brianne, 144–145

264
Snook, Chris J., xxxvii–xxxviii, 8–9,
144–145
social business strategy
building exercise, 93–97, 94
executing, 108–110, 109
for HR (See human resources (HR)
recruiting)
for Inﬂuencers and employee
advocates (See Inﬂuencer
Marketing)
purpose statement, 97
social business, deﬁned, 110
social business map, 110, 111
See also customer service; social
business strategy and tactics; social
selling; Vision Layer
social business strategy and tactics,
131–151
appropriate campaign goals,
135–139, 138
content marketing and paid media
ampliﬁcation, 139–145
Fort Collins Startup Week goes
Global on $2,500 (case study),
144–145
$1 Billion Dollar Growth Hack (case
study), 132–135
overview, 131–132, 131–132
search engine optimization (SEO),
145–151, 149, 150
“Social Business Strategy Use Cases”
(Rollyson), 110
social media
beer example, 122, 123
channels for Inﬂuencer Marketing,
168 (See also Inﬂuencer
Marketing)
for human resources (HR) recruiting,
173–174, 174 (See also human
resources (HR) recruiting)
INDEX
marketing checklist for, 136–139,
138
networking through, 222–223
objectives for, 112–114, 113
$1 Billion Dollar Growth Hack (case
study), 132–135
Optus (story), xxxiv–xxxvii, xxxv,
xxxvi
Save Our Chiefs (story), xxi, xxi–xxxiv,
xxii, xxv, xxxi, xxxii, xxxiii
triage for customer experience,
191–193, 192
See also audit; social business strategy
and tactics
social selling, 153–161
account based marketing (ABM) for,
158–160
challenges of, 158
#Closing $Millions for Pennies on the
Dollar (case study), 160–161
deﬁned, 154
goals for, 154–155
implementation of, 156–157
importance of, 154
Inﬂuencer Marketing and employee
advocacy for, 171
overview, 153
ownership of, 155
system, 156
Social Selling Labs, 155
SocialTalent.co, 176
Solis, Brian, xvii–xix, 11, 40, 99, 112,
113
Spencer, Stephan, 148
Spring, 53
stick-person graphic
cause and effect (law of laws), 88–89,
89
overview, 67–68, 68, 69–74, 70, 72,
74

265
Index
for transformation, 82–83
See also organizational mind
Stone, Biz, 221
stories, “facts tell, but stories sell,” 12
Strategy Brings Vision to Life (guiding
principle), 31
Strauss, William, 236
Stricchiola, Jessie, 148
Structure Hiring: The Advantage of the
New People Team (Charney), 177
subconscious mind, 70, 71–73, 86–87,
87
substance, creativity and, 64–66
Success Layer, 107–128
beginning with end in mind,
112–114, 113
brand guidelines audit, 125
EMF and, 29
governance guidelines, 126, 126–128,
127
heuristic audit, 125
memory and, 79–80
Operational Loop and Innovation
Loop, 114, 115, 115–120, 116,
117
overview, 107–110, 108,
109, 110
ROT (Redundant, Out of date,
Trivial) content audit, 120–125,
123
social business, deﬁned, 110,
111
Symantec, 13, 132–135, 192, 192
synthetic imagination, 79
T
tactics. See social business strategy and
tactics
tag management solution (TMS), 160,
201–202
Tealium, 202
technology
democratization and, 54–56
future-prooﬁng by avoiding
obsolescence, 227–237, 228, 234
questions to assess technological
forces, 56–57
See also marketing technology
(MarTech)
Terror Barrier, 83, 83–84, 86
Think and Grow Rich (Hill), 35–36, 77
“thin-slicing,” 77
T-Mobile, xxxiv, xxxvi
TMZ.com, 208
TOFU (top of funnel) elements, 155
topical relevancy, for Inﬂuencer
Marketing, 168
touch point map, for customer journey,
98, 98–100
Toyota Production System, 107
transparency
as fundamental customer service,
188–189
lack of, 169
triage, for customer experience, 191–193,
192
trust, 14–16
Turo, 6
Twitter, 156–157
U
Uber, 6, 38, 180, 235
Ultimate Goal, 211
Universal Mind, 109
user experience (UX/UI)
EMF and, 30, 30
for secure customer transactions,
189–190
V
Vaynerchuk, Gary, 122
VB Engage, xxxvii

266
VB Insight, 214
VentureBeat, xxxvii
Verizon, 76
virtual reality
masterminds and uploadable
consciousness, 233, 234
mini-VRcations, 232–233
Vise, David A., 76
Vision Layer, 91–105
business as relationship, 91–92
business goal exercises, 93–97, 94
competitive landscape, 44
customer journeys, Journey Map
Touch Point Exercise, 100–102
customer journeys and key touch
points, 98, 98–100
deﬁning scope of, 102, 102–105
EMF and, 29
overview, 93, 93
Strategy Brings Vision to Life
(guiding principle), 31
substance and creativity, 64–66
understanding mind with stick-person
graphic, 67–68, 68, 69–74, 70, 72,
74
Viskovich, Julio, 154, 156
Voice of Customer (VOC), 95
“VRcations,” 232–233
W
Wall Street Journal, The, 51, 163
Watchman’s Rattle, The (Costa), 236
Web 2.0 Expo, 220–221
Weiner, Jeff, 9
INDEX
Weldon, Marcus, 236
Western Union, 76
Wheeler, Tom, 231
will
deﬁned, 78
free will, 67, 70
six intellectual faculties, overview,
74–80
Wired, 4
word of mouth tools, in Inﬂuencer
Marketing, 166
WordStream, 206
World Economic Forum, xxxviii,
232
Wright, Travis, xxxvii–xxxviii, 8–9
X
X: The Experience Where Business Meets
Design (Solis), 40, 99
x-type conditioning, 87
Y
Yahoo!, 76
Your Brand (Brito), 195
YouTube, 206
Z
Zac, Jordan, xxxv
Zappos, 187, 189, 222
Zombies (Z)
dealing with Zombie attacks, 73, 80
deﬁned, 19
hiring process and, 175
overview, 16–21, 17

