
Digital Citizenship

Content Curation: How to Avoid Information Overload
By Steven W. Anderson @web20classroom
5 Skills for the Global Learner: What Everyone Needs to Navigate the  
Digital World
By Mark Barnes @markbarnes19
Teaching the iStudent: A Quick Guide to Using Mobile Devices and Social Media 
in the K–12 Classroom
By Mark Barnes @markbarnes19
Digital Citizenship: A Community-Based Approach
By Susan M. Bearden @s_bearden
Connected Leadership: It’s Just a Click Away
By Spike Cook @DrSpikeCook
Breaking Out of Isolation: Becoming a Connected School Leader
By Spike Cook @DrSpikeCook, Jessica Johnson @PrincipalJ, 
and Theresa Stager @PrincipalStager
All Hands on Deck: Tools for Connecting Educators, Parents, and Communities
By Brad Currie @bradmcurrie
Standing in the Gap: Resources for Connecting New Teachers Through Connected 
Resources
By Lisa Dabbs @teachwithsoul and Nicol R. Howard @NicolRHoward
The Missing Voices in EdTech: Bringing Diversity Into EdTech
By Rafranz Davis @RafranzDavis
Flipping Leadership Doesn’t Mean Reinventing the Wheel
By Peter DeWitt @PeterMDeWitt
Redesigning Learning Spaces
By Robert W. Dillon @ideaguy42, Ben Gilpin @benjamingilpin, A. J. Juliani 
@ajuliani, and Erin Klein @KleinErin

The Edcamp Model: Powering Up Professional Learning
By the Edcamp Foundation @EdcampUSA
Worlds of Making: Best Practices for Establishing a Makerspace for Your School
By Laura Fleming @LFlemingEDU
Using Technology to Engage Students With Learning Disabilities
By Billy Krakower @wkrakower and Sharon LePage Plante @iplante
Leading Professional Learning: Tools to Connect and Empower Teachers
By Thomas C. Murray @thomascmurray and Jeffrey Zoul @Jeff_Zoul
Empowered Schools, Empowered Students: Creating Connected and  
Invested Learners
By Pernille Ripp @pernilleripp
Blogging for Educators: Writing for Professional Learning
By Starr Sackstein @mssackstein
Principal Professional Development: Leading Learning in the Digital Age
By Joseph Sanfelippo @Joesanfelippofc and Tony Sinanis @TonySinanis
The Power of Branding: Telling Your School’s Story
By Tony Sinanis @TonySinanis and Joseph Sanfelippo @Joesanfelippofc
Confident Voices: Digital Tools for Language Acquisition
By John Spencer @spencerideas
The Educator’s Guide to Creating Connections
Edited by Tom Whitby @tomwhitby
The Relevant Educator: How Connectedness Empowers Learning
By Tom Whitby @tomwhitby and Steven W. Anderson @web20classroom


Digital Citizenship
A Community-Based Approach
Susan M. Bearden

Copyright  2016 by Corwin
All rights reserved. When forms and sample documents are included, 
their use is authorized only by educators, local school sites, and/or 
noncommercial or nonprofit entities that have purchased the book. 
Except for that usage, no part of this book may be reproduced 
or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, 
including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and 
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
All trademarks depicted within this book, including trademarks 
appearing as part of a screenshot, figure, or other image, are included 
solely for the purpose of illustration and are the property of their 
respective holders. The use of the trademarks in no way indicates any 
relationship with, or endorsement by, the holders of said trademarks.
Printed in the United States of America
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Bearden, Susan, author.
Title: Digital citizenship / Susan Bearden.
Description: Thousand Oaks, California : Corwin/A SAGE Company, 
2016. | Series: Corwin connected educators series | Includes 
bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2015048502 | ISBN 9781483392653 
(pbk. : alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Civics—Study and teaching—United States. |  
Citizenship—Study and teaching—United States. | Political 
participation—Technological innovations—United States. | 
Community and school—United States.
Classification: LCC LC1091 .B385 2016 | DDC 370.11/5—dc23 LC 
record available at http://lccn.loc.gov/2015048502
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
16 17 18 19 20 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Acquisitions Editor:  Ariel Bartlett
Editorial Assistant:  Andrew Olson
Production Editor:  Amy Schroller
Copy Editor:  Deanna Noga
Typesetter:  C&M Digitals (P) Ltd.
Proofreader:  Dennis W. Webb
Cover and Interior Designer:  Janet Kiesel
Marketing Manager:  Lisa Lysne
DISCLAIMER: This book may direct you to access third-party content via Web links, QR 
codes, or other scannable technologies, which are provided for your reference by the 
author(s). Corwin makes no guarantee that such third-party content will be available for your 
use and encourages you to review the terms and conditions of such third-party content. 
Corwin takes no responsibility and assumes no liability for your use of any third-party content, 
nor does Corwin approve, sponsor, endorse, verify, or certify such third-party content.
FOR INFORMATION:
Corwin
A SAGE Company
2455 Teller Road
Thousand Oaks, California 91320
(800) 233–9936
www.corwin.com
SAGE Publications Ltd.
1 Oliver’s Yard
55 City Road
London EC1Y 1SP
United Kingdom
SAGE Publications India Pvt. Ltd.
B 1/I 1 Mohan Cooperative Industrial Area
Mathura Road, New Delhi 110 044
India
SAGE Publications Asia-Pacific Pte. Ltd.
3 Church Street
#10–04 Samsung Hub
Singapore 049483

Contents
Preface
ix
Peter DeWitt and Ariel Bartlett
Acknowledgments	
xii
About the Author
xiii
1.	 What Is Digital Citizenship?
1
2.	 Why a Community-Based Approach to Digital Citizenship?
13
3.	 Demonstrating Leadership 
21
4.	 Educating Faculty and Staff
29
5.	 Educating Students
35
6.	 Educating Parents
45
7.	 Putting It All Together: Building a Comprehensive Digital 
Citizenship Program
51


ix
Preface
M
y best friend is a high school math teacher. When I started 
working on the Corwin Connected Educators series, I excit­
edly told her about the power of using social media to connect 
with other educators. I passed on what I learned from the authors 
in this series: that the greatest resource educators have is each 
other. At a conference, she heard Jennie Magiera speak and finally 
made the leap to getting on Twitter. Although I wasn’t sure she 
would continue tweeting, she did, and even joined Twitter chats 
like #connectedtl and #slowmathchat. A few days later, she texted 
me saying, “I seriously cannot thank you enough. You have 
changed my life.”
Being “connected” seems deceptively simple: Just get on Twitter, 
right? But that’s really not enough. For those who truly embrace 
connectedness, it’s a lifestyle change, an openness to sharing and 
learning in an entirely new environment. We’re seeing the impact 
of this shift in mindset worldwide. Policies are changing, new jobs 
in education are being created, hitherto impossible collaborations 
are happening, pedagogy is evolving, and there’s a heightened 
awareness of each person’s individual impact. All of these changes 
are explored in the Connected Educators series.
While you can see the full list of books on the series page, we’re 
introducing several new books to the series—published in the fall 
of 2015 and spring of 2016. These books each contribute some­
thing unique and necessary not only for educators who are new to 
the world of connected education, but also for those who have 
been immersed in it for some time.

Preface
x
Tom Whitby, coauthor of The Relevant Educator, has brought 
together a group of experienced connected educators in his new 
book, The Educator’s Guide to Creating Connections. Contributors 
Pam Moran, George Couros, Kyle Pace, Adam Bellow, Lisa Nielsen, 
Kristen Swanson, Steven Anderson, and Shannon McClintock 
Miller discuss the ways that connectedness has impacted them and 
the benefits it can have for all educators—policy makers, school 
and district leaders, and teachers.
While all connected educators are evangelists for being connected, 
connectedness does not necessarily prevent common problems, 
such as isolation in leadership. In Breaking Out of Isolation, Spike 
Cook, Jessica Johnson, and Theresa Stager explain how connected­
ness can alleviate the loneliness leaders can feel in their position 
and also, when used effectively, help leaders maintain balance in 
their lives and stay motivated.
For districts and schools embracing the connected mindset and 
empowering all of their learners to use technology, a solid plan for 
digital citizenship is a must. In Digital Citizenship, Susan M. 
Bearden provides a look at how leaders can prepare teachers and 
students for the new responsibilities of using technology and inter­
acting with others on a truly global platform.
Connected education provides unique opportunities for teachers in 
their classrooms as well. In Standing in the Gap, Lisa Dabbs and 
Nicol R. Howard explore the ways that social media can specifically 
help new teachers find resources, connect to mentors, and encour­
age each other in their careers. Robert W. Dillon, Ben Gilpin, 
A. J. Juliani, and Erin Klein show how teachers can purposefully 
integrate technology and empower their students in both physical 
and digital classrooms in Redesigning Learning Spaces.
One of the most powerful impacts connected education can have 
is in reaching marginalized populations. In Confident Voices, John 
Spencer shows how social media and other technology tools can 
empower English language learners. Billy Krakower and Sharon 
LePage Plante have also discovered that technology can reach  
special and gifted learners as well.

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
xi
The books in the Corwin Connected Educators series are supported 
by a companion website featuring videos, articles, downloadable 
forms, and other resources to help you as you start and continue 
your journey. Best of all, the authors in the series want to connect 
with you! We’ve provided their Twitter handles and other contact 
information on the companion website.
Once you’ve taken the step to joining a network, don’t stop there. 
Share what you’re doing; you never know when it will help some­
one else!
—Peter DeWitt, Series Editor
@PeterMDeWitt
—Ariel Bartlett, Acquisitions Editor
@arielkbartlett

xii
Acknowledgments
I
f it takes a village to help our students become good digital citi­
zens, it also takes a village to write a book about digital citizenship! 
I am indebted to so many who helped me on my own digital citi­
zenship journey and paved the way for this book to be written.  
Thank you to Dr. Mike Ribble and Jason Ohler, whose books on 
digital citizenship are a must read for anyone wanting to learn 
more about the subject; to Dr. Marialice Curran, whose passion for 
digital citizenship is an inspiration; to Anne Lahr, Brad Meyer, Dr. 
Joan McGettigan, and Jen Scheffer, for allowing me to share their 
stories; and to Katrina Stevens, who suggested I write a book in the 
first place!
I am deeply indebted to the wonderful staff at Corwin, especially 
to Acquisitions Editor Ariel Bartlett, without whose patience and 
feedback this book would not have been written.  Thanks also to 
Copy Editor Deanna Noga and Project Editor Amy Joy Schroller.
And finally, thank you to Dr. Kelly Mendoza, the Director of 
Professional Development, Common Sense Education, who pro­
vided insightful and invaluable feedback on the initial manu­
script and who has done so much to advance the cause of digital 
citizenship education.

xiii
About the Author
Susan M. Bearden is the Director of 
Information Technology at Holy Trinity 
Episcopal Academy in Melbourne, Florida. A 
former teacher, she frequently presents about 
social media, education technology, and digital 
citizenship at national and state conferences 
including International Society for Technology 
in Education (ISTE), Future of Education 
Technology Conference (FETC), the Consortium for School Networking 
(CoSN), Miami Device, and the Digital Citizenship Summit. In 2015, 
she was named to the Center for Digital Education’s list of “Top 30 
Technologists, Transformers and Trailblazers” and received the “Making 
IT Happen” Award from the Florida Society for Technology in Education. 
In 2014, she received the Bammy Award for School Technologist of the 
Year and was a finalist in the education talk show host category.
Bearden cofounded and moderates the #edtechchat and #digcit 
(digital citizenship) Twitter chats, which are weekly online discus­
sions about education technology and digital citizenship. She is a 
regular contributor to the popular EdTechChat Radio broadcast for 
the BAM Radio Network (www.bamradionetwork.com/edtechchat). 
A popular guest blogger, she has written for a variety of online pub­
lications including the Huffington Post, SmartBrief on Education, 
and Edsurge, and was named one of Common Sense Education’s 
Favorite Digital Citizenship Bloggers to Follow in 2014. Inspired by 
her experiences with Twitter, she developed Tweechme, a mobile 
app specifically designed to teach educators how to build Pers­
onal Learning Networks on Twitter. Connect with her on Twitter  
@s_bearden and @Tweechmeapp or at www.susanmbearden.com.

This book is dedicated to my husband, Christopher Bearden, 
whose encouragement and support knows no limits; and to 
my father, Roger A. Morrissette, a lifelong educator who dedicated 
his life to helping children and making the world a better place.

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
1
CHAPTER
1
What Is Digital 
Citizenship?
T
his is a question that I hear frequently, whether I am talking 
to students, teachers, administrators, friends, or family mem-
bers. Digital citizenship can be a confusing topic to the uniniti-
ated, and often it means different things to different people. 
Cyberbullying is often the first thing that jumps to mind as a 
common and well-publicized scourge; Internet safety is another. 
However, digital citizenship is not just about cyberbullying or 
Internet safety; it encompasses a broad range of behaviors and 
skills needed in today’s digital environments. In his excellent 
book, Digital Citizenship in Schools, Mike Ribble defines digital citi-
zenship as “the norms of appropriate, responsible behavior with 
regard to technology use.” The umbrella of digital citizenship  
covers a broad array of digital literacies, some better known than 
others, but all important for success in the digital age.

CH 1  •  DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP
2
There are some educators who believe that we should take the 
“digital” out of digital citizenship and just call it “citizenship.” 
And indeed, digital citizenship often goes (and in my opinion, 
should go) hand in hand with character education. The principles 
of good citizenship are the same online as they are offline. The 
online world, however, presents some context-specific challenges 
that the offline world does not. The anonymity of many social 
media apps encourages students and adults alike to say and do 
things online that they would never say face-to-face. Thoughtless 
posts and inappropriate photos and videos can quickly spread far 
and wide, viewable by a public audience, at a scale not possible 
before the advent of social media. The permanency of content 
posted online—once it’s online, it’s always online!—means that 
adolescent mistakes that once “stayed in high school” can haunt 
students for years to come. Adolescent conflicts and bullying that 
once stopped at the schoolyard door continue unabated 24/7 
because students are constantly connected via cell phones. The 
relative ease with which students can access inappropriate content 
(intentionally or not) forces parents and educators to address dis-
turbing social issues at increasingly younger ages. The digital-age 
culture of oversharing information on social media heightens the 
importance of teaching children to set appropriate personal 
boundaries. So while digital citizenship should definitely be 
viewed as an extension of offline behavior, it is also important to 
recognize the factors that make it more complex.
The same blurred boundaries between work, school, and home 
created by the advent of cell phones and our “constantly con-
nected” society are what make a whole community approach to 
digital citizenship so important. Students are not the only ones 
who need educating! Parents and educators alike are often equally 
in need of digital citizenship training. Most of them grew up in a 
different era, before the advent of these digital tools, and have no 
previous experiences or role models to guide them in navigating 
the challenges posed by raising children in the digital age. They 
may themselves struggle with some of the same online challenges 
that children do, whether that be social exclusion, cyberbullying, 

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
3
understanding appropriate online etiquette, navigating privacy 
settings, or feeling societal pressure to be “always available” via 
cell phone. Adults who don’t know how to handle the challenges 
they themselves face are hardly in a position to help children 
acquire these skills. At the same time, they may also be unaware 
of the fantastic learning opportunities provided by the thoughtful 
use of these same tools, which allow students to connect, collab-
orate, and learn from students and adults across the country or 
around the world. Given both the unprecedented challenges and 
opportunities presented by the digital age, it is clear that digital 
citizenship education is not solely “the school’s responsibility” or 
“the parent’s responsibility,” but is instead a community respon-
sibility. Schools are uniquely positioned to spearhead and support 
such community-based initiatives, and fortunately there is a 
wealth of online resources designed to help educators take up 
the challenge.
One of my favorite resources for educators and parents wanting 
to learn more about digital citizenship is Common Sense 
Education (www.commonsensemedia.org/educators). Common 
Sense is a nonprofit organization dedicated, in their words, to 
“helping kids thrive in a world of media and technology.” In 
addition to providing independent age-based and educational 
ratings and reviews for movies, games, apps, TV shows, websites, 
books, and music, they offer additional resources for parents and 
educators wanting to educate themselves about the perils and 
incredible opportunities presented by raising children in the dig-
ital age. They also offer a suite of free digital citizenship resources 
for educators, including a free K–12 curriculum. The curriculum 
is divided into eight separate categories that, along with the cur-
ricular framework, were developed based on Howard Gardner’s 
Project Good Play’s research on the “ethical faultlines” young 
people were falling into based on their research. (Links to the 
research and the Common Sense Education curriculum can be 
found on the companion website for this book.) These categories 
may serve as a helpful primer to help answer the question: What 
is digital citizenship?

CH 1  •  DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP
4
INTERNET SAFETY
Internet safety is a core component of digital citizenship. It is 
often narrowly viewed through the lens of protecting children 
from predators; children need to learn how to safely navigate an 
online world in which people can easily pretend to be someone 
who they are not. Revealing too much personal information can 
leave children vulnerable not just to predators, but also to iden-
tity thieves and other criminals. Location-based “check-ins” and 
posting geotagged photos online also pose risks. However, 
Internet safety also includes teaching students how to handle 
any online situations that make them feel uncomfortable, 
including exposure to inappropriate material, cyberbullying, and 
unsolicited approaches from strangers on social networks. Given 
that students are navigating online spaces at increasingly young 
ages—I was shocked to discover my 6-year-old granddaughter 
deftly navigating her way around YouTube!—this training needs 
to begin as early as kindergarten. It’s also important to teach 
children to balance the risks of Internet use with the rewards, 
such as being able to communicate and collaborate beyond class-
room walls, create and share content, and have their voices heard 
by a broader audience—not just their teacher and classmates. The 
online world presents incredible opportunities as well as risks, 
and a balanced digital citizenship program teaches students 
about both.
PRIVACY AND SECURITY
Identity theft is a growing problem, with online data breaches 
being a frequent cause. In a world where even major corpora-
tions are hacked on a regular basis, a solid understanding of 
online privacy and security is an essential life skill. In addition 
to the risks presented by viruses and malware, Internet users are 
increasingly vulnerable to e-mail or texting spam and phishing 
attacks. Poor password habits are common among adults and 
students—whether that be using simple passwords, sharing 
passwords with friends, or reusing passwords on multiple sites. 

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
5
The increasing sophistication of Internet scammers and hackers 
make it all the more imperative that students (and adults!) learn 
the basics of online security and how to safeguard their personal 
information. And with students active in online spaces as young 
as elementary school, it is increasingly important that they 
understand what information they should and should not share 
in online spaces.
In addition to the security risks above, many people are unaware 
the mere act of browsing the Internet or using a cell phone 
presents privacy risks. The rise of targeted advertising—whereby 
Internet ads appear in a user’s web browser or mobile device 
based on their browsing history, product purchases, or other data 
points—has created a huge market for companies doing business 
in the buying and selling of our personal data. Mobile device 
apps are infamous for collecting and sharing user data with third 
parties and are often riddled with security vulnerabilities. Many 
free apps—including “educational” and gaming apps popular 
with children—contain in-app advertising. Privacy policies—
which many users don’t even bother to read—are often vaguely 
worded, overly broad, and allow for the collection of far more 
personal data than is necessary for functional app use. Social 
media platforms like Facebook are not “free”—the personal data 
we willingly provide while using these platforms is used to 
deliver targeted ads as part of the “enhanced user experience.” 
Often, it is a case of balancing the trade-off between personal 
privacy and convenience. Educated consumers may choose to 
share some personal data to reap the benefits of technology use. 
However, students must be taught about how targeting advertis-
ing works and the risks that the associated data mining present 
to their personal privacy. They should understand the impor-
tance of customizing privacy settings and how they can do so in 
web browsers and on mobile devices. They need explicit instruc-
tion in understanding privacy policies and how to opt-out of 
third party sharing. By educating our students about the privacy 
risks inherent in web browsing and mobile app use, we empower 
them to make educated choices based on an understanding of 
the implications.

CH 1  •  DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP
6
RELATIONSHIPS AND COMMUNICATION
Two of the biggest relationship challenges created by online 
­communications are (1) written words can be easily misinterpreted 
in the absence of body language, and (2) people say things online—
especially anonymously—that they would never say face-to-face. 
Learning to communicate respectfully and appropriately online—
whether via e-mail, text message, or in other online spaces—is an 
often overlooked but very important skill. Sadly, it is one that 
many adults lack! Composing an e-mail to a college admissions 
officer or potential employer is very different from texting a friend, 
but students don’t necessarily learn this on their own—these are 
skills that need to be actively taught. Learning how to handle dif-
ferences of opinion in online spaces is equally important. Whether 
it be learning how to write a respectful comment on a blog post or 
collaborative document, or understanding how to deescalate digi-
tal drama (recognizing, for instance, that flaming text wars are not 
an appropriate way to handle conflict), relationship management 
and communication skills are of paramount importance for stu-
dents of all ages. It’s also important for students to learn how to set 
boundaries in their digital lives. These boundaries can range from 
balancing screen time with offline activities, understanding basic 
digital etiquette (for instance, recognizing that in many social situ-
ations it is not polite to pull out a cell phone during a face-to-face 
conversation), and even understanding how to handle pressure 
from peers to respond immediately to text messages.
While the digital world can present challenges for relationship 
management, it can be an incredibly powerful tool for connecting 
with others. Online spaces make it easy for students to collaborate 
on projects—whether working with classmates or with students 
around the world! Video conferencing platforms like Skype or 
Google Hangouts make face-to-face communication possible at no 
cost, aside from an Internet connection and bandwidth. 
Collaborative social media platforms—be they Google Apps for 
Education, Edmodo, or Twitter—create opportunities for both 
synchronous and asynchronous communication and collabora-
tion. Twitter hashtags like #comments4kids make it possible for 

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
7
students of all ages to share their work with a worldwide audience 
and get feedback. It is incumbent upon educators to teach stu-
dents how to leverage the power of these platforms in an increas-
ingly “flattened” globalized world.
Cyberbullying
If there are school administrators who have not had to deal with 
cyberbullying in their schools I personally have yet to meet them. 
The rise of the Internet has made cyberbullying much more perva-
sive and damaging than the schoolyard conflicts of the past. 
Adding to the challenges faced by school administrators is the fact 
that cyberbullying activity often happens after school hours (blur-
ring the boundaries between discipline responsibilities at home vs. 
school) and the fact that the apps and platforms used for cyberbul-
lying are constantly changing. (Facebook, ask.fm, Kik, Instagram, 
Yik Yak, and YouTube are just a few that come to mind as of this 
writing.) The changing technologies can make cyberbullying 
difficult to recognize and track for adults unfamiliar with the 
technology landscape frequented by today’s students. Although 
the minimum age for using many of these social media platforms 
is 13, many younger students are active on these platforms, with 
or without parent knowledge or consent. This makes cyberbullying 
education critical even in elementary school.
Teaching students conflict management skills (both online and 
off) can help reduce cyberbullying. Students need to learn what 
constitutes cyberbullying (sometimes, a misinterpreted digital 
communication can blow up into something much worse) and 
how to react to it, whether they are a bystander or victim. Students 
can learn how to deescalate online cruelty and be an “upstander” 
who speaks up and supports and protects someone who is being 
hurt. It’s also important to help parents understand, recognize, and 
respond to cyberbullying, whether their child is the perpetrator or 
the victim. They need to be able to recognize potentially danger-
ous situations that should involve law enforcement, such as 
threats, as opposed to situations that can be handled with conflict 
resolution. Many parents want to help their children but don’t 

CH 1  •  DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP
8
know how, which is why a successful cyberbullying education  
program involves the entire school community.
DIGITAL FOOTPRINTS AND REPUTATION
What do you find when you google your name? We live in an age 
where one’s online reputation can seriously impact employment 
and college prospects. Sadly, many students (and adults!) are obliv-
ious to the impact their online activities have on their digital foot-
print. Social media sites are heavily indexed by search engines and 
often appear among the top results. Students often post inappro-
priate content on social media sites that can easily be accessed with 
a web search. An increasing number of college admissions officers, 
coaches, and employers are googling candidate names to deter-
mine if they are a good fit for their organization. Business is boom-
ing for companies such as Reputation.com and regainyourname.
com, which offer services that will, for a fee, help with online 
reputation management. There are even companies like Social 
Assurity that specialize in evaluating the digital footprints of col-
lege-bound students and helping them clean up their online repu-
tation before applying to college. Digital footprints, for better and 
for worse, are a reality of the Internet age.
It’s worth mentioning that parents are often the first creators of a 
child’s digital footprint. A 2014 study by security firm AVG found 
that a child’s digital footprint can begin before birth, with 30% of 
parents sharing ultrasound images online. Photos and videos of 
children shared on social media sites such as Facebook, Instagram, 
and Flickr start forming their digital footprints long before they are 
themselves posting content online. While this social sharing often 
has benefits (such as keeping family and friends up to date on a 
child’s activities), it is often done without understanding the 
potential future implications. (Will that embarrassing photo be 
appreciated when the child gets older?) Once again, parent educa-
tion and awareness are key.
It’s important to remember that social media can play a key role in 
creating a positive digital footprint, not just a neutral or negative 
one! The digital age provides students (and educators) with 

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
9
unprecedented opportunities to showcase academic and profes-
sional work, extracurricular and volunteer activities, and other 
things that they are proud of. Blogs and other social media sites 
can help students develop a positive, authentic personal brand and 
help them connect with recruiters, industry experts, and potential 
employers. Digital footprints and online reputation management 
is one area where educators can and should be active role models 
for our students, parents, and the broader school community. We 
discuss ways to do this in later chapters.
SELF-IMAGE AND IDENTITY
Searching for identity is an important part of childhood and ado-
lescence. In the digital age, the Internet serves as a “stage” for chil-
dren to represent themselves. While the digital world can provide 
healthy outlets for children to explore different identities, it also 
poses risks. Children are often influenced by mass media (including 
celebrities, sexualized online content, and the societal representa-
tion of gender roles) in how they “think” they should be, look, and 
act. They post images, comments, and content that often reflects 
the persona they want to present to the world. However, this online 
identity doesn’t necessarily represent the multifaceted and complex 
nature of identity. In addition, content posted online can leave 
students open to cyberbullying or encourage them to engage in 
other unhealthy behaviors. This makes it all the more important 
for students to learn how to cultivate positive online identities and 
relationships. As Alec Couros asked in his 2015 TedXLangley pre-
sentation Identity in the Digital World: “How do we help our kids 
discover and experience the many emerging possibilities for net-
worked, human connection while allowing them to safely grow 
and shape their identities, and the identities of others?”
INFORMATION LITERACY
What does it mean to be literate in the digital age? Whether we are 
teaching students to evaluate the content and the credibility of 
online resources or helping them learn effective Internet searching 

CH 1  •  DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP
10
(including advanced search operators), the ability to sift through 
the vast quantities of information available on the Internet, iden-
tify and curate what is valuable, and share it with others is a vital 
21st-century skill. The old joke “I read it on the Internet, so it must 
be true” exemplifies the need to teach students criteria for evaluat-
ing and rating online content sources. When it comes to accuracy 
and veracity, all online sources are most definitely not created 
equal. It’s also important for students and adults to understand 
how Internet marketing works and how it influences Internet 
searches. Examples include sponsored links (Internet advertise-
ments that appear in response to specific Internet searches) and 
browser cookies, which are used to personalize the information 
that appears in search results according to the user’s previous 
browsing habits. An example of this phenomenon would be of two 
individuals separately doing online research about a hotly debated 
political topic. A person who has spent a lot of time browsing con-
servative news sites will be served up search results that align with 
conservative political leanings, while the opposite is true for the 
individual who has previously browsed liberal news sites. 
Understanding how these processes work (and how to circumvent 
them) is a critical 21st-century skill.
CREATIVE CREDIT AND COPYRIGHT
The ease of plagiarizing sources in the digital age has spawned 
services like www.turnitin.com that use computer algorithms to 
identify content plagiarized from other Internet sources. However, 
it is not just academic papers where plagiarism and copyright 
infringement can be found! Many educators do not well under-
stand or model the principles of copyright. They may fail to prop-
erly cite an image source in their own presentations, for example, 
or inappropriately distribute copyrighted textbook materials to 
their students. They may interpret fair use (which provide educa-
tors and work contained in educational settings with specific 
rights) overly broadly or conservatively, negatively impacting their 
own use of digital tools in the classroom. (This book’s companion 
website has links to educator guidelines about fair use.) They may 

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
11
not understand the difference between using copyrighted music as 
background music in a video (which would not be considered fair 
use) as opposed to remixing the original content in a way that 
provides social commentary on a topic of class discussion (which 
would be an example of fair use). Educators who are not comfort-
able with the principles of copyright and fair use are hardly posi-
tioned to guide their students in becoming media literate citizens.
In addition to helping students understand when and how to 
make use of traditionally copyrighted materials under fair use 
guidelines, educators need to teach students how to leverage both 
public domain content and content licensed through Creative 
Commons. (Creative Commons allows content creators to specifi-
cally license their work for public use under specific conditions.) 
Students should be educated about their rights as content creators 
and how they can use Creative Commons to license their own 
work. Because we live in an era where the ease of online informa-
tion sharing makes copyright infringement (inadvertent or not) as 
simple as clicking a button, it is critical for educators and students 
to understand both their rights and the rights of others. The ethi-
cal and legal ramifications make an understanding of creative 
credit and copyright a critical 21st-century skill.
Now that we have outlined the basics of digital citizenship, let’s 
discuss the benefits of teaching it using a community-based 
approach!
BOOK STUDY QUESTIONS
1.	 How literate do you consider yourself in each of the 
eight digital citizenship categories listed above?
2.	 What would be the benefit to you personally of 
becoming more literate about digital citizenship?
3.	 What would be the benefits of implementing a 
digital citizenship education program in your school 
or district?
???????????????


WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
13
CHAPTER
2
Why a Community-
Based Approach to 
Digital Citizenship?
I
n many schools, digital citizenship education is limited both in 
scope and audience. The focus may be on meeting the minimum 
requirements for Children’s Internet Protection Act (CIPA) compli-
ance, with parent or educator training being a distant consider-
ation. The responsibility for digital citizenship training may lay on 
the shoulders of a single teacher, perhaps a computer/technology 
teacher, using a curriculum that meets the CIPA compliance mini-
mum standards but little else. It may be limited to one-off school 
assemblies that address a narrow facet of digital citizenship, such 
as Internet safety. “Digital citizenship education” may just be seen 
as another checkbox to be filled on a lengthy list of state or federal 
mandates, as opposed to being incorporated into the fabric of the 

CH 2  •  Why a Community-Based Approach to Digital Citizenship?
14
broader curriculum and school culture. With so many standardized 
tests and pressures faced by educators today, why should schools 
take on yet another responsibility?
What Is CIPA?
The Children’s Internet Protection Act, or CIPA, requires schools that 
receive government funds for Internet infrastructure to have web 
filtering solutions in place to protect children from pictures that are  
(a) obscene, (b) child pornography, or (c) harmful to minors. It also 
requires schools to have Internet safety policies that include monitoring 
the online activities of minors and “provide for educating minors about 
appropriate online behavior, including interacting with other individuals 
on social networking websites and in chat rooms, and cyberbullying 
awareness and response.”
Although CIPA does not apply to teachers, some schools and districts 
interpret the legislation very conservatively and end up blocking large 
swaths of the Internet for students and educators alike. Unfortunately, 
this often includes many sites with legitimate educational purposes, 
including YouTube, blogs, wikis, and other social media platforms.
It’s worth noting that no Internet filter is foolproof and that determined 
students will always find a way to get around them. While writing this 
paragraph, I did a Google search for “Get around web filter” and it 
turned up over 81,700,000 results! That’s not including the students 
with cellular data plans, which bypass web filters completely.
Complicating the landscape is that schools and districts often strug-
gle with where to set boundaries regarding student behavior online, 
especially when incidents happen off campus, outside school hours, 
and not using school equipment. Where do schools draw the line? 
School responses to this ambiguity vary widely—from administra-
tors who hire companies to actively monitor student social media 
use, to those who shy away from disciplining students for virtually 
any off-campus activities. Whose responsibility is it to teach kids 

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
15
about appropriate online behavior anyway? Shouldn’t this be a par-
ent responsibility? Why should it be the school’s responsibility? In 
many schools and districts, concerns about these boundaries and the 
potentially negative impacts of social media may lead to complete 
bans on its use in educational settings. Extremely restrictive web 
filtering, often brought on by conservative interpretations of CIPA, 
is common in many schools. While these concerns are understand-
able, in practice this philosophy deprives children of the opportu-
nity to learn how to use online tools appropriately and safely, under 
the guidance of a caring teacher. Instead, many students go from 
extremely limited access to digital tools during the school day to 
completely unfiltered Internet access on their cell phones as soon as 
the bell rings. As Kevin Honeycutt notably observed, our children 
are out on the digital playground, but no one is watching.
While the philosophical debate over these boundaries rages, the 
reality is that today’s digital technologies present both risks and 
opportunities. The risks are often better publicized, with cyberbul-
lying, sexting, and online exploitation being the most common 
ones trumpeted by news headlines. But as Common Sense 
Education’s Kelly Mendoza has said, “the benefits of learning to 
create, communicate, and collaborate in digital spaces responsibly 
and safely are the essence of digital citizenship.” It is incumbent 
on educators to help students and parents understand both sides 
of the equation, to help them leverage the opportunities presented 
by the online world while educating them about the potential 
risks. And while any digital citizenship education is better than 
nothing, the most successful programs weave digital citizenship 
lessons into the regular curriculum, with an eye toward educating 
the entire school community.
It’s unfortunate that in today’s world our students have no shortage 
of terrible role models when it comes to appropriate behavior in 
online spaces. Every day, a politician, sports figure, or celebrity 
courts controversy and career destruction with an obnoxious tweet, 
a scandalous text, or an embarrassing photo posted online. The 
comment section on almost any news website is a testament of how 
low the standards for civil discourse online have become. Adult 
cyberbullies can be as cruel as adolescent ones. And sadly, parents 

CH 2  •  Why a Community-Based Approach to Digital Citizenship?
16
and even educators can sometimes be included among these poor 
role models. When facing such seemingly insurmountable chal-
lenges, it might be tempting for schools to wash their hands of 
their responsibility for digital citizenship education beyond the 
minimum requirements necessary for receiving E-Rate funds.
What Is E-Rate?
E-Rate is a federal program that provides schools, school districts, and 
libraries with federal funds to subsidize the cost of telecommunications, 
Internet access, and internal connections. All schools receiving 
E-Rate discounts must comply with the Internet safety educational 
requirements outlined in CIPA.
But instead of just focusing on the negative aspects of the digital 
world, what if schools focused on teaching students, educators, 
and parents about the benefits by promoting responsible use of 
digital tools and modeling appropriate online behavior through 
authentic learning experiences that involve the entire school 
community?
What if, instead of avoiding social media in school altogether or 
focusing solely on the negative aspects, we teach students how to 
leverage it to connect in positive ways and build a digital footprint 
that reflects their best selves rather than their worst? What if we 
include parents in the conversation?
What if we intentionally teach students conflict management skills, 
to help them better negotiate disagreements online and off? What 
if we teach our children to be “upstanders” in the face of online 
bullying, to stand up for the victims instead of doing nothing?
What if we teach our students about best practices in cybersecurity, 
so they can educate their fellow students, friends, and family and 
make the online world safer for everyone?
What if, instead of completely blocking cell phone use in our 
schools, we teach students when and how to use them appropriately?

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
17
What if, instead of viewing parents as part of the problem regard-
ing inappropriate online behavior, we view them as partners and 
educate them about appropriate behavior in online spaces so they 
can better help their children?
What if, instead of avoiding the institutional use of social media 
platforms like Instagram and Facebook, we use them to build rela-
tionships with the broader school community and model best 
practices in social media use?
What if we recognized that if an ounce of prevention is worth a 
pound of cure, then helping our children be responsible digital 
citizens is well worth the investment?
One of the biggest challenges faced by educators wanting to teach 
digital citizenship is that parents, teachers, and school officials 
often don’t know what they don’t know. While there will always 
be parents and educators who are knowledgeable and proactive 
about teaching children about digital citizenship, many (perhaps a 
majority) are not. They may be well-intentioned, but uninformed. 
They may want to help children navigate these digital waters, but 
lack the knowledge, practical experience, and digital skill sets to do 
so. When it comes to emerging digital literacies, parents and edu-
cators who came of age in an earlier time often lack the necessary 
frame of reference needed to help children become responsible 
digital citizens.
It has been my experience, however, that many parents are aware 
of the gaps in their knowledge (even if they don’t specifically 
know what these gaps are) and are grateful to get information that 
helps them be better parents and digital citizens themselves. They 
are often relieved to know that they are not alone in their fears 
and uncertainties. They may be intimidated by the vast and 
ever-changing array of digital tools and platforms used by stu-
dents today. They may struggle with digital life skills themselves—
even basic skills like creating secure passwords and understanding 
social media privacy settings. They may want to talk to students 
about their digital lives, but not know how to broach the subject. 
They may allow or even encourage children under 13 to set up 
social media accounts, without any understanding of Children’s 

CH 2  •  Why a Community-Based Approach to Digital Citizenship?
18
Online Privacy and Protection Act (COPPA) regulations or the 
broader implications of underage social media use. But every bit 
of knowledge they gain will enable them to be better parents who 
can model, discuss, and reinforce the principles of digital citizen-
ship with their children. Knowledge is power, and if it takes a 
village to raise a good digital citizen, then proactively educating 
that village multiplies the impact of digital citizenship training a 
hundredfold.
What Is COPPA?
The Children’s Online Privacy and Protection Act, also known as COPPA, 
requires website and online service providers directed to children under 
the age of 13 to give notice to parents and get their verifiable consent 
before collecting, using, or disclosing personal information from children 
under 13. The reason that the minimum age for most social media 
sites is 13 is because many website platforms that are targeted toward 
adults don’t want to address the technical and legal hurdles required to 
be COPPA compliant. COPPA was updated in 2012, and you can learn 
more about it from the companion website resources for this book.
It’s not just the parents who face a steep learning curve: educators, 
too, need education! They are often no more knowledgeable about 
issues such as cybersecurity, privacy, copyright, and online reputa-
tion management than their students’ parents. For every teacher 
who is knowledgeable about digital citizenship, there are dozens 
more who are not. Assuming a baseline understanding of digital 
literacies and good online judgment is usually a mistake for the 
same reasons we can’t make these assumptions about our students 
or their parents: educators, like students, usually have not had 
formal or even informal training in these skills.
The good news, however, is that these skills can be learned and 
knowledgeable educators can be powerful role models for students 
and parents! Educators and school districts who use social media 

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
19
and other digital tools wisely and incorporate them into instruc-
tion can have a powerful influence on their school community. 
Digital platforms enable teachers and students to connect and 
collaborate with others, to share and reflect on their learning, and 
to provide opportunities to highlight student voice. Digital tools 
allow educators to communicate with parents and share the great 
things happening in their schools in a way that weekly paper 
newsletters and press releases never could. Educators who leverage 
the power of social media to build Personal Learning Networks and 
collaborate with other professionals are well-positioned to help 
students learn to use these tools appropriately. However, many 
teachers don’t know how to leverage these technologies to con-
nect, collaborate, and enhance student learning. Educators need to 
develop these digital literacies themselves before they can help 
their students and serve as role models. Just as educating parents 
helps them be better parents, educating teachers makes them bet-
ter educators who are better able to support their students.
Digital citizenship is not a one shot lesson or assembly on cyber-
bullying and social media safety, even if many schools currently 
teach it that way. Digital citizenship needs to be an ongoing 
conversation, a conversation about how people conduct them-
selves online and the specific digital literacies that students need 
to be successful 21st-century citizens. It needs to be woven into 
the fabric of a school culture to be the most effective, with les-
sons reinforced by hands-on activities and even opportunities 
for students to make mistakes in a safe environment under the 
guidance of mature, caring adults. Regardless of the terminology, 
the best tool that educators and parents have is open and honest 
communication with students about the realities of their online 
lives, whatever their ages. Including parents and teachers as well 
as students in digital citizenship education helps all stakeholders 
understand that when it comes to helping our kids, we are all in 
it together. A community-based approach to teaching digital 
citizenship can be a powerful relationship-building tool for 
school communities. Every step we take to educate the village 
helps all adults in the school community be better role models 
for our students.

CH 2  •  Why a Community-Based Approach to Digital Citizenship?
20
BOOK STUDY QUESTIONS
1.	 How is your school or district currently approaching 
digital citizenship education?
2.	 How would your school or district benefit from 
taking a community-based approach to digital 
citizenship education, as opposed to solely focusing 
on students?
3.	 What do you perceive as the biggest challenges you 
face in implementing a community-based approach 
to digital citizenship in your school or district?
?????????????????

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
21
CHAPTER
3
Demonstrating 
Leadership
I
f you are a school administrator or teacher leader reading this 
book, congratulations! You have taken the first step into modeling 
the characteristics of a good digital citizen by educating yourself. 
Remember, as a “lead learner,” you play a critical role in deve­lop- 
ing a school culture around good digital citizenship. As you read 
through this chapter, see which ideas resonate with you and which 
you might be able to start implementing at your school. Set achiev-
able goals for yourself and commit to following through. Building a 
culture of positive digital citizenship in your school is not just a 
goal, it is a journey. Every step you take on this journey will help 
you better educate your school community. In Chapter 7, we discuss 
ways to build a comprehensive digital citizenship education pro-
gram for your school or district.
If you are a classroom teacher, you play a key role in helping stu-
dents become better digital citizens. Never underestimate the 

CH 3  •  Demonstrating Leadership
22
impact you can have on your students, school families, and col-
leagues! You and you alone set the tone for your classroom, and 
your influence can extend far beyond your classroom walls. 
Become a digital citizenship teacher-leader for your school! There 
are tremendous curricular resources available to educate students 
and assist your own personal growth.
Take these seven steps to begin your journey!
1. EDUCATE YOURSELF  
ABOUT DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP
Reading this book is an excellent first step! The more you learn 
about digital literacy and citizenship, the better prepared you will 
be to support your school community. There are a number of 
excellent resources in the online companion to this book to help 
you learn more. Commit to spending 15 minutes a day on your 
own digital citizenship education. It’s worth the investment, both 
personally and professionally. Pick one of the topic areas in 
Chapter 1 and review the resources available on this book’s com-
panion website. You’ll be amazed at how quickly you can apply 
what you learn. Even better, share what your newfound knowledge 
with your family and colleagues! There’s no better way to cement 
your understanding than teaching others, whether that be in a 
formal classroom setting, an informal conversation during a coffee 
break, or a discussion at the dinner table. Everything you learn 
about digital citizenship will make you a better parent, educator, 
counselor, and friend.
2. MODEL GOOD DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP
Are you using social media professionally? If not, it’s time to start! 
Start building a Personal/Professional Learning Network (PLN) 
using Twitter or other social media platforms. To learn more, read 
Connected Leadership: It’s Just a Click Away by Spike Cook, or The 
Relevant Educator: How Connectedness Empowers Learning by Tom 
Whitby and Steven W. Anderson. Choose one platform, such as 
Twitter, Edmodo, LinkedIn, or Google Plus—whatever works best 

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
23
for you—and start from there. Create a professional bio with a 
headshot and start interacting professionally with other educators 
in online spaces. Comment on industry-related blog posts using 
your real name. All these platforms have mobile apps, making it 
easy to stay connected on the go or during short periods of down-
time. (I’ve gotten great ideas from other educators while standing 
in line at the supermarket!) Twitter is my personal favorite, and it 
is popular among connected educators, but it is not the only social 
media platform you can use to build your PLN. By learning how to 
use social media yourself, you will both improve your professional 
practice and get a better understanding for how your students are 
using it (and how they should be using it!). By modeling appropri-
ate social media use, you’ll gain credibility with your school com-
munity and be better positioned to advise others. Remember, there 
is no better way to understand how social media platforms work 
than to use them yourself. Social media is here to stay, and it plays 
a huge role in the lives of students. You can jump onboard the 
train and help guide their journey or be blindsided by it.
Social media can also be a great tool for telling your school’s story 
and building relationships with your school community. In addi-
tion to using social media for your own professional learning, 
consider starting a school Facebook page, blog, or Twitter account 
to share the great things happening at your school! A great 
resource for this is The Power of Branding: Telling Your School’s Story 
by Tony Sinanis and Joseph Sanfelippo. Social media allows you to 
communicate with parents throughout the school day, resulting in 
increased transparency and improved home-school relationships. 
Real-time updates from your mobile phone can have a far greater 
impact than a printed weekly school newsletter. All the while, you 
can model positive social media use. It’s a win-win scenario!
3. START TALKING  
ABOUT DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP
It’s up to you to start engaging members of your school commu-
nity in conversations about digital citizenship! Most people don’t 
know what they don’t know, and the first step in educating them 

CH 3  •  Demonstrating Leadership
24
is familiarizing them with the vocabulary. Host parent round tables 
where small groups can discuss topics centered on digital citizen-
ship. Talk to teachers about digital citizenship and what it means 
to them and for their students. Better yet, get the students talking! 
They have plenty to say about their online lives if we are willing to 
listen. Common Sense Education has some terrific materials for 
facilitating parent talks and student panel discussions, including 
their Connecting Families program, which you can find through 
the companion website for this book.
Regardless of whether you are a teacher or an administrator, others 
will take their cues from you. If your students know that digital 
citizenship is important, they are more likely to rise to the occa-
sion. What you focus on, you will get more of.
4. DON’T ASSUME THAT FACULTY,  
STAFF, AND PARENTS KNOW WHAT 
GOOD DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP LOOKS LIKE
It is important to remember that many people don’t have a clear 
idea of what digital citizenship means, or why it is important. 
Different people (and even different communities) have different 
expectations of appropriate online behavior. Whatever your school 
or district’s expectations are, make sure they are clearly communi-
cated and understood throughout your school community. While 
Acceptable or Responsible Use Policies (known as AUPs or RUPs) 
are important (see the companion website for resources and exam-
ples of these policies), it is not enough just to have a policy—make 
sure that your school- community lives it! And remember, digital 
citizenship extends beyond social media use. If you have not yet 
implemented a school- or district-wide digital citizenship educa-
tion program, take advantage of less formal learning opportunities. 
Set aside time in a faculty meeting or a professional development 
day to discuss issues such as copyright and fair use. Ask your IT 
department to present to faculty about best practices in personal 
cybersecurity. Have a counselor discuss strategies for handling 
cyberbullying. Invite your media specialist to talk about informa-
tion literacy or advanced web search techniques. Leverage the 

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
25
resources within your school to educate faculty, staff and parents, 
and encourage them to continue the conversations with students.
5. MONITOR YOUR DIGITAL FOOTPRINT, 
TALK TO YOUR SCHOOL COMMUNITY 
ABOUT MONITORING THEIRS
If you work in education, you are being googled—by students, by 
parents, by journalists, by the community at large. Be proactive in 
creating and monitoring your digital footprint. Professional social 
media use can go a long way toward building a positive personal 
brand for you and your school. Remember the frequently repeated 
adage: If you don’t tell your story, someone else will tell it for 
you—and it probably won’t be the version you want told. Having 
a significant, positive online presence can also help counteract the 
existence of negative online content by pushing it further down in 
the search engine results. Just remember, if it is on the Internet it 
isn’t private—so regardless of privacy settings, you should assume 
that any and all content you post could be viewed by a public 
audience. A good rule of thumb: If you wouldn’t want something 
broadcast on the evening news, don’t post it online—and that 
includes e-mail and text messaging.
The fastest way to check your digital footprint is to do a web search 
for your name and see what turns up. (Be sure to clear your browser 
cookies and cache first to prevent your search results from being 
influenced by your browsing history.) Use multiple search engines 
(like Bing) because the results from each search engine will be a bit 
different. You can also use tools like Google Alerts, Talkwalker 
Alerts, and Mention to monitor online references to you and your 
school. (You’ll find links to them in the companion website 
resources for this book.) To set up alerts, enter your search criteria 
(such as your name or a school name) and enter an e-mail address. 
These tools will send you an e-mail or otherwise alert you when 
content about you (or your school) appears online. These are also 
excellent tools for students and parents to use. Encourage all mem-
bers of your school community to be aware of and monitor their 
digital footprint! It’s an important life skill.

CH 3  •  Demonstrating Leadership
26
6. DON’T EXPECT A  
POSITIVE DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP  
CULTURE TO HAPPEN IN A VACUUM
Your school’s online culture will evolve from its offline culture. 
Does your school have a character education program or a mission 
statement that encourages good citizenship? What systems do you 
currently have in place to help students manage conflict? How do 
you address bullying offline? Do your faculty and staff feel sup-
ported by school leadership? Do you have a good sense for the 
“pulse” of your school climate? Good digital citizenship stems from 
a positive school culture. Remember, “one-shot assemblies” can be 
helpful in creating awareness about digital citizenship but are no 
substitute for ongoing, sustained activities and healthy dialog 
about the social issues students and adults face both online and off.
7. ENCOURAGE AND  
SUPPORT AUTHENTIC LEARNING 
EXPERIENCES THAT INCLUDE DIGITAL 
CITIZENSHIP AS A COMPONENT
The best way to help our students become good digital citizens is 
to incorporate opportunities that teach digital citizenship into 
daily classroom activities. Unfortunately, some schools block 
access to most (if not all) social media platforms and other collab-
orative communication tools. Even “walled garden” communities 
like Edmodo or Schoology, which allow students to interact with 
their peers and teachers in a “closed” online environment, are 
sometimes blocked. Often, these decisions are made by noneduca-
tors (such as technology directors) with little to no discussion of 
the impact on instruction. Even teachers are denied access to 
online tools; there are many districts that will not even allow 
teachers to access YouTube.
Unfortunately, this “lock and block” philosophy often deprives stu-
dents of the opportunity to learn, with adult supervision, how to 
conduct themselves appropriately in online spaces. How can we 

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
27
expect our students to acquire these critical skills without scaffold-
ing or guidance, and how can we offer students authentic learning 
experiences if access to these tools is blocked? One analogy I have 
heard compares learning appropriate online behavior with getting a 
driver’s license. We wouldn’t allow students to get a driver’s license 
without actually driving a car under adult supervision, so why do 
we expect that students will learn to use social media platforms 
wisely without guidance? While school Internet access is often 
heavily filtered, many of our students have cell phones that provide 
them with completely unfiltered Internet access the minute school 
gets out. This disconnect is a recipe for digital citizenship disasters.
Web tools such as Kidblog, Edmodo, and Google Drive allow youn­
ger students to write, collaborate, and build their communication 
skills within a closed online environment. For older students, social 
media platforms like Twitter or Wikispaces can allow students to 
develop appropriate social media skills while learning traditional 
curricular content. Blogging for a public audience allows students to 
get feedback from multiple sources; students “up their game” when 
they know their work will be seen by a broader audience. Digital 
portfolios can help students create a positive online footprint while 
serving as formative assessment. We discuss some examples of 
embedded digital citizenship activities like these in Chapter 5.
One of my favorite real-life digital citizenship stories comes from a 
colleague who was using Google Apps for Education to practice 
collaborative writing with her second graders. Her students were 
using the commenting feature in Google Docs. One day, a boy in 
her class wrote “You’re a poopy head!” as a comment on a shared 
document. The student responded with something along the lines 
of, “Well, you’re a super poopy head and your writing stinks!” 
Since the teacher was reviewing the class comments, she quickly 
discovered the conversation. It turned out that the boys (who were 
friends) did not realize that their comments were viewable by all 
the students in their class and their teacher. The incident of course 
led to a discussion with both the boys and their parents about 
appropriate online behavior. While my colleague described the 
incident somewhat sheepishly, I reminded her that the students in 
her class had learned a valuable lesson that day, one that they were 

CH 3  •  Demonstrating Leadership
28
not likely to soon forget. I would much rather they learn that les-
son at a young age, in a safe environment, under the guidance if a 
caring adult mentor. This is far better than learning that lesson at 
an older age, in a more public space, using language far more 
offensive than “you’re a poopy head!”
BOOK STUDY QUESTIONS
1.	 What specific steps will you take in the next month 
to educate yourself about digital citizenship?
2.	 What specific steps will you take in the next  
3 months to educate your school community about 
digital citizenship?
3.	 How can you model the principles of good digital 
citizenship in your daily life?
???????????????

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
29
CHAPTER 
4
Educating Faculty 
and Staff
N
o comprehensive digital citizenship program can be complete 
without providing professional development for faculty and 
staff. In the next chapter, we discuss student digital citizenship 
education, but school and district employees need training just as 
much as students do! Stories of educators being disciplined or los-
ing their jobs for inappropriate behavior online are not uncom-
mon, and schools and districts have been sued for copyright 
infringement. From a cybersecurity and data privacy perspective, 
an uneducated workforce creates serious security risks. Having a 
well-educated workforce not only mitigates risks such as these, but 
also teaches school employees to serve as positive role models for 
students and parents and act as brand ambassadors for your 
school. Digital citizenship education also empowers teachers to 
leverage online tools to create real-world, authentic learning expe-
riences. No one can teach or model what they don’t themselves 

CH 4  •  Educating Faculty and Staff
30
understand! If it takes a village to raise a good digital citizen, then 
educating faculty and staff is a critical but often overlooked piece 
of the puzzle.
We discuss educating students about digital citizenship in Chapter 5, 
but at a minimum, an employee digital citizenship training program 
should include
••
Clear policies, procedures and training addressing topics in-
cluding but not limited to

c
Social media (personal and professional use)

c
Copyright and Fair Use

c Technology Acceptable/Responsible Use (including cyber-
security)

c
Student data privacy
••
Training, curriculum, and strategies for educating students 
about digital citizenship
Let’s discuss these areas in detail.
SOCIAL MEDIA USE
One of the challenges schools face when drafting social media 
policies is that the individuals tasked with writing the policies are 
not necessarily skilled social media users. This can result in social 
media policies that are either overly restrictive (which can lead to 
legal challenges related to First Amendment rights) or too vague. 
The best policies are flexible documents developed by people who 
understand how various social media platforms work and can thus 
identify the risks and benefits. You can find some examples on the 
companion website resources for this book. It’s also important to 
clearly define what constitutes appropriate social media use for a 
given community (remember, not everyone has the same interpre-
tation of what constitutes appropriate!) and to update policies as 
technologies change.
Because social media can blur the boundaries between one’s per-
sonal and professional lives, it’s important to differentiate between 

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
31
professional and personal social media use. For instance, a teacher 
might create a professional Twitter account or a class blog to com-
municate with students and parents. This is different from a per-
sonal Facebook or Instagram page geared toward family and 
friends. It’s important to clarify the rules of student-teacher inter-
actions in online spaces; employees often have questions about 
what is and isn’t appropriate. For instance, what should a teacher 
do if they receive a friend request on their personal Facebook page 
from a student? How about a parent?
It’s also important to communicate that privacy settings are not 
absolute and that content can be shared far beyond the intended 
audience. As I mentioned earlier, if you work at a school, you are 
being googled—whether by students, parents, journalists, or other 
community members. All school employees need to be aware 
that, right or wrong, they are often held to a higher standard of 
behavior than people who work in other professions, and there-
fore need to conduct themselves online accordingly. Encouraging 
teachers to build Professional/Personal Learning Networks online 
is a great way to help them understand important digital citizen-
ship concepts such as privacy settings and digital footprints. 
Professional social media use can help them better understand the 
implications and influence of content posted online (both posi-
tive and negative).
The New York City Department of Education has excellent social 
media policies for students and employees on their website, which 
you can find in the companion website resources.
COPYRIGHT AND FAIR USE
Formal training in the area of copyright and fair use is a must in 
the digital age. Like students, teachers will often appropriate pho-
tos, videos, and other digital content into teaching materials 
without giving thought to copyright. Fair use allows for the lim-
ited use of copyrighted material in educational settings without 
getting permission from the copyright holder, but is often misun-
derstood by educators. This limits their ability to leverage digital 
content in creative ways. Educators also need to be educated 

CH 4  •  Educating Faculty and Staff
32
about their rights as content creators. Many teachers are sharing 
lesson plans and other teaching materials online; they need to 
understand their rights as copyright holders, including the ability 
to license their materials through Creative Commons. Educators 
who understand their rights as content creators are much better 
positioned to help students understand theirs. School librarians 
are often excellent sources of information about copyright and 
fair use and can help direct teachers to public domain and 
licensed Creative Commons content.
TECHNOLOGY ACCEPTABLE USE/
RESPONSIBLE USE POLICIES
While most organizations have Acceptable Use Policies (AUPs) 
governing the use of school or district IT resources, it is helpful to 
review the policies with faculty and staff as opposed to just bury-
ing it in an employee manual. Even better, involve your school 
community in writing these policies! Employees (and students) are 
much more likely to buy into policies if they have a voice in how 
they are written. A collaborative approach to developing AUPs 
will help all stakeholders (IT staff, employees, and students) 
understand each other’s needs and perspectives. This usually 
results in more flexible policies that balance constituent needs 
and empowers teachers and students to leverage technology in 
teaching and learning instead of discouraging them. Some 
schools are shifting to the term Responsible Use Policies (RUPs), 
which emphasizes the responsible use of technology, instead of 
AUPs. The change in wording emphasizes a more collaborative 
approach between IT departments and the school communities 
they serve. You can find resources about AUPs and RUPs on the 
companion website.
Cybersecurity is another area where employee education can reap 
huge dividends. Teaching educators how to recognize phishing 
e-mail, create strong passwords, and protect themselves from mal-
ware will result in a workforce less likely to behave in ways that put 
your school’s network at risk. While high profile hackers may grab 

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
33
the headlines, the teacher or school secretary who lists their pass-
words on a sticky note on their desk can be just as dangerous! 
Many adults are surprisingly unsophisticated in this regard, mak-
ing proactive approach to cybersecurity education a worthwhile 
investment. As an added benefit, cybersecurity-savvy teachers are 
better able to develop cybersecurity-savvy students.
STUDENT DATA PRIVACY
Protecting student data in the digital age is an increasingly import-
ant and controversial topic. In today’s educational environment, a 
tremendous amount of student data is collected and analyzed in a 
variety of software programs, which vary by school and/or district. 
This information can range from directory information (such as 
name, address, and phone number) to attendance history, socio-
economic status, disciplinary history, and academic progress. 
While student data can be a valuable educational tool, enabling 
educators to identify at-risk students and better differentiate 
instruction, it can potentially be misused by third parties. As of 
this writing, there is a tremendous debate at the national level 
about the importance of safeguarding student data and making 
sure that it is only used for educational purposes.
The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act, or FERPA, is a fed-
eral law that helps ensure the privacy and accuracy of education 
records. However, many educators are unfamiliar with FERPA 
guidelines and can inadvertently violate the law. Many of the dig-
ital tools used in instruction may violate FERPA if used without 
parental consent. It is therefore incumbent upon schools and dis-
trict to develop policies and procedures surrounding the use of 
digital tools and educate teachers about these policies.
Kirk Anderson, the Director of Educational Technology for Denver 
Public Schools, has created an excellent (and humorous) video 
explaining the district’s privacy policies and processes that teachers 
must follow to ensure that their use of digital tools remains FERPA 
compliant. You can find a link to the video in the companion web 
resources for this book.

CH 4  •  Educating Faculty and Staff
34
What Is FERPA?
The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act law applies to all 
schools that receive certain federal funds from the U.S. Department of 
Education. The law gives parents certain rights regarding their children’s 
education records, rights that transfer to the student when he or she 
reaches the age of 18 or attends a school beyond the high school level. 
It specifies under what specific circumstances schools can release 
information from a student’s education record without parental consent 
(i.e., schools to which a student is transferring). It also specifies that 
students may disclose directory information such as student’s name, 
address, telephone number, and date of birth, but that parents and 
eligible students (students over 18) must be advised about the directory 
information and given the opportunity to request that such information 
not be shared.
In Chapter 7, we discuss some ideas for putting together a com-
prehensive digital citizenship education program that includes 
faculty and staff. But first let’s discuss ways to educate our core 
constituents: students!
BOOK STUDY QUESTIONS
1.	 What are some ways in which you might educate 
faculty and staff about digital citizenship?
2.	 What are some of the challenges you face in 
educating faculty and staff about digital citizenship?
3.	 What specific steps can you take to overcome these 
challenges?
?????????????

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
35
CHAPTER 
5
Educating Students
E
ducating students about digital citizenship is of course the 
heart of this book. Incorporating digital citizenship lessons 
organically into the fabric of daily lessons is probably the most 
effective approach, but as we discussed in the previous chapter, 
this approach requires teachers to be educated and comfortable 
with the concepts of digital citizenship first. As Common Sense 
Education’s Kelly Mendoza has noted, effective digital citizenship 
education also requires educators to take an interest in their stu-
dents’ digital lives and understand the role that digital tools play. 
While there is no “one size fits all” solution, there are a number 
of terrific curriculum resources to help teach students about dig-
ital citizenship. Several of them can be found in the online 
resources for this book. Some resources are designed as stand-
alone online lessons, others are designed to supplement or be 
incorporated into the teaching of other academic subjects. The 
most important step in your journey to educate students about 
digital citizenship is to start doing it! In Chapter 7, we discuss how 

CH 5  •  Educating Students
36
to put together a comprehensive digital citizenship training pro-
gram for an entire school or district, but if you aren’t in a posi-
tion to lead a large scale effort, you can still make a difference. 
Tackle the proverbial elephant one bite at a time: upgrade one 
unit per semester by incorporating digital citizenship education. 
Figure out what area your school community most needs help 
with, or what fits most naturally into your existing curriculum, 
and start with that. If you are an administrator, identify one or 
two teachers in your building who you feel might be good 
“champions” for digital citizenship education and ask them to 
introduce a lesson or two into their existing curriculum and pro-
vide them with all the needed supports. Or jump in and teach a 
couple of lessons yourself! Every step forward is a step in the right 
direction. And don’t forget to ask your students for input. Engage 
them in conversation and ask them about their digital citizen-
ship-related concerns. Listen carefully and you’ll know where 
you need to start.
In addition to utilizing a formal digital citizenship curriculum, an 
important part of digital citizenship education is providing stu-
dents with opportunities to practice their skills. “Walled gardens” 
such as Edmodo or Google Apps for Education allow students to 
develop a “phased” online presence, providing a safer environ-
ment for kids to make mistakes (and all mistakes should be viewed 
as learning opportunities!). For older students, leveraging social 
media in the classroom can support curriculum, provide quieter 
students with a “voice,” and help students develop positive digital 
footprints. Here are some examples:
••
Have students blog and teach them how to comment appro-
priately on other blog posts.
••
Engage students using online discussion boards using a tool 
like Edmodo.
••
Use Twitter to extend and enhance classroom discussions of 
English literature.
••
Engage authors, scientists, or other business professionals in 
classroom conversations via Twitter.

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
37
There are many other ways to incorporate digital citizenship educa-
tion within the context of other academic subjects. A few examples 
might be:
••
After a lesson on copyright, assign a PowerPoint presentation 
that requires proper image citation.
••
Before beginning a research paper, have students practice 
web search skills.
••
Ask older students to write and design public service announc­
ements to educate younger students about online privacy.
••
Have students create “Fakebook” pages for major historical 
characters.
The possibilities are limited only by your imagination!
Here are a few examples of schools that have incorporated digital 
citizenship into their curriculum in a variety of ways:
Holy Trinity Episcopal Academy
A preschool–12 independent school in Melbourne, Florida, Holy 
Trinity was the first Common Sense Education Digital Citizenship 
Certified School in the state. Holy Trinity utilizes both the Common 
Sense Education Digital Citizenship curriculum and other free 
online resources at both the lower (PS–6) and upper (7–12) schools. 
At the lower school, digital citizenship lessons are supported by a 
robust character education program. 21st Century Learning 
Specialist Brad Meyer (@Brad21CLSMeyer) works closely with class-
room teachers and lower school librarian Judy Houser (@jhouser1) 
to introduce and reinforce digital citizenship lessons throughout 
the year. Activities range from computer lab sessions that target 
specific lessons from the Common Sense Education curriculum to 
more informal opportunities that arise from in-class activities, 
such as blogging and document sharing using Google Drive. Some 
of the most effective lessons, says Meyer, are the informal ones, 
such as those that arise from casual classroom conversations or 
one-on-one discussions. “Students know that I am always available” 
to answer questions, he says.

CH 5  •  Educating Students
38
Meyer holds two Common Sense Education certifications: Digital 
Citizenship Certified Educator and Graphite Certified Educator. 
Parents are excited that the school has a digital citizenship expert 
on staff and appreciate the school’s proactive approach to teaching 
digital citizenship. “They are grateful,” says Meyer, “that their kids 
are being taught about digital citizenship in a hands-on way, and 
that we not just giving the students technology but teaching them 
how to use it responsibly.”
Digital citizenship education needs to start at the elementary level, 
believes Meyer, and the earlier the better. “You may think it is too 
early or not necessary, but it is vitally important. Make the time, 
use whatever resources are at your disposal, and make (conversa-
tions about) digital citizenship a part of your daily routine—just 
like lining up or clean up time. You will be surprised at how much 
they learn and the long term rewards of this approach.”
At Holy Trinity’s Upper School, eighth-grade American History 
teacher Anne Lahr—also a Common Sense Education Digital 
Citizenship Certified Educator—got started when she decided to 
broaden her traditional citizenship unit to include digital citizen-
ship. She started with teaching a few lessons from Common Sense’s 
Digital Citizenship curriculum during the first year, then expanded 
the scope of her digital citizenship training by incorporating 
Common Sense’s “Digital Bytes” program to spark in-class conversa-
tions with her students. She also has her students get their “Digital 
Driver’s Licenses” using the University of Kentucky’s free online 
program. A 25-year veteran educator, Anne says that her students 
have probably been using the Internet “even longer than I have” but 
emphasizes the need for teachers to adapt to the changing digital 
landscape. “These are skills that they need. The Internet is a beauti-
ful, wonderful place, but it can also be very dangerous. I think it is 
more about helping them develop awareness than anything else.” 
The Common Sense Education materials, she said, are flexible 
enough to work with many different subjects. “You can pick and 
choose the materials that best align with your other teaching goals.”
Lahr begins teaching digital citizenship during the first week of 
school, starting with a project from the Common Sense Education 

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
39
lesson called “My Digital Life” that has students reflect on the role 
of digital media in their lives. Students create videos about their 
digital lives using Animoto and share them with the class. In addi-
tion to laying the groundwork for the lessons that follow, the ice-
breaker activity helps her get to know her students. She then 
moves on through some of the other lessons during the next week, 
including those on cyberbullying, information literacy, and cre-
ative credit and copyright. Lahr makes a point of asking students 
to teach her about the apps and tools they use on a regular basis. 
“I play dumb and the kids love it! They really open up when they 
feel they are teaching you something. They are so eager to share 
and teach me how their favorite programs work. You get a real 
sense of how they are using them and how they fit into the social 
fabric of their lives.”
Lahr recommends that educators new to the concepts of digital 
citizenship start by exploring the Common Sense Education curric-
ulum from the perspective of a student. “Go through some of the 
lessons yourself and reflect upon your learning,” she recommends. 
Working through the creative credit and copyright lessons, for 
instance, made her much more sensitive to potential copyright 
issues in her own professional practice. Another benefit of going 
through the lessons, she says, was making connections to material 
already covered by her history curriculum. This allows her to better 
leverage the Common Sense material to reinforce her existing les-
son content. For example, she connects the creative credit and 
copyright lessons to the history of patent law. “Patent laws were in 
the Articles of Confederation, even before the Constitution was 
written,” she said. “Our Founding Fathers understood the impor-
tance of protecting people’s creative work.” Discussing contempo-
rary issues against the background of historical content helps bring 
history to life in Lahr’s classroom.
North Broward Preparatory School
At North Broward Preparatory School, an independent high school 
in Coconut Creek, Florida, a course in Personal Branding and 
Digital Communication is a graduation requirement. The trimester 

CH 5  •  Educating Students
40
class is taught by academic technology teacher Jason Shaffer and is 
designed to help students learn how to harness the power of social 
media and understand the importance of cultivating a personal 
brand online. The idea for the course, according to school’s 
Director of Education and Information Technology, Dr. Joan 
McGettigan (@drmcgettigan), came about as a way to meet the 
needs of students facing a changing digital landscape. “Like many 
high schools, we had a typical ‘intro to technology’ class covering 
Office applications,” she says. “However, in today’s world, that was 
not very helpful.”
Class activities include blogging and setting up accounts on several 
social media platforms, including Twitter, Instagram, and Google 
Plus. The focus is on appropriate use and creating a positive digital 
footprint. Self-reflection is an important element of the course, 
with students evaluating their strengths and weakness to best craft 
their “brand.” Topics covered in the curriculum also include digital 
rights and ethics, content curation, and public speaking.
“From a digital citizenship perspective, we want our students to 
understand the ramifications of poor social media use, but also go 
beyond that,” says McGettigan. “We want our students to be well 
versed in digital communications and understand the culture spe-
cific to different social media platforms. If it is true that the aver-
age U.S. citizen will change careers (not just jobs) 8 to 10 times 
over the course of a lifetime, and that for two or three of those 
positions you will have to recreate yourself, then it is imperative 
that students know how to brand themselves. If they don’t, some-
one else will.”
According to McGettigan, students not only enjoy the class, but 
they also thank the instructor for it. Parent response to the course 
has been positive; most are relieved that the school is addressing 
issues with which many of them are uncomfortable. “Every year 
we have a couple of parents who question the need for their child 
to set up social media accounts as part of the course, but when we 
educate them about the ‘Why’ they come to appreciate it. We’ve 
also had many parents tell us that they wish we offered a version 
of the class for them!”

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
41
McGettigan is passionate about teaching students appropriate 
social media use. “Students are carefully coached when learning to 
drive,” she says. “They are taught about the dangers of the road, 
how to operate and maintain a car, what to do in an emergency, 
how to park, and how to handle traffic and bad weather. Why 
don’t we do the same thing before letting our students loose in the 
digital world? They need to understand how to navigate this con-
stantly shifting world safely.”
Burlington High School
At Burlington High School (BHS), a public school in Burlington, 
Massachusetts,, Mobile Learning Coach Jennifer L. Scheffer teaches 
the Student Technology Innovation and Integration course, a 
semester-long elective open to students in Grades 10–12. Students 
in the course run the BHS Help Desk, which provides technical and 
instructional technology support for teachers and students in their 
1:1 iPad program. In addition, the course includes a substantial 
digital citizenship and digital literacy component, with students 
leveraging a variety of social media tools as part of their day-to-day 
classroom activities.
Using a curriculum developed by Scheffer, students learn about dig-
ital citizenship through real-world, authentic learning experiences 
that benefit both the students and the broader school community. 
Class participants are required to contribute regularly to the BHS 
Help Desk blog by creating a variety of original digital content 
including blog posts, presentations, screencasts, app reviews, videos, 
digital stories, and Google Hangouts on Air. Through contributing 
to the blog, which has a global audience, students learn the techni-
cal aspects of sharing content (embedding multimedia, linking to 
outside resources, and properly citing and crediting online content) 
and the legal issues surrounding intellectual property. The BHS Help 
Desk also has its own YouTube channel, known as Help Desk Live, 
where students post video interviews with students and industry 
professionals recorded via Google Hangouts. Guests have included 
company CEOs, app developers, college professors, K–12 educators, 
book authors, and other students.

CH 5  •  Educating Students
42
Help Desk students also moderate professional Twitter chats with 
other educators using the hashtag #TechTeamMA. They have also 
guest moderated other Twitter chats, including #edtechchat and 
#digcit. Help Desk students have participated in the #edtechchat 
radio broadcast on the BAM! Radio Network and have even been 
invited to present at professional education conferences, including 
the national Digital Citizenship Summit (CT), EduCon (PA), Mass­
CUE (MA), and the Christa McAuliffe Technology Conference (NH).
“Each student completes an online career portfolio,” says Scheffer, 
“including a LinkedIn account, digital resume, and an online 
profile using a platform like About.me, branded.me, or Flavors 
.me. Students understand the difference between sharing per-
sonal versus professional information and how social media can 
be used to enhance (or hurt) their future academic and career 
opportunities.” They are also encouraged to use digital tools to 
connect with industry experts to help them personalize their Help 
Desk learning experience.
Internet ethics is another important component of the course. 
“Help Desk students understand privacy settings and how to use 
digital tools in a safe and ethical way,” says Scheffer. Students are 
taught the types of information they should avoid sharing online 
as well as how to respond to incidents of cyberbullying, trolling, 
and other negative online behavior. Scheffer also encourages her 
students to promote a culture of kindness online and to be 
“upstanders” in the face of inappropriate online behavior. Due to 
their effective and ethical use of digital tools, many Help Desk 
students have emerged as digital role models for other teens.
Scheffer sees digital citizenship and literacy training as a critical 
component of preparing students for the 21st-century workforce. 
“My favorite aspect of teaching the course is that students have 
access to modern digital tools,” she says. “This helps them create 
an authentic digital identity not through simulations, but through 
real world experiences. They leave the course with an understand-
ing of how to succeed and be competitive both on and offline.”
As shown by the examples above, there are many different ways to 
develop a digital citizenship program at your school. In Chapter 7, 

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
43
we talk about how you develop your own digital citizenship edu-
cation program. In the next chapter, however, we discuss the 
importance of educating another important constituency: parents.
BOOK STUDY QUESTIONS
1.	 What are some ways in which you might incorporate 
digital citizenship education with your students?
2.	 What are some of the biggest challenges you face in 
incorporating digital citizenship education into 
your curriculum?
3.	 What specific steps can you take to overcome these 
challenges?
?????????????


WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
45
CHAPTER
6
Educating Parents
P
arents play a key role in educating students about digital 
­citizenship. However, one of the challenges schools face in 
partnering with parents to educate students about digital citizen-
ship is that many parents don’t know what they don’t know. 
Parents have differing levels of knowledge and awareness, depend-
ing on a variety of factors that include personal experience, socio-
economic status, and parenting styles. Even proactive, educated 
parents often have large gaps in their understanding of digital  
citizenship. Thus, parent education plays a critical role in helping 
our students become good digital citizens.
When today’s parents were themselves children, the social media 
tools so prevalent today did not exist. As a result, parents often 
have no personal experiences or role models to draw from when it 
comes to educating their children about appropriate online behav-
ior. Many cultural norms associated with parenting don’t necessar-
ily translate to the digital world. As a result, parents usually want 

CH 6  •  Educating Parents
46
to help their children, but they don’t always know how. Some 
parents are completely oblivious to potential online perils, allow-
ing children unsupervised and unfiltered Internet access at young 
ages. Others are so overprotective that they may object to a teacher 
using “walled garden” platforms like Edmodo or Schoology with 
students. It’s important to teach parents about both the positive 
and negative aspects of our digital world. While some schools 
might prefer to view educating children about digital citizenship as 
a parent responsibility, the reality is that many parents are not 
equipped to do so and they are looking to teachers and schools for 
help. Schools can and should meet parents where they are and be 
proactive in their approach to parent education.
It’s been my experience that many parents are hungry for “digital 
age” parenting information and grateful for the opportunity to 
learn more. They are often relieved to hear that other parents share 
their questions or concerns. And effective parent education sessions 
do not always have to be formal presentations! Some of the most 
meaningful parent education sessions I have conducted were round 
table discussions with a group of parents centered on a particular 
topic, like cell phones. Questions like, “When is it OK to get my 
child a cell phone?” and “How can I learn more about their online 
friends?” are common. Educating parents about digital citizenship 
and engaging them in honest, open dialog not only makes them 
better parents but also can serve as a powerful relationship-building 
tool for teachers and administrators. It’s important to remember 
that you don’t have to have all the answers to have a valuable dis-
cussion with parents. For instance, check out the Common Sense 
Education Connecting Families Program listed in the companion 
website resources. The program is designed so that any facilitator 
can engage parents in meaningful conversations, even if they do 
not consider themselves experts on a particular topic.
It’s worth mentioning that schools often bring in law enforcement 
professionals to talk about Internet safety at evening assemblies. 
While these events can raise awareness, these “one and done” 
assemblies usually focus on legalities and risk and don’t help build 
parent confidence. Parents are better served by conversations over 
time that take a balanced approach to the risks and benefits of 

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
47
online tools. It’s also important to remember that parent education 
should not be limited to middle and high school parents. The pro-
liferation of mobile devices means that children are accessing the 
Internet at increasingly younger ages. It is not uncommon to see 
preschool-aged children playing on a parent’s cell phone. Digital 
citizenship training for students and parents needs to start in early 
childhood—kindergarten is not too young to start.
PARENTS AS ROLE MODELS:  
 THE GOOD AND THE BAD
It’s an unfortunate reality that our students have no shortage of 
terrible adult role models when it comes to online behavior. There 
is a long list of celebrities and politicians whose careers have been 
derailed by the dumb things they have done on the Internet. 
Athletes have been sent home from the Olympics, lost scholar-
ships, or been otherwise penalized for a thoughtless tweet. Business 
professionals have lost their jobs over an insensitive Facebook 
post. Even more disturbing, however, are the parents who behave 
inappropriately online. While many do serve as positive role mod-
els for their children, others do not. Adults make many of the same 
mistakes our students do regarding digital media. With such poor 
role models, is it any surprise to see children behaving the same 
way? These behaviors make comprehensive parent education an 
even more important component of any digital citizenship pro-
gram. Parents need to be reminded that, as in other aspects of 
parenting, they are their child’s first digital citizenship role models. 
The parents who are glued to their cell phones at the dinner table 
or who text while driving should not be surprised when their chil-
dren emulate these behaviors.
WAYS TO INVOLVE  
AND EDUCATE PARENTS
There are many ways to involve and educate parents about dig-
ital citizenship, and no one approach will work for every school 
community. Use the following ideas as a starting point and 

CH 6  •  Educating Parents
48
modify them to meet the needs of your school. When planning 
parent training, remember to educate parents about the positive 
aspects of Internet use as well as the downsides. For instance, 
many parents don’t understand how social media platforms can 
be used for collaboration on school projects or leveraged to help 
students build a positive digital footprint.
Parent Coffees and/or Tech Nights
Invite parents to attend presentations or discussions about digital 
citizenship related topics. For example, the Common Sense 
Education Connecting Families program offers a wealth of parent 
resources, including conversation starters, facilitation guides, writ-
ten materials, and educational videos. If you record or screencast 
the presentation for parents unable to attend and post it on your 
school website, you’ll reach even more families. By inviting stu-
dents to participate and/or do some or all the teaching, you are 
guaranteed an audience!
Share Resources Online
Create a digital citizenship page on your school website. There are 
many excellent parent education resources on the companion 
website for you to include. Do you have a school blog? Consider 
writing about digital citizenship–related topics (or even better, 
have students write about them). If you don’t have a school blog, 
the Common Sense Education Parent Toolkit has widgets that 
allow you to embed their parent blog feed on your school website 
so you constantly have fresh content. Then advertise your web-
site resources!
Create Opportunities  
for Students to Teach Parents
Have students create digital citizenship–related projects using digital 
media. They might create a public service announcement using 
iMovie, interactive digital posters using Glogster or Thinglink, or even 
a simple PowerPoint presentation. Then share these presentations 

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
49
with parents! Invite them for a student-led “Digital Citizenship” 
night, where students share their projects. If you don’t host an eve-
ning event, post the projects on your school website and invite par-
ents to view their child’s work.
Share Information via Text,  
School Newsletters, or E-Mail
Do you have a weekly school newsletter or e-mail? Why not cre-
ate a weekly feature with tips about digital age parenting? Does 
your school have a Facebook page? Share digital parenting 
resources there as well. Do your school parents frequently com-
municate via mobile devices? Consider using a service like 
RemindHQ and invite parents to sign up to receive text messages 
with links to digital citizenship–related resources topics. You 
could do the same thing with a Twitter account and encourage 
parents who are not on Twitter to use Twitter’s fast-follow feature 
to receive these tweets as text messages. (See the companion 
website for a link to a screencast that demonstrates how to sign 
up to receive tweets as text messages.) Reach your parents where 
they are, and don’t be afraid to use multiple channels to do so! 
Some parents will prefer to get a handout brought home by a 
student, another might prefer to get a text. The important thing 
is that the more parents hear about digital citizenship, the more 
likely they are to absorb the message. Experiment with different 
communication modalities; don’t limit yourself to just one. Most 
important, don’t give up!
While educators can’t control parent behavior, they can take a pro-
active approach to parent education and serve as positive online 
role models. Try one of the ideas above and see what works for your 
specific community. Use social media in a positive, professional 
manner and model the digital skills we want students (and their 
parents) to acquire. Whether through a class blog, a professional 
Twitter feed, or a school Facebook page, engage parents in positive 
ways through social media. And don’t stop talking about it!
At one parent presentation, a mother asked me a question about 
Clash of Clans, an online game popular among fifth-grade boys 

CH 6  •  Educating Parents
50
at my school. We discussed the importance of monitoring his 
online interactions with other gamers, and I suggested she ask 
her son to show her how to play the game so that she could con-
nect with her son’s interests and better understand what he was 
doing. The following month, she came back thanking me pro-
fusely for the advice! It turned out that her son had indeed been 
playing the game with a group of strangers, unaware of the 
potential risks. She talked with him about the dangers and 
worked with her son so he was able to continue playing the game 
with a group of boys he knew in real life. The relief on her face 
was palpable. I realized that if my presentation had helped even 
one mother be a better parent and helped one child be safer 
online, it was worth the time and effort.
By enlisting parents as partners in digital citizenship education, 
and giving them the information and skills necessary to better help 
their children, we can greatly expand the effectiveness of our own 
digital citizenship education efforts. In the next chapter, we discuss 
how to pull it all together by putting together your own digital 
citizenship education program.
BOOK STUDY QUESTIONS
1.	 How would your school or community benefit from 
including parents in conversations about digital 
citizenship?
2.	 What are some of the biggest challenges you face in 
educating parents?
3.	 What specific steps can you take to overcome these 
challenges?
???????????????

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
51
CHAPTER
7
Putting It All Together
Building a Comprehensive Digital  
Citizenship Program
H
aving read this far, hopefully you are now sold on the 
importance of community-based digital citizenship educa-
tion in your school or district and are ready to take the next step. 
However, you might be asking, “Where do I begin?” While there is 
no one way to implement a digital citizenship program, you might 
find the following guidelines helpful. Common Sense Education’s 
Kelly Mendoza, the Director of Professional Development for 
Education Programs, recommends schools interested in imple-
menting a digital citizenship program take the following steps:
1.	 Identify a digital citizenship lead and bring key 
stakeholders together to form a project team. Whether you 
are looking to implement a digital citizenship program for a school 
or for an entire district, it is critical to identify an enthusiastic  

CH 7  •  Putting It All Together
52
­project leader for your digital citizenship initiative. Stakeholder 
voice is equally important. Your project team may include teach-
ers, administrators, parents and/or caregivers, and even students. 
Student voice is often overlooked in the planning phase of digital 
citizenship initiatives but can bring valuable perspectives to the 
conversation. Make sure you clarify and communicate expecta-
tions for team members: what are their roles on the project team, 
and for what will they be held responsible?
2.	 Develop a digital citizenship vision. Record it. What 
do you want your digital citizenship education program to look 
like? What do you wish your students, teachers, and parent com-
munity to understand and do as a result of your initiative? De-
veloping and communicating your digital citizenship vision serves 
as a guide for implementation and helps you garner community 
support. The Common Sense Education Digital Citizenship Imple-
mentation plan, to which you can find a link in the companion 
resource website for this book, includes some examples of digital 
citizenship vision plans in the FAQ section of the document.
3.	 Explore education resources and discuss ideas with 
the team. The companion website for this book lists a plethora of 
resources for educating your school community about digital citi-
zenship. Common Sense Education offers a free K–12 Digital Liter-
acy and Citizenship Curriculum that satisfies the criteria for E-Rate 
compliance and is aligned with Common Core State Standards, 
the International Society for Technology in Education’s National 
­Education Technology Standards (ISTE’s NET•S), and the American 
Association of School Librarians (AASL) Standards. There are other 
curriculum resources on the companion website as well. See which 
resources might be the best fit for your school community. It’s OK 
to mix and match based on community needs.
4.	 Map out your digital citizenship plan. Determine how, 
when, and who will provide digital citizenship instruction to facul-
ty, students, and parents. You may find the Common Sense Educa-
tion implementation plan helpful; it is included in the companion 
website resources. Here are some aspects to consider:
a.	 Students—At what grade levels will instruction occur, 
how many hours of instruction will there be, and what 

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
53
resources will be used? Will it be incorporated into a spe-
cific academic subject? Who will be responsible for pro-
viding the training?
b.	 Teachers—How will teachers be trained? Will your train-
ing only include teachers involved in direct digital citi-
zenship instruction, or will you expand it to include the 
broader faculty and staff community? How will you track 
and evaluate the instruction?
c.	 Parents—How will you engage and educate your school 
community? What communication strategies and meth-
ods will you use?
5.	 Communicate your plan and get everyone on board. 
A well thought out communications strategy will go a long way to 
earning community buy-in. It’s important for stakeholders to un-
derstand the rationale and benefits of implementing a digital cit-
izenship education program. Be sensitive to the time needed for 
edu­cator training and implementation so that it is not considered 
just “one more thing” teachers need to do. Ask your project team 
members how to best frame the conversation so that it is not viewed 
negatively as a top-down initiative. Enlist the support of educators 
“in the trenches” to help ensure your message is well-received.
6.	 Train Teachers. If you are interested in using Common 
Sense media materials, a link to their teacher education resources 
can be found on the companion website. Some questions to con-
sider: Will you incorporate digital citizenship education into tradi-
tional professional development days or use online resources? Is a 
“train the trainer” approach an effective method of educating your 
faculty and staff? How can you reward and highlight educators 
willing to go the extra mile in teaching digital citizenship? How 
will you track training completion rates? Will your digital citizen-
ship training include noninstructional staff?
7.	 Execute your plan, including delivering student 
instruction and engaging parents. As you implement your 
instructional and parent outreach plans, take the time to evalu-
ate your implementation. Get stakeholder feedback (including 
students) to determine program effectiveness. Make changes as 
needed to improve or enhance your digital citizenship education 

CH 7  •  Putting It All Together
54
program. View your program as a work in progress and strive to 
improve it every year!
A few events you may wish to celebrate as part of your digital citi-
zenship initiatives include Digital Citizenship Week (usually held 
in October of each year) and Safer Internet Day (an international 
event held in February). A Google search will help you find the 
dates for a specific year.
STEPS FOR CONTINUED PERSONAL  
AND PROGRAMMATIC GROWTH
Digital citizenship education is an ongoing process. As technolo-
gies change, so will the challenges and opportunities they present. 
As educators, parents, and citizens of the online world, it is 
incumbent upon us to stay abreast of changing landscape and 
commit to our own personal growth. Here are some resources that 
will help you stay abreast of the latest developments in digital 
citizenship curriculum, news, and trends (links can be found on 
the companion website):
1.	 Join the ISTE Digital Citizenship Learning Network. 
The International Society for Technology in Education has a 
learning network for individuals interested in digital citizen-
ship education. It’s a great way to connect with like-minded 
colleagues.
2.	 Participate in the #digcit Twitter chat and follow 
the #digcit hashtag on Twitter. The #digcit Twitter chat 
is a series of online conversations about digital citizenship 
held on Wednesdays at 7 pm ET/ 4 pm PT. Participating in 
the chat or even just searching for the #digcit hashtag on 
Twitter is a great way to stay abreast of current trends, tech-
nologies, and events related to digital citizenship.
3.	 Join the edweb.net digital citizenship community. 
This free professional learning community provides ideas, 
discussions, and webinars about digital citizenship. It’s a 
great place to ask questions and share ideas and best prac-
tices about teaching digital citizenship.

WWW.CORWIN.COM/CONNECTEDEDUCATORS
55
4.	 Common Sense Media. In addition to the many curric-
ular resources provided by Common Sense Education, the 
main Common Sense Media website provides a wealth of 
resources for parents including digital media reviews (mov-
ies, books, video games, apps, and more), blog posts on digi-
tal citizenship–related topics, family media guides, and more.
CONCLUSION
As educators, parents, and adults who care about the welfare of 
children, we all hope that our students will grow up to be respon-
sible citizens of the world who contribute to society in constructive 
ways. In the digital age, that includes positive and healthy partici-
pation in online spaces. Educators are uniquely positioned to help 
students become responsible digital citizens, but as we have previ-
ously discussed, digital citizenship education is most effective 
when implemented as a community effort. So in closing, I encour-
age you to start building your digital citizenship village today!
BOOK STUDY QUESTIONS
1.	 If you were charged with putting together a digital 
citizenship project team for your school or district, 
who would you select as your project lead and team 
members? Why would you choose these specific 
individuals?
2.	 What do you view as the biggest potential 
roadblocks to implementing a comprehensive 
digital citizenship education program at your school 
or district? How can you overcome these 
roadblocks?
3.	 What specific steps will you take as a result of 
reading this book to facilitate the implementation 
of a community-based digital citizenship program 
in your school or district?
?????????????????????????


CORWIN HAS ONE MISSION: to enhance education through 
intentional professional learning. 
We build long-term relationships with our authors, educators, 
clients, and associations who partner with us to develop and 
continuously improve the best evidence-based practices that 
establish and support lifelong learning.
Helping educators make the greatest impact

Solutions you want. Experts you trust.  
Results you need.
Contact an account manager at (800) 831-6640 or visit  
www.corwin.com for more information.
Author Consulting
On-site professional learning with sustainable 
results! Let us help you design a professional 
learning plan to meet the unique needs of your 
school or district. www.corwin.com/pd
Institutes
Corwin Institutes provide collaborative learning 
experiences that equip your team with tools and 
action plans ready for immediate implementation. 
www.corwin.com/institutes
eCourses
Practical, flexible online professional learning 
designed to let you go at your own pace.  
www.corwin.com/ecourses
Read2Earn
Did you know you can earn graduate credit for 
reading this book? Find out how:  
www.corwin.com/read2earn

