

DIGITAL
PHOTOGRAPHY
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N


TOMANG
DIGITAL
PHOTOGRAPHY
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N
CONTENT PREVIOUSLY PUBLISHED IN DIGITAL PHOTOGRAPHER’S HANDBOOK

For Wendy
Senior Editor   Nicky Munro 
Designer   Joanne Clark
US Editor  Megan Douglass
Jacket Designer   Laura Brim 
Producer, Pre-production   Rebekah Parsons-King
Production Controller  Mandy Inness
Managing Editor   Stephanie Farrow
Senior Managing Art Editor   Lee Griffiths
First American Edition, 2012
This edition published in the United States in 2018 
by DK Publishing, 345 Hudson Street, New York, 
New York 10014
Copyright © 2018 Dorling Kindersley Limited
DK, a Division of Penguin Random House LLC
Text copyright © 2002, 2007, 2010,  
2012, 2018 Tom Ang
All images © Tom Ang, except where  
otherwise stated.
For further information see: www.dkimages.com
18 19 20 21 22  10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
001–294569–January/2018
All rights reserved.
Without limiting the rights under the copyright 
reserved above, no part of this publication may be 
reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval 
system, or transmitted, in any form, or by any 
means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording, or otherwise), without the prior written 
permission of the copyright owner.
Published in Great Britain by Dorling Kindersley 
Limited.
A catalog record for this book is available from the 
Library of Congress.
ISBN 978-1-4654-6862-8
DK books are available at special discounts when 
purchased in bulk for sales promotions, premiums, 
fund-raising, or educational use. For details, 
contact: DK Publishing Special Markets, 345 
Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014  
SpecialSales@dk.com
Printed and bound in China
A WORLD OF IDEAS:
SEE ALL THERE IS TO KNOW
www.dk.com
10 Your first pictures
12 Picture composition
18 Focusing and depth of field
22 Movement blur
24 Influencing perspective
26 Changing viewpoints
28 Quick fix Leaning buildings
29 Quick fix Facial distortion
30 Color composition
34 Quick fix White Balance
36 Exposure control
38 Low-key images
40 Accessory flash
42 Quick fix Electronic flash
44 Electronic flash
06 Introduction
52 Abstract imagery
55 Architecture
 58 Documentary photography
 62 Street photography
CORE 
SKILLS
1
PHOTOGRAPHY 
PROJECTS
2
CONTENTS

106 Workflow essentials
108 Downloading
110 Image management
112 Capture defects
114 Color management
116 Cropping and rotation
118 Quick fix Poor subject detail
119 Quick fix Poor subject color
120 Levels
122 Burning-in and dodging
124 Dust and noise
126 Sharpening
130 Blurring
134 Quick fix Image distractions
136 White balance
138 Color adjustments
140 Saturation and vibrance
142 Manipulation defects
BUYING
GUIDE
194 Camera phones
196 Compacts
198 Mirrorless compacts
200 SLRs
202 Choosing lenses
206 Photographic accessories
210 Digital accessories
212 Electronic lighting
214 Computers
216 Computer accessories
218 Printers and other devices
220 Index
224 Acknowledgments
4
64 Vacations and travel
70 Weddings
72 Children
76 Landscapes
82 Cityscapes
86 Low-light photography
88 Animals
92 Panoramas
94 Live events
98 Portraits
102 Camera phone photography
144 Curves
148 Color to black and white
156 Vintage effects
158 Working with RAW
162 Duotones
164 Cross-processing
166 Tints from color originals
168 High dynamic range
172 Selecting pixels
176 Masks
178 Quick fix Removing backgrounds
180 Layer blend modes
186 Cloning techniques
188 Simple composite
190 Image stitching
IMAGE
DEVELOPMENT
3

This is the fifth edition of Digital Photography: An Introduction, celebrating over
10 years in print. In that time, while few of the fundamentals of image-making have 
changed, digital technologies have transformed much of photography almost beyond 
recognition. The steady rise of photographers’ skills as access to photography has spread 
to literally billions of people all over the world is itself a remarkable social and artistic
phenomenon. One result is the bewildering explosion in the number of photographs
being made: the total has passed a trillion images per year, and by the next edition we 
should not be surprised to learn that the 2-trillion mark has been reached.
While the steady improvement in photographic abilities is attributable in part to 
technology’s ingeniously adept mediation, it is evident that skills and understanding 
of photography have genuinely grown and continue to blossom. Nonetheless, the 
hunger for photographic knowledge has also exploded, which drives the continuing
demand for—and appeal of—this book.
We have responded to the latest developments with numerous updates to
Digital Photography: An Introduction. We have taken account, for example, of the rise 
of the interchangeable lens compact and the diversification of image manipulation 
and management. In the process, our sections on film and scanning have finally had
to be removed. In their place, we have introduced several new pages in which we
examine images to understand the theory behind their impact. 
INTRODUCTION

With this fifth edition, we find photography approaching a turning point. Core 
practices such as photojournalism are under siege from changing economic, political,
and ideological forces. The dominance of social media has driven sweeping changes
in the nature of the photographic subject, pushing formerly trivial subjects such as
the self, the mundane, and daily meals to center stage.
Major technologies are now fully mature, so the computer errors, crashes, and
corrupted files that made digital photography such a time-consuming process are
no longer daily occurrences. The power of the internet and the ability to send a still
image to a million places around the planet in seconds are now taken for granted. 
In short, the camera in your hand is the most elaborate and potent visual tool
ever invented. You can enjoy enormous fun with it. You can have your life hugely 
enriched by its creative returns, and you can make a difference to the world. That 
is photography’s strength—that is its gift to you. And it is yours to give back through 
your own humanity, artistry, and creativity. 
May the light be with you!


CORE 
SKILLS
1

10
YOUR FIRST PICTURES
CORE SKILLS
Photography first became truly popular when
photographers no longer had to be personally 
responsible for processing their pictures. In the
digital era, you can simply press the button and 
your camera or computer does all the rest. Indeed, 
with many cameras you can start snapping away 
the moment you take it out of the box. There is no 
need to hold back, and certainly no immediate call 
for the instruction book.
First date
After the initial fun, however, it is worth making a 
few conscious decisions. It is a good idea to set at 
least the date and time before you begin any serious 
photography. If you are going on vacation, 
remember to change to local time—and if you are 
traveling with friends or family it helps if you
synchronize your cameras’ clocks, as this makes it
easier to sort and sequence images later.
Quality or ease
The default, or “out-of-the-box,” settings will be 
designed to help you use the camera easily and also  
to give a good impression of its abilities. You may
find that, for this early stage of experimentation, 
the image files are unnecessarily large. Change the
image size to the smallest while you are learning 
to use the camera.
You can, and should, shoot freely with the
camera. Try out all the different modes and scene
settings, different sensitivities, and color settings to 
see what results they produce. Try the camera
indoors, on friends and family, take it outdoors, use 
it in bright light, and shoot in darkened places.
While at this stage of learning, it is OK to make a 
quick review of the images you capture. However, 
the best way to assess images properly is by using a 
computer monitor (see pp. 214–5).
Regaining control
You can leave all settings on automatic, thereby 
putting the camera in control. You may be able to
teach yourself the basics of composition with this set 
up, but the finer points of exposure and color control
will be in the camera’s hands, not yours. In short, 
you will not be making the most of your camera.
When you have an idea what each mode and 
setting does to your images, adopt a group of 
settings—for example aperture priority, high ISO,
no flash, black-and-white, high sharpening—and
▶Unlikely beauty
Photography has a unique 
talent for turning the
unattractive into an
intriguing image. The 
unlikeliest subjects, such as
rusting doors, peeling paint
and, as here in New 
Zealand, the worn bottom
of a boat, can yield patterns
of colors and textures that
entertain the eye.

11
YOUR FIRST PICTURES
▲ Even the kitchen sink
With its usual jumble of bright metallic pots and pans,
colorful food, and areas of plain surface, a kitchen is
a surprisingly rich source of images. Contrast colorful
dishes with steel utensils, and place natural forms
against machined surfaces. Take time to explore details with
the camera set to close-up mode, with the flash turned off.
Wait for sunny days to obtain the most light indoors.
▲ Family snaps
Do not hold back from pointing the camera at members of 
the family. Catch them at relaxed times with any camera—
here with a cameraphone at a restaurant—for portraits that
capture their character.
▶Out of the window
If you have a window, you have a source for images:
there will be changes in the light, and there may be
ever-changing activity in the street. Keep watch and
pictures will present themselves. 
use it to make a whole series of images. This is a
good way to learn all about your camera.
Chimping is for chumps
Chimping is short for “checking image preview” and 
seems very appropriate for photographers who
exclaim “Oo! Oo! Ah! Aah!” while reviewing their
images on the camera’s LCD screen. If you allow
yourself to be distracted by the preview image, you 
will miss many shots. It also breaks the rhythm of 
shooting, and interrupts the concentration you 
should be applying to the subject.
Try to reserve your reviewing to rest breaks and 
moments when you are sure nothing is going 
on. You do not have to go as far as some
photographers, who tape up their camera screens 
to wean themselves off the habit, but turn off the 
preview and you will find you photograph more, 
and become more attuned to your subject.

12
PICTURE COMPOSITION
Photographers have the good fortune to be able to 
build on the experience of centuries of painting 
and graphic art with the unique visual tools of 
photography. Photographic composition arises 
through the joining of elements such as angle of 
view, perspective, depth of field, color, and tone
with the visual structures that generations of artists
have found effective in their work. 
Any photographic composition can be said to 
work if the arrangement of the subject elements 
communicates effectively to the image’s intended 
viewers. Often, the best way to ensure a striking 
composition is to look for the key ingredients of a 
scene and then adjust your camera position
and exposure controls to draw those elements 
out from the clutter of visual information that, if 
left competing with each other, would weaken 
the photograph’s impact. Composition is not only 
about how you frame the picture; it is also how you 
use aperture to control depth of field, focus to lead
the viewer’s attention, and expose to use light and 
shade to shape the image.
If you are new to photography, it may help to 
concentrate your attention on the scene’s overall
structure rather than thinking too hard about very 
specific details; these are often of only superficial
importance to the overall composition. Look for the
lines that lead through the image. Are there any
repeated elements, any arrangements that make a
pattern? Try squinting or half-closing your eyes
when evaluating a scene; this helps reduce the
details and reveal the scene’s core structure.
Explore each situation or opportunity by moving
around the subject as much as possible, trying out 
different angles from as high and low as you can. 
When you feel the image looks right, make the 
exposure without further thought. If you are slave
to the same rules as everyone else, your pictures will
look like all the others. The fastest way to learn is to
experiment freely.
CORE SKILLS
▶Symmetry
Symmetrical compositions are effective for images that
contain elaborate detail, such as this resort interior in
Singapore. As a composition strategy, symmetry also 
works very well for subjects of the utmost simplicity,
such as portraits against a plain background.
◀Radial
Radial compositions
are those in which key
elements spread out from
the center. This imparts
a lively feeling, even if the
subject is static. In this
portrait, taken in New 
Zealand, actual and implied
lines radiate away from the
central subject, pointing to
the portrait sitter at the 
same time as leading away
to all the other elements.

13
PICTURE COMPOSITION
▲Diagonal
Diagonal lines that lead the eye from one part of an image 
to another will impart more energy than horizontal lines. In
this example, taken in Taveuni, Fiji, it is not only the curve of 
the palm’s trunk, but also the movement of the boy and his
dog along it that encourage the viewer to scan the entire
picture, sweeping naturally from the strongly backlit 
bottom left-hand corner to the top, thus engaging with
the textures of the sky.
◀Overlapping 
Subject elements that 
overlap indicate increasing
depth, as do the relative 
sizes of objects of known
dimensions. We can tell
that the man on the right is
closer, because he is larger
than the horse, while the
man on the left must be
farther away; not only is he
smaller than the other man,
but he is also behind the
horse. These elements
work together to articulate
the three dimensions in 
this photograph, taken
during an American Civil
War reenactment in the
United States.

14
CORE SKILLS
◀Tall crop
The opposite of a letterbox
composition (right) is a tall
and narrow crop, which
emphasizes an upward 
sweeping panorama—a
view that can be taken in
only by lifting the head and
looking up. As with all
crops based on a high
aspect ratio, it usefully
removes a lot of unwanted
detail around the edges.
▶Letterbox 
composition
A wide and narrow 
letterbox framing suits
some subjects, such as
these prayer flags in
Bhutan, perfectly. Such
a crop concentrates the
attention on the sweep
of colors and detail, cutting
out unwanted—and visually
irrelevant—material at
the top and bottom
of the image.
▶The golden spiral and golden section
This image has been overlaid with a golden spiral based
on the golden section, as well as with a grid dividing the
picture area into phi ratios. This demonstrates that, even
with a fleeting shot, photographers compose instinctively, 
to fit elements to harmonious proportions.


16
PICTURE COMPOSITION CONTINUED
CORE SKILLS
▲Framing
The frame within a frame is a painterly device often
exploited in photography. Not only does it concentrate the
viewer’s attention on the subject, but it also often hints at
the wider context of the subject’s setting. Through overlap,
the frame also describes the space receding into the
distance as here, in Jodhpur, India.
◀Geometric 
patterns
Geometrical shapes, such
as triangles and rectangles,
lend themselves to 
photographic composition
because of the way they
interact with the rectangle 
of the picture frame. Here,
in a 19th-century villa in
Auckland, New Zealand,
shapes from narrow strips
to sharply acute triangles
are all at work to make
this an eye-catching
composition. Color
contrasts between
the warm reds of the
wood and blue sky
also contribute.

17
PICTURE COMPOSITION
▲Massed pattern
Even the massive crowds in this street in Kolkata, India, are
organized. The receding parallel of the road, the glint in
power lines, and the differences in scale of people can all
be used to make sense of what initially appears to be chaos.
▼Rhythmic elements
The ghostly silhouettes of trees in Palaia, near Pisa in Italy,
organize the space into an irregular but discernible rhythm
of lights and darks, with the more or less regular negative
spaces between the trunks. Seen together, they create an
ambivalent mood—mysterious, yet calm.
TRY THIS
Look out for patterns whenever you have a camera
at hand. When you find an interesting example, take
several shots, shifting your position slightly for each.
Examine the pictures carefully, and you may find
that the shot you thought most promising does
not give the best result. Often, this is because our
response to a scene is an entire experience, while
photographs have to work within the proportions
of the format.

18
FOCUSING AND DEPTH OF FIELD
CORE SKILLS
Depth of field is the space in front of and behind 
the plane of best focus, within which objects appear 
acceptably sharp (see opposite). Though accurate, 
this definition tells you nothing about the power 
that depth of field has in helping you communicate
your visual ideas. You can, for example, vary depth 
of field to imply space, to suggest being inside the 
action, or to emphasize the separation between 
elements within the picture area.
Varying depth of field
Your chief control over depth of field is the lens 
aperture: as you set smaller apertures (using
f/11 instead of f/4, for example), depth of field 
increases. This increase is greater the shorter
the lens’s focal length, so that the depth of field
at f/11 on a 28mm lens is greater than it would be 
at f/11 on a 300mm lens at the same working 
distance. Depth of field also increases as the subject 
being focused on moves further away from the 
camera. Meanwhile, at close focusing distances,
depth of field is very limited.
Using depth of field
An extensive depth of field (resulting from using a
small lens aperture, a wide-angle lens, distant
focusing, or a combination of these factors) is often 
used for the following types of subject:
▪Landscapes, such as wide-angle, general views.
▪Architecture, in which the foregrounds to buildings 
are important features.
▪Interiors, including nearby furniture or other 
objects, and far windows and similar features.
As a by-product, smaller apertures tend to reduce
lens flare and improve lens performance.
A shallow depth of field (resulting from a wide
lens aperture, a long focal length lens, focusing 
close-up, or a combination of these) renders 
only a small portion of the image sharp, and is 
often used for:
▪Portraiture, to help concentrate viewer attention.
▪Reducing the distraction from elements that
cannot be removed from the lens’s field of view.
▪Isolating a subject from the distracting visual
clutter of its surroundings.
LENS FOCUSING
Spreading light reflected from or emitted 
by every point of a subject radiates
outward, and those rays captured by
the camera lens are projected onto the
focal plane to produce an upside-down
image. The subject only appears sharp,
however, if these rays of light intersect
precisely on the sensor plane (achieved
by adjusting the lens’s focus control). If 
not, the rays are recorded not as points,
but rather as blurred dots. If the image
is reproduced at a small enough size,
then even dots may appear as points,
but as a subject’s image diverges farther 
from the sensor plane, so the dots
recorded by the camera become larger
and larger, until, at a certain point,
the image appears out of focus—the
points have become large enough
to be seen as blurred dots.
Lens positioned
for correct focus
Subject
Light reflected 
from subject
Light refracted 
by lens
Focal plane
Lens not positioned
for correct focus

19
FOCUSING AND DEPTH OF FIELD
◀ Effects of lens aperture
The main reason for changing lens aperture
is to adjust camera exposure: a smaller
aperture restricts the beam of light passing
through the lens. However, the aperture also
alters depth of field. As you set smaller
apertures, the cone of light passing through
the lens becomes slimmer and more
needlelike. As a result, even when it is not
perfectly focused, light from the subject is
not as spread out as it would be if a larger
aperture were used. Thus, more of the scene
within the field of view appears sharp. In this
illustration, lens focal length and focus
distance remain the same, and depth of field
at f/2.8 covers just the depth of a person,
whereas at f/8 it increases to 6ft (2m) in
extent. At f/22, depth of field extends from
5ft (1.5m) to infinity.
◀ Effects of lens focal length
Variations in depth of field resulting
from focal length alone are due to
image magnification. With our figure 
at a constant distance from the camera,
a long focal length (135mm) will record
him at a larger size than does a standard
lens (50mm), which, in turn, creates a larger
image than the wide-angle (28mm). To the
eye, the figure is the same size, but on the
sensor or film, the figure’s size varies directly
with focal length. Where details are
rendered smaller in the image, it is more
difficult to make out what is sharp and what
is not. As a result, depth of field appears to 
increase. Conversely, longer focal length
lenses magnify the image, so magnifying
differences in focus. Thus, depth of field
appears to be greatly reduced.
◀ Effects of focus distance
Two effects contribute to the great reduction
in depth of field as you focus more and 
more closely to the camera, even when
there is no change in lens focal length or
aperture. The main effect is due to the
increased magnification of the image: as 
it looms larger in the viewfinder, so small
differences in the depth of the subject call
for the lens to be focused at varying
distances from the sensor or film. Notice
that you must turn a lens more when it is
focused on close-up subjects than when it
is focused on distant ones. Another slight 
but important reason for the change in
depth of field is that effective focal length
increases slightly when the lens is set further
from the focal plane—in other words, when
it is focused on subjects close-up.
5ft (1.5m)
10ft (3m)
15ft (4.5m)
135mm
50mm
28mm
f/2.8
f/8
f/22
30ft (9m)
30ft (9m)
30ft (9m)
25ft (7.5m)
25ft (7.5m)
25ft (7.5m)
20ft (6m)
20ft (6m)
20ft (6m)
15ft (4.5m)
15ft (4.5m)
15ft (4.5m)
10ft (3m)
10ft (3m)
10ft (3m)
5ft (1.5m)
5ft (1.5m)
5ft (1.5m)
0ft (0m)
0ft (0m)
0ft (0m)

20
FOCUSING AND DEPTH OF FIELD CONTINUED
CORE SKILLS
Autofocusing (AF)
Cameras are able to focus automatically on your 
photographic subject by using one of two 
systems. The active system, which uses a
beam of infrared (IR), is now largely obsolete but 
was formerly much used in compact AF cameras.
In the passive system, however, sensors analyze the
image to determine whether it is in focus and, if 
not, how best to bring it into focus. 
One passive method detects the contrast of fine 
detail in the image: unfocused images present as 
low-contrast, because they lack detail. The lens is
then made to change focus so that contrast is at a 
peak, corresponding with a sharp image. This
method requires good light levels to work well.
Another passive method samples a part of the 
image, then splits it into two beams. When these 
beams fall on certain reference points in the sensor
(the beams are “in phase”), the lens is considered to
be in focus. The crucial property of this method is
that the phase differences vary, depending on
whether the lens is focused in front of or behind the 
plane of best focus. This information enables the
system to work very rapidly, even continuously.
For best results, note the following:
▪For off-center subjects, aim the focusing area at
your subject, “hold” the focus with light pressure on 
the shutter or focus-lock button, then reframe.
▪Extremely bright objects in the focusing region—
sparkling reflections on polished metal, for instance—
could confuse the sensor and reduce accuracy. 
▪Photographing beyond objects that are close to the
lens—for example, through a bush or between the
gaps in a fence—can confuse the autofocus system.
▪Restless subjects, such as children or flowers in a
light breeze, may be best kept in focus by setting
a distance manually and then adjusting your
position backward and forward to maintain focus. 
◀Mimicking depth
While a narrow field of 
view usually yields a
shallow depth of field, 
you can simulate a more
generous zone of sharp
focus linked with a
narrow field of view by
cropping a wide-angle
image. Here, a 28mm view 
has been cropped to that
of a 200mm lens, and the
scene appears sharp from 
foreground to background.
▶Selective focus 
A telephoto shot (135mm)
taken with the lens
aperture wide open (f/1.8)
throws the model in the
background well out of 
focus while the porcupine
spines of her necklace 
are rendered pin sharp.
Although almost nothing
is sharp in this image,
its power comes from 
the suggestiveness
of the blurred image: it
is perfectly clear what 
the subject is about.

21
FOCUSING AND DEPTH OF FIELD
▪With very rapidly moving subjects, it may be 
better to focus on a set distance and then wait for
the subject to reach that point before shooting.
Hyperfocal distance
The hyperfocal distance is the focus setting that
provides maximum depth of field for any given 
aperture. It is the distance to the nearest point that
appears sharp when the lens is set at infinity, and it 
is the nearest distance at which an object can be
focused on while infinity appears sharp. The larger 
the aperture, the farther this point is away from you. 
This is useful when the scene is changing so
rapidly that you cannot keep focus on your subjects. 
With very rapid autofocus cameras, its utility is 
limited. It is better to focus on a subject than to 
hope depth of field will render it sharp enough. 
PERCEIVED DEPTH 
OF FIELD
Acceptable sharpness varies according to how 
much blur a viewer is prepared accept. This, in
turn, depends on how much detail a viewer can
discern in the image, which, in turn, depends on
the final size of the image (as seen on a screen or
as a paper print). As a small print, an image may
display great depth of field; however, as the image
is progressively enlarged, it then becomes more
and more obvious where the unsharpness begins, 
thereby making the depth of field appear
increasingly more limited.
▲Right aperture
Even an ultra wide-angle lens will offer insufficient depth
of field when objects are close to the lens and very distant
unless a small aperture is used. In this shot, the charm of 
the scene would have been lost had either the château or
foreground flowers been unsharp. The smallest aperture on
this lens was set to give maximum sharpness, but the long
shutter time needed meant that a tripod was necessary.
▶Off-center subjects
With off-center subjects, as here, you may need to ensure
your camera does not focus on the middle of the frame. 
Modern systems may recognize the main subject and focus 
accordingly. For this image, I focused on the boys, locked
the setting, and recomposed the shot. Even in bright 
conditions and focusing at a distance, depth of field is
limited because of the very long (400mm) focal length.

22
MOVEMENT BLUR
CORE SKILLS
The generally accepted advice is that you should
hold the camera steady when capturing pictures.
Any movement during exposure causes the image 
to move across the sensor. If that movement is
visible, it is seen as a blur, which causes the image to 
look unsharp at best and, at worst, quite 
unrecognizable. Nonetheless, there is certainly a
place for pictures that display a thoughtful or 
expressive use of subject blur.
Try it and see
The effects of exposure during movement are
unique, and no other recording medium represents 
the blur of movement in quite the same way as a 
camera. However, since what you capture in the 
image will vary with the level of movement of the 
subject and with distance, its effects are hard to 
predict. Experiment freely with different settings
and evaluate results on a computer monitor, rather
than the camera’s review panel. 
With experimentation and experience, you will
find that brighter areas quickly become too bright 
when overlapped. At the same time, dark areas tend
to be reduced by overlapping with lighter areas. The 
net result is a tendency to overexpose. You can
exploit this to create high-key images or set 
exposure overrides to force tones to be darker,
which helps to maintain intense colors (see pp. 
38–9). The tendency to overexpose also means that 
results are best in dull light with a limited number of 
light-sources.
Contrasting blur
The appearance of blur is usually enhanced when it
is seen in contrast against sharply defined forms or
shapes. By the same token, sharpness appears 
▼Moving camera
The blur produced by taking a photograph from a
speeding car streaks and blends the rich evening light 
in a very evocative and painterly fashion in this example.
To the eye at the time of taking, the scene was much
darker and less colorful than you can see here. It is
always worth taking a chance in photography, as you
never know what might come of it.

23
greater where it contrasts with blur, so it is worth 
arranging for some part of the scene to remain
sharp. This may call for the use of a tripod. Start with 
exposure times not longer than 1⁄1⁄18⁄8⁄  sec with a normal
lens. Very long exposures cause so much blur that it 
becomes difficult to identify the subject. They are
also a lot more difficult to control.
Quality blur
It may seem unnecessary to bother with focus since
you are working with blur, but you will find that it is 
worth focusing as carefully as you would if you were
aiming for a sharp image. By doing this you produce 
a solid “core” to the image, against which the viewer 
can more readily appreciate the blur.
For similar reasons, it is just as important to
maintain image quality as ever. Movement blur 
produces smooth or milky tones, so any break up of 
the image either from resolution that is too low for
the output size (see pp. 112–3), or noise caused by
high sensitivity (high ISO) settings can detract from 
the overall effect.
▲Pan handling
Following the movement of a subject during exposure—
panning—exploits the fact that different speeds of 
movement produce different levels of blur. Parts of the 
image that are relatively stationary in the image—such as
the girl’s face—appear sharper than elements that move
more rapidly, such as her legs.
▲Tossing the camera
This is a technique that can be huge fun and totally
unpredictable: set shutter priority with an exposure time
of 1 or more seconds. Hold on to the camera strap, press
the shutter button, then toss the camera into the air with
a spinning action (ensuring that the camera does not hit
the ground). For the best results, try this at night with street
lights or neon signs.
MOVEMENT BLUR

24
INFLUENCING PERSPECTIVE
CORE SKILLS
You can exercise control over the perspective of a 
photograph by changing your camera position. This 
is because perspective is the view that you have of 
the subject from wherever it is you decide to shoot. 
Perspective, however, is not affected by any changes
in lens focal length—it may appear to be so but, in 
fact, all focal length does is determine how much of 
the view you record.
Professional photographers know perspective
has a powerful effect on an image, yet it is one of 
the easiest things to control. This is why when you
watch professionals at work, you often see them
constantly moving around the subject—sometimes
bending down to the ground or climbing onto the 
nearest perch; approaching very close and moving 
further away again. Taking a lead from this, your 
work could be transformed if you simply become 
▲Alternative views 
This wide-angle view (above left), shows an unremarkable
snapshot of a beach, in Andros, Greece. It is a simple image
of the place, but it lacks an engaging interpretation or
inventive viewpoint of the scene. Once on the beach,
the temptation is to take in a wide shot that summarizes
the whole scene. Instead, a low viewpoint that takes in the
more mobile, observing the world through the
camera from a series of changing positions rather 
than a single, static viewpoint.
Bear in mind that with some subjects—still lifes,
for example, and interiors or portraits—the tiny 
change in perspective between observing the 
subject with your own eyes and seeing it through
the camera lens, which is just a little lower than your 
eyes, can make a difference to the composition. 
This difference in perspective is far more
pronounced if you are using a studio camera or
waist-level finder on a medium-format camera.
Using zooms effectively 
One way to approach changes in perspective is to 
appreciate the effect that lens focal length has on 
your photography. A short focal length gives a 
corner of a parasol gives a more intimate and involving feel: 
by using the parasol to balance the large rock, the picture
is almost complete. Waiting for the right moment—a 
child running into the foreground—brings the whole
perspective to life.

25
INFLUENCING PERSPECTIVE
▲Distant perspectives 
Overlooking the action there is a sense of the crush of 
people at this festival in mountainous Tajikistan (above). 
Two children holding hands complete the scene. The long 
focal length version (above right) focuses attention on the 
dancer, but excludes all sense of setting beyond the crowd
watching the traditional performance.
perspective that allows you to approach a subject 
closely yet record much of the background. If you 
step back a little, you can take in much more of the 
scene, but then the generous depth of field of a 
wide-angle tends to make links between separate 
subject elements, as there is little, if any, difference
in sharpness between them.
A long lens allows a more distant perspective. 
You can look closely at a face without being nearby. 
Long lenses tend to pull together disparate objects—
in an urban scene viewed from a distance, buildings 
that are several blocks apart might appear to crowd 
in on top of each other. However, the shallow depth 
of field of a long lens used at close subject distances 
tends to separate out objects that may actually 
be close together by showing some sharp and
others blurred. 
PERSPECTIVE EFFECTS
Wide-angle lenses
▪Take in more background or foreground.
▪Exaggerate the size of near subjects when
used in close-up photography.
▪Exaggerate any differences in distance or
position between subjects.
▪Give greater apparent depth of field and
link the subject to its background.
Telephoto lenses
▪Compress spatial separation.
▪Magnify the main subject. 
▪Reduce depth of field to separate the
subject from its background.
For this exercise, leave your zoom lens at its shortest
focal length setting. Look for pictures that work best 
with this focal length—ignore any others and don’t
be tempted to change the lens setting. This will help
to sharpen your sense of what a wide-angle lens
does. You may find yourself approaching subjects—
including people—more closely than you would
normally dare. The lens is making you get closer
because you cannot use the zoom to make the
move for you. Next, repeat the exercise with the 
lens at its longest focal length setting.
TRY THIS

26
CHANGING VIEWPOINTS
CORE SKILLS
Always be on the lookout for viewpoints that give a 
new slant to your work. Don’t ignore the simple 
devices, such as shooting down at a building instead 
of up at it, or trying to see a street scene from a
child’s viewpoint rather than an adult’s.
Your choice of viewpoint communicates subtle 
messages that say as much about you as they do
your subject. Take a picture of someone from a 
distance, for example, and the image carries a sense 
that you, too, were distant from that person. If you 
photograph a scene of poverty from the viewpoint 
of a bystander, the picture will again have that 
distant look of having been taken by an aloof 
observer. Lively markets are popular photographic 
subjects, but what do they look like from a 
stallholder’s position? If you enjoy sports, shoot
from within the action, not from the sidelines.
Practical points
Higher viewpoints enable you to reduce the
amount of foreground and increase the area of 
background recorded by a lens. From a high vantage
point, a street or river scene lies at a less acute angle 
than when seen from street or water level. This
reduces the amount of depth of field required to
show the scene in sharp focus.
However, from a low camera position subjects
may be glimpsed through a sea of grass or legs. 
And if you look upward from a low position, you 
see less background and more sky, making it easier
to separate your subject from its surroundings.
▲Less can say more
At markets and similar types of location, all the activity can
be overwhelming—and the temptation is often to try to
record the entire busy, colorful scene. However, if you look
around you, there could be images at your feet showing
much less but saying so much more. In Uzbekistan I noticed
next to a fruit stall a lady who had nothing to sell but
these few sad tulips.
◀Child’s eye view
From almost ground level,
the swooping gulls feel
quite threatening and pull
the viewer into the action. 
At the same time, looking
upward gives the viewer a
sense of open skies—this
would be lost with the gaze
directed downward.

27
CHANGING VIEWPOINTS
▲Changing viewpoint
This conventional view of the Mesquita of Cordoba, Spain 
(above), works well as a record shot, but it is not the
product of careful observation. Looking down from the
same shooting position, I noticed the tower of the building 
reflected in a puddle of water. Placing the camera nearly in 
the water, a wholly more intriguing viewpoint was revealed
(right). An advantage of using a digital camera with an LCD 
screen is that awkward shooting positions are not the
impossibility they would be with a film-based camera.
HINTS AND TIPS
▪In some parts of the world, it is a good idea to
avoid drawing attention to your presence. Your
search for an unusual camera viewpoint could
attract the unwanted interest of officialdom. Even
climbing onto a wall could land you in trouble in
places where strangers are not a common sight
or photographers are regarded with suspicion.
▪As well as being discourteous, it might also be
illegal to enter a private building without 
permission in order to take photographs. You
may be surprised at how cooperative people
generally are if you explain what you are doing
and why, and then ask for their assistance.
▪Try to be open and friendly with people
you encounter—a pleasant smile or an
acknowledging wave is often the easiest,
and cheapest, way to elicit a helpful response
from strangers.
▪Prepare your equipment before making your
move. Balancing on the top of a wall is not the
best place to change lenses. With manual
cameras, preset the approximately correct 
aperture and shutter time so that if you snatch
a shot, exposure will be about right.

28
QUICK FIX LEANING BUILDINGS
CORE SKILLS
Buildings and architectural features are always
popular photographic subjects, but they can cause
problems of distortion that are tricky to rectify.
Problem: Tall subjects—such as buildings,
lampposts, trees, or even people standing close by 
and above you—appear to lean backward or as if 
they are about to topple over. Extreme wide-angle 
views are particularly prone to this effect.
Analysis: This distortion occurs if you tilt the
camera upward to take the picture because you are
trying to avoid taking in too much of the foreground
and not enough of the height of the building. The
top of the building is farther away, so it appears
smaller, causing the whole image to lean backward.
Solution: Stand farther back, and keep the
camera level. You will still take in too much of 
the foreground, but you can crop the image later.
▪Use a wider-angle lens or zoom setting, hold the
camera precisely level, then crop off the
foreground in image-manipulation software.
▪Take the picture anyway and try to correct
some or all of the distortion by manipulating
the image later. 
▪Use a shift lens. Such equipment is expensive, but
it provides the technically best solution.
▲Tilting the camera
An upward-looking view of the spires of Cambridge, 
England, makes the buildings lean backward. The visual
effect can be exploited for drama.
▲Using the foreground
By choosing the right camera position, you can keep the 
camera level and include foreground elements that add
to the shot.
▲Looking up
The awe-inspiring Grand Mosque in Abu Dhabi, United
Arab Emirates, invites ultra-wide-angle views of the
columns and ceilings. But in a small image, the strong
convergences appear too exaggerated and extreme.
▲Partial correction
By using the viewpoint or perspective features in image-
manipulation software, it is possible to reduce the
converging lines and give a more natural look. Such
a result is not possible using only a lens.

29
QUICK FIX FACIAL DISTORTION
QUICK FIX FACIAL DISTORTION
Distorted facial features, such as an overly
large nose, are often the reason that a portrait is
unattractive. It is the consequence of moving 
in close to make the subject’s face as large as 
possible within the frame.
Problem: Portraits of people taken close-up with
normal lenses will exaggerate certain facial features,
such as noses, cheeks, or foreheads.
Analysis: The cause is a perspective distortion.
When an image is viewed from too far away for
its magnification, the impression of perspective is
not correctly formed. This is why at the time you
took the photograph,  your subject’s nose appeared
fine, but in the print or on screen it looks
disproportionately large.
Solution: Use a lens setting longer than a 35 mm
equivalent of 50 mm—that is, about 70 mm or more.
This helps ensure that for an average-size screen from
a normal viewing distance the perspective looks correct.
▪Work at the longer end of your zoom lens.
▪If you have to work close-up, try taking a profile
instead of a full face (see below).
▪Avoid using wide-angle lenses close to a face,
unless you want a distorted view.
▪Don’t fill the frame with a face at the time of 
shooting. Instead, rely on cropping at a later
stage if you need the frame filled.
▪Don’t assume you will be able to correct facial
distortions later on with image-manipulation
software. It is hard to produce convincing results.
▪Don’t worry too much about distortions: the
expression and lighting give a greater visual impact.
▲ Front-facing
To emphasize the friendly character of this man, several
“rules” were broken: a wide-angle lens was used close-up;
the shot was taken looking upward; and the face was
placed off in one corner, thus exaggerating the distortion 
already present.
▲Wide-angle profile
If forced to take a portrait close-up with a wide-angle
lens—35 mm in this instance—it is best to look for a profile,
since this avoids many of the problems associated with
distortion in front-facing shots. Make sure you focus
carefully on the eye.

30
COLOR COMPOSITION
CORE SKILLS
Color can be used to express emotion in an image. 
Pale, soft colors are restful and tranquil, while rich,
vibrant colors burst with energy and demand 
attention. Color is integral to visual experience, but 
in photography it is almost a separate subject in 
itself. The basis of successful color photography
is to use color in its own right, instead of merely 
capturing the many hues of a scene.
Color as subject
One approach is to photograph colors themselves 
rather than the objects they imbue—that is, to try to 
treat the subject as if it were the incidental feature 
in the scene. You do not need to learn to see in
color, but you do need to learn to see colors for 
themselves—entirely separate from the thing that
displays the color.
This change of mental focus could radically 
transform the entire way you photograph. You 
evaluate a scene not in terms of whether it is a 
marvelous vista but in color analytic terms. You will
observe that colors vary not only with hue—the name 
given to a color—but also with intensity, or saturation. 
Soon, you will appreciate another quality: the value,
or brightness, of a color. With more experience, you 
will appreciate that certain colors can be captured in 
their full richness, whereas others will appear weaker.
Understanding each dimension adds to your ability 
to compose with color.
Color wheel
The colors of the rainbow can be arranged in a
circle (the “color wheel”): the basic primary colors
are red, blue, and yellow. In between these are
placed violet, green, and orange, and between 
these are all the intermediate colors. A hue that is
directly to the left or right of a color on the wheel 
is said to be an analogous, or adjacent, color—such 
as light and dark green with yellow, or blue, purple,
and cyan. A combination of these colors in 
your images will appear harmonious and will 
therefore be correspondingly easy to compose,
as the colors work together and can help bind 
together disparate elements within the scene. 
Broadly speaking, landscape photographers tend
▶Fashion parade
The saturated colors of the
different T-shirts could lead
to a chaotic composition.
However, several other 
elements help to organize
the image: the regular
lines of the windows, 
chairs, and railing all cut
the image into neat frames
around the blocks of color.
At the same time the blue 
of the sky and water form
an even background
against which the T-shirt
colors can glow.
▼Brilliance of pallor
Colors do not have to 
be highly saturated or
intense to be effective. 
In many cases subtle
contrast works best, such
as the tiny area of red
petal against the overall
green balance of this 
image. The sharpness 
of the flower against the 
vague shadows also helps
define the color regions.

31
PERCEPTION OF COLOR
If a pale subject is seen against a background of 
a complementary color, its saturation seems
to increase. Similarly, a neutral gray changes its
appearance according to its background color,
appearing slightly bluish green against red, and
magenta against green. If you compare the gray 
patches in the two-colored panels below you can
see this at work. If you were to cut small holes in a
piece of white card, so that only the four patches
are visible, you would see that the circles are, in 
fact, an identical shade of gray.
COLOR COMPOSITION
▲Betting on white
Any color seen against white appears to be relatively
stronger. The pale blue reflection of sky would be swamped
by any other colors in the image, but with the large areas of 
neutral shades, even the very soft blues in the shadows
become more apparent.

32
COLOR COMPOSITION CONTINUED
CORE SKILLS
to prefer working with analogous colors, so the 
viewer concentrates on forms and texture, whereas 
garden photographers tend to seek out contrasting
colors, for livelier results.
A version of the analogous scheme is the 
monochromatic, in which all colors are variants of 
the same hue. Such images—think of seascapes
with their infinite varieties of blue—offer tonal 
subtlety instead of color contrasts. Close-ups of 
flowers are often rewarding because they offer 
narrow, subtle color shifts.
Colors are said to clash where they lie opposite 
or far from each other on the color wheel. While
compositions with strong contrasts are appealing 
when initially experienced, they are more tricky to 
organize into a successful image. Look for simplicity
in structure and a clear arrangement of subject
matter—too many elements jostling for attention 
can lead to a disjointed, chaotic image.
Pastel colors
Referring to pastel colors as the weak versions of 
a hue is accurate, but also does them a disservice: it
suggests that they are of limited use. Pastels are
certainly more pale and less saturated or vibrant
than full-on colors. They are nonetheless vital tools 
for the photographer.
Pale colors suggest tranquillity and calm, and are
gentle where strong colors are more vigorous. They
evoke responses of peace and well-being—which is 
why they are so popular for home interiors—and,
for a photographer, they are also important as 
counterbalances to strong colors. You can achieve 
striking results by simply concentrating on pastel 
colors in their own right. You will find them where 
there is a good deal of light—which tends to dilute 
colors—and where pastel shades have been used 
decoratively in architecture, interior design, or 
garden planting schemes.
The easiest way to create pastel-dominated
images is simply to over-expose them: this can be 
very effective for creating unusual effects in nature 
and landscape photography. Images such as these
are often associated with high-key lighting, since 
the presence of dark shadows tends to make 
even the palest of colors look richer. Alternatively, 
many digital cameras can be set to record all the
colors in a scene as pastels.
▶ Strong structure
The watered-down colors
in this cityscape provide
a canvas for the morass
of steel structures that
crawl up the buildings.
It may be tempting to
increase contrast and 
saturation, but that would 
over-dramatize the true
nature of the view. In flat
lighting, expose with care, 
as poor accuracy impacts
on every tone in the image, 
and use the lens at its
best aperture to ensure
sharply defined details.

33
COLOR COMPOSITION
◀ Grounded color 
The neutral block of gray
in the center of the image 
provides a grounding for
the opposing visual lures
of the patches of deep
blue and red. In addition, 
the structure imposed by
strong lines and curves
ensures this image, taken
in the Atomium in Brussels, 
presents a rich articulation
of space and form.
▲Soft but strong
Flowers of a Scottish Highland spring make a striking image
despite being made up of largely pastel colors, all seen
under a dull light. Compose to overlap contrasting colors
and try zooming to a long focal length setting to compress
space and juxtapose different patches of color.
▲Saturation contrast
The attention-grabbing colors of an umbrella appear to
be even stronger than they are because of contrast with the
gray tones of the buildings. This, together with the radial
structure of the umbrella straining against the linear form
of the building, creates a contrast that is almost too vigorous.
TRY THIS
One effective way to work with colors is to
ensure the main colors in your pictures are
complementary pairs—such as red–green, yellow–
violet, orange–blue. Try to capture subject matter
with complementary colors; it is not as easy
as you might expect. But you will find that, with
practice, complementary color pairs will catch your
eye even if you are not consciously looking
for them. As you refine your technique, see if 
you can use color complementaries to separate
out elements in your image—use the language 
of color to express and communicate your
response to a scene.

34
QUICK FIX WHITE BALANCE
CORE SKILLS
White balance ensures that the color of illuminating 
light is as close as possible to that of normal
daylight. This is the foundation for accurate color 
reproduction. If there is no adjustment for a tint,
such as red, in the illumination, all colors in the 
scene will carry a reddish tint. 
Problem: Images made indoors tend to appear
unnaturally warm-toned. In other situations, pictures 
taken under fluorescent lamps appear greenish
overall. A related problem occurs in outdoor shots:
you see a blue cast in the shadows on a sunny day,
or images appear unnaturally cold on cloudy days.
Problems are compounded if you work in mixed
lighting, such as daylight from a window and light
from a table lamp. If you correct for the orange 
cast of the lamp, the window light looks too blue;
if you correct for the window light, the lamp light
looks too orange.
Analysis: All imaging systems assume that the
light falling on a scene contains the full spectrum of 
colors. This produces the “white” light of daylight.
If, however, the light is deficient in a specific band of 
colors or is dominated by certain colors, then
everything illuminated by it will tend to take on the
strongest color component. Our eyes and brain make
automatic adjustments by balancing various color
signals to reduce dominant colors. As a result, for
example, we do not experience indoor light as being
unduly orange. Likewise, we seldom notice
the blue color cast that is often present in the
shadows on sunny days.
Digital camera manufacturers have achieved a
similar effect in their products’ automatic white
balance: the red, green, and blue signals are
monitored, and the camera compensates for any
dominant levels of a particular hue. But there are
limits to the adjustment, and when these are
exceeded, we see more or less strong tints in our
images. The resulting “inaccurate” color reproduction
may be important for establishing the mood of a
scene; the red tones of a sunset or the cool tones
of a snowfield, for example, are appropriate and
integral to each situation.
Orange street lamps
The lighting in this square in Malacca,
Malaysia, was recorded as a lurid red in the image.
Even the white windows look too red.
White balanced
A firm correction turns the white windows
to a nearly neutral gray but at the cost of losing the
atmosphere and mood of the scene. The tree now 
looks too blue.
Half-correction
An incomplete correction gives an effective
balance of realistic rendering with a retention of the
mood and color contrasts of the original.
1
2
3

35
QUICK FIX WHITE BALANCE
Solution: Image-manipulation software can make
extensive corrections to white balance—use the White
Balance tool, the dropper tools in Levels, or Curves
controls. The dropper tool samples or measures a 
small area of the image to calculate the change.
Choose carefully. If different parts of the image show 
different white balances, you may need to mask one
area to limit corrections to that area (see right).t)t
When capturing images in JPEG format, you may
set Auto White Balance (AWB) for convenience. For
better results, set a white balance appropriate to the
scene—for example, “cloudy” for overcast days. For
maximum flexibility, record in RAW format and
decide on the white balance during post-processing.
White balance generally corrects the blue-yellow 
balance. Some images may need correction of the
green-magenta balance, called “tint” control. These 
may be needed to correct skin tones and are
available in some software.
As captured
With white balance set to “cloudy,” this
model’s skin tones are beautifully warm, but the
lamps behind her are too yellow-red.
Global incorrection 
A correction aimed at the lamps using the
Highlight dropper—it sampled from the bright lamp
area—leads to too much blue in the model.
Masked 
correction
This result was achieved
by selecting the area
behind the model
before sampling with the 
Highlight dropper,
making sure to leave 
some yellow in the lamp.
1
2
3
▪Avoid photographing in mixed-lighting
conditions unless you specifically want the image
to display unpredictable colors. 
▪Avoid making color-critical shots under
fluorescent lamps: the color cast can prove very
difficult to correct. 
▪For color-critical work, use a gray card to set
custom color balance following your camera’s
instructions. Photograph the card or color chart
to provide a standard for calibration.
HOW TO AVOID THE PROBLEM

36
EXPOSURE CONTROL
CORE SKILLS
Exposure control is the process of making sure that
you capture your image with the exactly the right 
amount of light needed to produce the effect you
wish to obtain. You measure light levels with an 
exposure meter—usually one that is built into the 
camera or a separate handheld meter—and with
the aid of meter readings, you adjust the shutter, 
aperture, and ISO settings.
It is important to control exposure accurately
and carefully, as it not only ensures you obtain the 
best from whatever system you are using, but it also 
saves you the time and effort of manipulating the 
image unnecessarily at a later stage. 
Measuring systems
To determine exposure, the camera measures the 
light entering the camera that is reflected from a 
scene. The simplest system measures light from the
entire field of view, treating all of it equally. 
Many cameras use a center-weighted system, in 
which light from the entire field of view is registered, 
but greater account is taken of that coming from
the central portion of the image. This can be taken 
further, so that the light from most of the image is
ignored, except that from a central part. This can
vary from a central 25 percent of the whole area to 
less than 5 percent. For critical work, this selective
area, or spot-metering, system is the most accurate.
A far more elaborate exposure system divides the
entire image area into a patchwork of zones, each 
of which is separately evaluated. This system, 
commonly referred to as evaluative or matrix 
metering, is extremely successful at delivering 
consistently accurate exposures over a wide range
of unusual or demanding lighting conditions. This is 
now widely used in modern cameras—from
compacts and SLRs, to mirrorless cameras. 
As good as they are, the exposure systems found
in modern cameras are not perfect. There will be
times when you have to give the automation a
helping hand—usually when the lighting is most 
interesting or challenging. This is why it is so 
crucially important to understand what exactly 
constitutes “optimum exposure.” 
Optimized dynamics
Every photographic medium has a range over
which it can make accurate records—beyond that,
the representation is less precise. This range, or 
latitude, is represented by a scale of grays on either 
side of the mid-tone—from dark tones with detail 
(for example, dark hair with some individual 
strands distinguishable), to light tones showing 
texture (for example, paper showing creases and 
wrinkles). If you locate your exposure so that the
most important tone of your image falls in the
▶What is “correct”? 
To the eye, this scene
was brighter and less
colorful than seen here.
A technically correct 
exposure would have 
produced a lighter
image—thus failing to 
record the sunset colors.
Although it looks like this 
might challenge a basic
exposure-measuring
system, by placing the sun 
center frame you guarantee
underexposure, resulting,
as in this example, in a
visually better image
than a “correct” exposure
would produce.

37
EXPOSURE CONTROL
▲Narrow luminance range
Scenes that contain a narrow range of luminance and 
large areas of fairly even, regular tone do not represent
a great problem for exposure-measuring systems, but you
still need to proceed with care for optimum results. The
original of this image was correctly exposed yet appeared
too light because, pictorially, the scene acquires more
impact from being darker, almost low-key. The adjustments 
that were made to darken the image also had the effect
of increasing color saturation, which is another
pictorial improvement.
▲Wide luminance range
The range of luminance in this scene is large—from the
brilliant glare of the sky to deep foreground shadows.
Exposure control must, therefore, be precise to make 
the most of the sensor’s ability to record the scene. In these
situations, the best exposure system is a spot meter, with
the sensor positioned over a key tone—here, the brightly
lit area of grass on the right of the frame. Evaluative
metering may also produce the same result, but if you
are using a film camera, you will not know until you
develop the film.
▲Metering systems
Center-weighted metering (above left) takes in all of the
view but gives more weight, or emphasis, to the light level
around the center of the image, tailing off to little response
at the edge. A spot-metering system (above right) reads
solely from a clearly defined central area—usually just
2–3 percent of the total image area. So a bright light at
the edge of the image will have no effect on the reading.
SENSITIVITY PATTERNS
Cameras use a variety of light-measuring systems,
and the representations shown here illustrate
two of the most common arrangements. With
a center-weighted averaging system, most of 
the field of view is assessed by the meter, but 
preference is given to light coming from the
middle of the frame. In the majority of situations,
this arrangement gives predictable and reliable
results. The metering on modern cameras can be
arranged so that all of its sensitivity is concentrated
in a small spot in the very middle of the field of 
view. Used in any auto-exposure mode with the
reading held or memorized once made, this
method gives reliable results quickly and easily.
middle of this range, the recording medium has
the best chance of capturing a full range of tones. 
In general, the aim of exposure control is to
choose camera settings that ensure the middle
tone of an image falls within the middle part of the 
sensor’s recording range, to make the most of the 
available dynamic range while meeting the need 
to capture movement and adequate depth of field.
Spot metering
The most reliable method for achieving precision in
exposure control is to use spot metering (see box 
below). Aim the measuring spot at the key tone to 
obtain a reading to ensure it is correctly exposed. 
The key tone could be a person’s face or the sunlit
portion of a valley wall. From this, the rest of the
image’s tones will fall into place.

38
LOW-KEY IMAGES
CORE SKILLS
▲Twilight
The natural time for capturing low-key images is the
evening and night. Here a hotel guest reads by lamplight
while the day darkens around her. Almost every tone
is darker than mid-tone.
▲By design
You can force mid-tones and highlights to be darker than
usual through manipulation. Here, an image from Tuscany
produced through the Hipstamatic app has been further
darkened to emphasize the storm-laden atmosphere.
A highly effective yet very simple way to imbue an 
image with expression is by deliberately giving less 
exposure than normal, resulting in a darker-than-
normal image. This maneuver simplifies the content
of an image—as there is little room for detailed 
renditions—and intensifies colors.
Swing low
Technically, dark or “low-key” images are easier to 
create than those that are full of light: they call 
for less lighting, less exposure, and less precision.
Ideally, you light a subject with a single weak light. 
For example, with a portrait, a single source such as 
a window lights the face from an acute or glancing 
angle so that textures and features cast sharp
shadows. Expose for the bright areas: this renders
them as mid-tones or lower, which forces all darker
tones into deep shadows and blacks.
The best way to determine exposure for low-key
pictures is to concentrate your exposure reading 
on the areas that must retain subject detail; 
this ensures that texture and form are recorded. If 
you point your spot or selective-area meter at
such a region of your subject, that tone will be 
rendered as a mid-tone gray. As shadows become 
featureless black, take care to balance their shape 
and form carefully against the lighter areas. Also 
note how light colors become more intense when 
darker than normal.
Underexposure 
with 
digital 
cameras 
can 
introduce noise in the shadows, so it may be best to
create a low-key effect from a normally exposed 
image via image-manipulation software. When it
comes to printing out low-key images, beware: ink-
jet prints with large areas of black can easily become
overloaded with ink.

39
LOW-KEY IMAGES
Seek out scenes with a broad subject-luminance
range, such as a building with one side lit by sun
leaving the other in deep shadow. Make a series
of decreasing exposures, starting with the correct
one. As the mid-tones progressively deepen to
black, the bright areas simply shrink until the image
consists of sharply drawn highlights. Notice that the
image can work well at many stages.
◀Dramatic portrait
For a low-key portrait,
all that is required is
sidelighting from a low 
angle, as here, with enough
underexposure to send
the majority of tones into
the shadow. The absence of 
really bright areas creates
a moody feel. This type of 
portrait is much favored
for older subjects, because
it conceals imperfections
and wrinkles.
▲Two-toned
Silhouettes—in which the 
subject is seen only in dark
outline against a relatively
bright background—are
a special kind of low-key
imaging. By forcing 
mid-tones to be very dark, 
we lose all shadow detail
and retain only shape.
TRY THIS

40
ACCESSORY FLASH
The modern flash is nearly universal because it is 
both highly miniaturized and “intelligent.” Units may 
be small enough to fit in a camera phone, for 
example, yet deliver extremely accurate computer-
controlled doses of light that balance the ambient
light in the scene. Thanks to this versatility, flash units 
are found on virtually all camera phones, compact 
cameras, and many SLR and mirrorless cameras.
Making flash work for you
Whatever you might gain in terms of convenience 
by having a ready source of extra light built into 
the camera, you lose in terms of lighting subtlety. 
To make the best use of flash, you need to exploit 
the control facilities on your camera.
First, use the “slow-sync” or “synchro-sun” mode
if your camera is equipped with it. In low-light 
conditions, this allows the ambient exposure to be
relatively long, so that areas that are beyond the 
range of the flash can be recorded as well as 
possible, while the flash illuminates the foreground 
(see below). This not only softens the effect of the
flash, but it can also mix white balance—the cool 
tint of the flash and the warmer color of the ambient 
light—which can be eye-catching.
Second, try using a reflector on the shadow side 
of the subject. If angled correctly, it will pick up 
some light from the flash and bounce it into the
shadows. Any light-colored material can be used as
a reflector—a piece of white paper or card or a 
white wall, for example. Flexible reflectors that are
lightweight and opened out for use but can be
collapsed to compact size are inexpensive and
very effective. Some models offer two different 
surfaces—a gold side for warm-colored light and a
matte or silvery white side for harder light.
Third, an advanced option is to use slave flash.
These are separate flash units equipped with sensors
that trigger the flash when the master flash (built 
into or cabled directly to the camera) is fired. If you 
have a flash unit, it is not expensive to add a slave
unit. However, you will need to experiment with 
your camera to check if the synchronization of the 
multiple flash units is correct.
▲ Flash limitations
Dusk in Istanbul, Turkey, and traditional musicians 
gather. The standard flash exposure used for this image
lights only the foreground subjects and the rapid light
fall-off, characteristic of small light sources, fails to
reach even a short distance behind the first musician.
Adding to the problems, camera exposure is not long 
enough for the low ambient, or available, light levels
prevailing at the time. As a consequence, the 
background has been rendered black. This type of 
result is seldom attractive, nor does it display any
sound photographic technique.
▲Effective technique
When illumination is low, make the most of what light
is available rather than relying on electronic flash. Here, 
exposure was set for the sky: this required a shutter of 
¼ sec, giving rise to the blurred parts of the image. At the
same time, the flash was brief enough to “freeze” the soldier
in the foreground, so that he appears sharp. Utilizing all
ambient light ensures that the distant part of the scene is
not wholly underexposed—some color can even be seen in
the background building. Compare this with the image
in which flash provided all the illumination (left).
CORE SKILLS

41
▲ Without flash
Bright, contrasty sunshine streaming in through large 
windows behind the subjects—a troupe of young singers
dressed in traditional costume from Kyrgyzstan—produced
a strongly backlit effect. Without the use of flash, the
shadows would appear very dark, but in this case a wall
behind the camera position reflected back some light
from the windows into the shadows to relieve the contrast
a little and so retain some subject details. Use of a fill-in
flash would have spoiled the composition, which relies on
the pattern of the shoes.
▲ With flash
In this alternative interpretation of the previous scene (left), 
flash has been used. This produced enough light to fill most
of the shadows. Now we can clearly see the girls’ costumes,
but note the shadows that still remain on the carpet. The
camera was set to expose the background correctly: here,
an exposure time of 1⁄1⁄1250 
⁄2⁄
sec was used. The f/number
dictated by the exposure meter was then set on the lens,
and the flash was set to underexpose by 11⁄1⁄13⁄3⁄ stops. This 
ensured that the foreground was exposed by both the 
flash and the available window light. 
ACCESSORY FLASH
Using any setup with more than one flash
means trying out different levels of flash output to 
discover the best results. Start by setting the slave 
to its lowest power output, bearing in mind that the 
task of this unit is to relieve subject shadows, not act 
as the main light. Some camera models are 
designed for multiple-flash photography.
Flash synchronization 
Because the pulse of light from electronic flash 
is extremely brief, even when compared with the 
shortest shutter time, it is crucial that the shutter
is fully open when the flash fires. Only then will 
the entire sensor area be exposed to the flash light 
reflected back from the subject. There is usually 
a limit to the shortest shutter time that synchronizes
with the flash, often known as “x-sync.” For
most cameras with focal-plane shutters, this is
between 1⁄1⁄1 00
⁄1⁄
and 1⁄1⁄1250
⁄2⁄
sec. In some models, x-sync 
corresponds to the shortest available shutter time,
which may be 1⁄1⁄18,000
⁄8⁄
sec, but only when using flash 
units dedicated to that particular camera model.
FLASH EXPOSURE
All flash exposures consist of two separate
illuminations occurring simultaneously. While
the shutter is open, or the light sensor is receptive,
light from the overall scene—the ambient
light—creates one exposure. This ambient exposure
takes on the color of the prevailing light, it exposes
the background if sufficient, and it lasts longer 
than that of the flash itself.
The second exposure is in addition to the
ambient one. The burst of light from a flash 
is extremely brief, possibly less than 1⁄1⁄110,000 
⁄1⁄
sec
(though studio flash may be as long as 1⁄1⁄1200 
⁄2⁄
sec), and its color is determined by the
characteristics of the flash tube (which can
be filtered for special effects). 
The fact that there are two exposures means
that it is necessary to control their balance for
the best results. But it also allows you to make
creative use of the process by, for example,
allowing the flash to freeze movement, while the
longer ambient exposure produces blurred results.

42
QUICK FIX ELECTRONIC FLASH
▲Light fall-off
Light from a flash unit mounted on the camera falls off,
or loses its effectiveness, very rapidly as distance increases.
This is evident in this close-up image of a bride holding a
posy of flowers. The subject’s hands and the roses nearest
the flash are brightly illuminated but even just a little bit
further back, the image is visibly darker. This is evident if 
you look at the back edge of the wedding dress, for
example. The effects of this light fall-off can be greatly
minimized by using a light source that covers a larger
area—hence the very different lighting effect you get
when using bounced flash (opposite).
CORE SKILLS
Modern electronic flash units are versatile and
convenient light sources, ideal for use when light 
levels are low (and the subject is relatively close) 
or when image contrast is high and you want to 
add a little fill-in illumination to the shadow areas.
However, due to the intensity of their output, as 
well as their limited range and covering power, 
they can make it difficult to obtain naturalistic 
lighting effects and correct exposure. 
Problem: Common types of problem that are 
encountered when using electronic flash include
overexposed results—particularly of the foreground
parts of the image—and underexposed results—
particularly of the image background. In addition, 
general underexposure of long-distance subject
matter is very common, as is uneven lighting, in
which the corners or foreground are less bright
than the center of the image.
Analysis: Flash units are controlled with their own
light-sensitive sensor or with sensors in the camera.
These measure the light output from the flash or the
amount of light reflecting back from the subject and
reaching the sensor. As a result, they are just as prone
to error as any camera exposure meter. Furthermore,
the light produced by a flash unit falls off very rapidly
with distance (see above right and p. 40). 
Overexposed flash-illuminated pictures are
usually caused by positioning the flash too close to
the subject, or when the subject is the only element
in an otherwise largely empty space.
Flash underexposure is caused by the unit having
insufficient power to cover adequately the flash-to-
subject distance. For example, no small flash unit can
light an object that is more than about 30 ft (10 m)
away, and even quite powerful flash units cannot
adequately light an object that is more than about
100 ft (30 m) distant.
Uneven lighting is caused when the flash is unable
to cover the angle of view of the lens—a problem
most often experienced with wide angles. And
another problem occurs when an attached lens
or lens accessory blocks the light from a camera-
mounted flash.
Solution: For close-up work, reduce the power
of the flash if possible. When photographing distant
subjects in the dark—landscapes, for example, or the
stage at a concert—flash is usually a waste of time
and is best turned off. A better option is to use a long
exposure and support the camera on a tripod or rest
it on something stable, such as a wall or fence. With
accessory flash units—not built-in types—you can
place a diffuser over the flash window to help spread
the light and so prevent darkened corners when
using a wide-angle lens.

43
▲Uneven light
On-camera flash typically delivers these unsatisfactory
results. The lighting is uneven, the shapes the flash has
illuminated look flat, and there are hard, harsh reflections
on all shiny surfaces. In addition, the flash has created
unpleasant shadows (note the shadow of the lip-brush on
the background woodwork). Always be aware of any flat
surfaces positioned behind your subject when using flash
from the camera position.
▲ Mixed lighting
The result of balancing flash with an exposure sufficient to
register the ambient light indoors delivers results like this.
The lighting is soft but the color balance is warmed by the
ambient light. Also, the background is bright enough for it
to appear quite natural. If a greater exposure had been
given to the background, there would have been an
increased risk of subject movement spoiling the image.
▲ Bounced flash
Direct flash used at this close distance would produce
a harshly lit subject and a shadowy background. In this
shot, the flash was aimed at the wall opposite the child.
In effect, the light source then becomes the wall, which 
reflects back a wide spread of light. Not only does this 
soften the quality of the light, it also reduces the rapid light
fall-off characteristic of a small-sized source of light. But
bounced flash is possible only if you use an auxiliary flash
unit. Note, however, that the background is rather darker
than ideal—to overcome this, there must be sufficient
ambient light to mix with the flash illumination to provide
correct exposure overall (above right). 
QUICK FIX ELECTRONIC FLASH
The best way to obtain reliable results with flash
is to experiment in different picture-taking
situations. With a digital camera you can make
exposures at different settings in a variety of 
situations to learn the effects of flash. Some flash
units feature a modeling light, which flashes
briefly to show you the effect of the light—this is
a useful preview, but it can consume a good deal
of power and is likely to disturb your subject.
HOW TO AVOID THE PROBLEM

44
ELECTRONIC FLASH
Today’s battery-powered electronic flash units offer 
an impressive combination of high power, 
portability, flexibility, and convenience. Moreover, 
these units are easy to use, with many automatic 
features. In addition, lighting effects are repeatable 
and color temperature is constant (see p. 138). In 
fact, portable electronic flash units are the single 
most powerful accessory you can attach to your 
camera. They widen the range of situations you can 
photograph in while expanding the lighting effects 
available for many situations. It is also easy to match
flash units to budget, as low-power units are very 
affordable. For greater expense, you are rewarded
with higher power, more rapid recharging, and 
more 
automatic 
features 
such 
as 
wireless 
(infrared or radio) synchronization.
Digital advantages
Digital photographers are at a great advantage
compared with their film-based counterparts in 
being able to assess the result of a flash exposure 
immediately after it is made—either by observing
the image on the camera’s review screen or on a 
computer monitor. Assessing images on the
relatively small screen of a typical digital camera is 
more reliable than before, thanks to improved and 
larger screens. Nonetheless, if possible, it is always
preferable to download the image onto a computer
for assessment via a full-size and calibrated monitor 
(see pp. 214–5).
Types of equipment
For a range of photographic tasks, from still life to
portraiture, a single flash unit will suffice. The single
most useful light-shaper—which changes the quality
of the emitted light—is a large diffusing panel, also 
called a soft-box. A substitute for a soft-box is a 
reflector, but that incurs a big loss of light through
the inefficiency of reflection.
A second synchronized lighting unit is useful for
adding highlights—a halo of light from behind, for 
example, or controlling background lighting, or 
increasing overall light levels. The two units need to 
be synchronized with the camera. This can be done 
wirelessly with infrared or radio, which is available 
on the better-specified models. You can also attach 
a sensor to one of the units: when it picks up 
a sudden rise in light levels, it triggers the unit 
it is attached to. Using these methods you can 
synchronize several units.
For the greatest flexibility, you also need a camera
with a lens offering a wide range of adjustable 
CORE SKILLS
BROAD LIGHTING
Young children can be demanding 
subjects if you have too fixed an
end result in mind. Often, they
are curious about all the
equipment in a studio, they are
very mobile, their concentration
span is short, and they are difficult
to direct. One approach is to
position them against a plain
background and set a broad
lighting scheme—perhaps two
soft-boxes, one either side of the
set. The wide spread of soft light
allows your subjects to move
about without you worrying 
where shadows will fall.

45
ELECTRONIC FLASH
apertures. As adjusting the aperture is your principal 
means of controlling flash exposure reaching the
camera sensors, cameras with just three or four 
aperture settings can limit your creativity.
Studio lighting
In mastering the basics of portable flash lighting 
you will also learn the fundamentals of studio flash 
lighting. The difference is that not only are studio 
units far more powerful and controllable, but also 
the range of light-shapers available is very wide, 
making it possible to create lighting effects that are 
all but impossible to reproduce outside the studio.
In the studio, you can have everything under
control—from the color of the walls to whether you
cover the windows. You may therefore light your 
subject with only the studio units, or you can
balance existing, ambient light from the sky with 
flash light: the range of possibilities is infinitely rich.
Building a lighting scheme
The sequence on the following pages shows what
differences you can achieve by working with the 
simplest lighting set-up: a single flash. Analyze 
the images for the quality of the light and shadows
in order to learn how to obtain the same effects 
with your own equipment.
FILL-IN FLASH
Fill-in flash is used to light
shadowy areas, particularly when
the background is much brighter
than the subject (right). The flash 
is set so that it lights the subject 
with between 0.5 stop to 1.5 stop
less than a full exposure. For
example, the aperture setting is 
f/5.6 but the flash level is set as if 
the aperture is f/4: this puts out 
1 stop less than is needed as the
actual set aperture is smaller by
1 stop. At its best, fill-in flash is
invisible: the lighting simply looks
gorgeous (far right
(f(
).t)t
▲Ring of bright light
One of the most delightful lighting effects in portraiture is
the rim light or halo: place the flash pointing toward the 
camera but hidden behind the subject’s head. This throws
some of the hair into bright highlight while leaving the rest 
of the image in shadow and relatively flat light.

46
ELECTRONIC FLASH CONTINUED
CORE SKILLS
INVERSE SQUARE LAW
If you double the distance between a light source
and the surface that light falls on, brightness at 
the surface is not just halved. For a small, or
“point,” light source, without a reflector or lens for
focusing output, doubling the distance reduces
intensity by four times (by a factor of two
squared). This is the inverse square law. Although
commonly applied to studio and accessory flash
lighting, the inverse square law gives inaccurate
results since nearly all luminaires (sources of light)
use reflectors or lenses, so light distribution is not
even and equal in all directions.
2ft (0.6m)
4ft (1.2m)
8ft (2.4m)
▲Manual flash
As light leaves the flash head it
spreads out, so when the flash-to-subject
distance has doubled, illumination is about a
quarter of the original. Therefore, you control flash 
exposure through both distance and lens aperture.
Direct on-camera 
with diffuser
You can soften the light from the flash
by applying a diffuser: this can be as
simple as a piece of white paper or
tissue held in front of the flash-tube 
that emits the light. Or you can attach
an accessory plastic dome onto the
flash unit. The diffusing reduces the
amount of light by spreading it over a
wide area. This delivers soft shadows
with just a hint of highlight 
concentration, giving a natural look.
Direct on-camera with 
subject away from wall
The strong shadow from direct
lighting can be reduced by moving
the subject away from any wall or
surface behind that would catch the
shadow. By adjusting the distance
from the wall, you may be able to
balance the brightness of light on
your subject’s face with the
background. However, the lighting
is still harsh and unflattering.
Direct on-camera with 
subject close to wall
The normal position for flash—
mounted on the camera and pointed 
directly at the subject—is only for 
convenience. And it was necessary
when flash units were weakly 
powered, as it makes the most
efficient use of light. However, it is
one of the worst possible ways to light
a subject: shadows on the face are
flattened, which smooths out form
and texture, and any slightly reflective
surface returns as a shiny bright patch.
Furthermore, a strong shadow is 
thrown behind the subject, which is
visible if there is a wall too close.

47
ELECTRONIC FLASH
HARSH SHADOWS
Using a single camera-mounted flash is by far the
most convenient lighting arrangement. However, 
effects are often harsh and unattractive. Here, a
flash on the left of the camera has provided
adequate illumination but it has also cast hard
shadows behind the subject and from the pen she
is holding. At the same time, the modeling effect
on the face is flat, while the background appears
too dark due to the rapid fall-off of light. To avoid
these problems, you will either have to bounce
the flash off an intervening surface or, better, use
more than one lighting unit.
On-camera with bounce 
from above
Bouncing turns any nearby surface
into a flash accessory: with your flash
mounted on the camera, turn its head
toward the ceiling. The flash travels
from the flash unit to the ceiling 
which, in reflecting the light, becomes
the main source of light. As the light
has spread over a wide area on the
ceiling before being reflected, the 
light is softened. However, because
the light comes from above, it causes
deep shadows over the eyes. A little 
light may leak from the flash to light 
the subject directly: this is useful for 
filling in shadows.
Detached with subject lit
at 45°
Lighting becomes very interesting
when the flash is freed from the
camera. Some units use a cable to
connect to the camera, others use
infrared or radio to synchronize. At 
any rate, unless you have assistance,
you can hold the flash only as far
as you can reach. Fortunately, it is 
easy to hold the flash so that it lights
a portrait subject from about 45
degrees. This oblique lighting brings
out the form of the face or body;
here giving shape to the nose,
cheeks, and chin.
On-camera with bounce 
from side
There are two advantages to bouncing
light from the flash against a nearby 
wall. As the light reaches the subject
from the side, there is better 
modeling, with no heavy shadows
around the eyes. Also, you can usually
get closer to walls than to ceilings,
which means you lose less light and
can control its quality by varying your 
distance from the wall. Work close to
the wall for a harder light; shoot from
further away for a softer effect. 
Naturally, white walls (or ceilings) are
the best to work with as they do not 
disturb color balance.

48
ELECTRONIC FLASH CONTINUED
CORE SKILLS
HINTS AND TIPS
If you are new to working with studio flash and
accessories, you might find it useful to bear the
following points in mind:
▪As a general rule, always use as few units as
possible to achieve the desired lighting effects. 
Start with one light only and use reflectors to
control the quality of the illumination reaching
your subject. Only if this is insufficient should
you consider adding extra lighting units to
the scheme.
▪Remember that it is easier to remove light than
to add light. Using accessories, such as barn doors
or snoots, you can easily control the fall of light
and any shadows that are created as a result.
However, an additional light immediately casts
a set of new shadows.
▪A reflector placed facing the main light, angled
so that it bounces light into subject shadows, is
usually a more effective solution than using
another light source to reduce shadows.
▪A large light source, such as an umbrella
reflector or soft-box, produces softer light and
more diffused shadows than a small light source.
▪A small light source, such as a spotlight with a
small bowl, produces harder light and sharper
shadows than a large, diffuse light source.
▪You can use colored gels to add tints to the 
background of your subject.
Off-camera at 90º with side
reflector
If you light your subject from one side
but place them so that they are near
a wall facing the flash, some light
bounces from the wall into the
shadows. This lifts or fills the shadow
side with soft light. This reduces the
drama but creates a most attractive
lighting. Alternatively, you can hold a
card or sheet of paper on the shadow
side to reflect light. By working with
the color of the reflector and its
surface texture—whether glossy or 
rough—you can alter the quality of 
the reflected light.
Off-camera from below
pointing upward
Seldom flattering but always
recognizable, lighting a portrait
subject from below has the most
specific uses of any lighting set-up.
This is because it is the least likely
to be found in the natural world.
The light looks as if it comes from a
fire or a flashlight held low down.
By casting unusual shadows on the
face and leaving everything else in the
dark, this scheme conveys mystery
and tension.
Off-camera at 90º with flash
close to model
The closer a light-source is placed to
the subject, the harsher the light
appears to be. And if it is placed to the
side, deep and long shadows result.
The combination of hard light with
deep shadows delivers dramatic
effects thanks to the marked contrasts
of tone and visible detail. At normal
portrait distances, you will probably
need to mount your flash on a small
stand or ask an assistant to hold the
flash to one side of the subject. For
maximum contrast, ensure the subject
is not close to a wall on the side
opposite the flash.

49
ELECTRONIC FLASH
▶ Mixed light sources
An aim of studio lighting can
be to mimic the quality of 
daylight. In this scene, it was
important that the table light 
appeared to be the main
light source. The levels of 
daylight were inadequate to
illuminate the dark-colored 
interior of the room, so a
flash was directed at the
ceiling behind the table.
The reflected light was just
enough to bring out
important details in the
setting without creating
tell-tale hot spots in the
glass-fronted pictures.
Ambient with full fill-in
from flash
All flash exposures consist of two
separate exposures: one using light
from the flash, one using ambient or
available light. When the levels of the
two are equal, or the flash is brighter,
the effect usually appears over-lit and
unnatural. A full fill-in with flash is
useful in situations where you do not
wish to lose any details to shadows;
where you need maximum clarity.
If the ambient light is colored, as
here, it will warm up the white
balance of the image.
Reduced exposure overall
with fill and ambient
Under-exposure softens the lighting
by allowing shadows to differentiate
from mid-tones. At the same time,
colors become deeper and the
contribution from the tinted ambient
lighting from indoor lamps makes a
significant shift in white balance.
On-camera flash with
diffuser plus daylight
The white balance of many flash-units
tends to be on the cool side of
neutral, some giving a noticeably
bluish color cast. You can correct this
using a filter, in post-processing, or by
working with ambient light. If you use
indoor lighting, the resulting white
balance will be distinctly warm. If you
work with daylight, the balance is
cooler. In this image, the brown walls
of the room contributed their color
to the final balance. This shows how
each source of light and every
reflecting surface in the scene
contributes to the final result.


PHOTOGRAPHY 
PROJECTS
2

52
ABSTRACT IMAGERY
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS
Photography has the power to isolate a fragment of 
a scene and turn it into art, or to freeze shapes that 
momentarily take on a meaning far removed from
their original intention. Or chance juxtapositions 
can be given significance as a result of your 
perception and the way you decide to frame and 
photograph the scene.
Close-ups and lighting
The easiest approach to abstracts is the close-up, 
as it emphasizes the graphic and removes the
context. To achieve this, it is usually best to shoot 
square-on to the subject, as this frees the content
from such distractions as receding space or shape 
changes due to projection distortion. 
Longer focal length settings help to concentrate
the visual field, but take care not to remove too 
much. It is advisable to take a variety of shots with 
differing compositions and from slightly different
distances, as images used on screen or in print often 
have different demands made on them. For
example, fine detail and texture are engrossing but
if the image is to be used small on a web page, then 
a broad sweep may work better. And since you will 
usually be shooting straight onto flat or two-
dimensional subjects, you do not need great depth 
of field (see pp. 18–21). This is useful, as it is often 
crucial to keep images sharp throughout.
▶ Complicated 
abstract
Abstract images do not 
need to be simple in either 
execution or vision. Try
working with reflections 
and differential focus 
(focusing through an
object to something 
further away). Here, in
Udaipur, India, a complex
of mirrors, colored glass,
and highlights from
window shutters battle for
attention—and bemuse the
viewer. Control of depth of 
field is critical: if too much
of the image is very sharp,
the dreamy abstract effect
may be lost.
▼ Found abstract
Here, the decaying roof 
surface at a busy railway
station must have been
glanced at by thousands
of commuters every day
but seldom seen. Perhaps
it is a simple expression of 
the process of aging, the
origins of which can only
be guessed at. 

53
ABSTRACT IMAGERY

54
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS
ABSTRACT IMAGERY CONTINUED
▲Modern forms
Contemporary architectural details are rich sources of 
abstract imagery. Their strong graphic design invites you to
take—and delight in—small elements and examine their
interaction with other, equally graphic elements. Here,
the frosted glass of an apartment building gives a partially
obscured view of the courtyard beyond. To increase the
abstract look of the image, I simply turned it on its side.
▲Light play
Observe shadows closely and you will find a challenging
and constantly changing source of images. Clear, clean 
light helps give well-defined shadows that contrast sharply
with man-made textures and surfaces. Take care not to
overexpose, because that will cause you to lose highlight
textures. This type of image often benefits from increased
contrast and saturation, as seen here.
COPYRIGHT CONCERNS
You may think that because a poster or other
subject is on public view, you can photograph it
with impunity. If you are taking the photograph
for research or study, for example to illustrate
a school essay on advertising, then this may
be true. In other cases, however, you may be
infringing someone’s copyright. If you use a
recognizable and sizeable portion of an image
on public view as a significant part of another
image that you go on to exhibit, publish, or sell,
then in many countries you would be in breach
of copyright. If you really want to use the image,
then at least be aware of the potential legal
situation. Note that sculptures; buildings; logos,
such as McDonald’s arches; cars, such as the
Rolls-Royce; the French TGV train; certain toys,
such as Disney characters; and even landmarks,
such as the Lone Cypress tree at Pebble Beach
in California—all enjoy a measure of copyright
protection. In reality you may never be taken to
court for photographing them—but be aware that,
theoretically, you could be.

55
ARCHITECTURE
ARCHITECTURE
The built environment can provide endless
photographic opportunities—the problem is not in 
finding subject matter, but in reducing it to a 
manageable scale. At the same time, digital techniques 
make it easier than ever to create stunning images. 
For example, we can work with a wider range of 
lighting options than ever before, thanks to tone-
mapping software, which blends different exposures
into a tonally compressed image (see pp. 168–9).
Technical considerations
You can approach photography of buildings in 
broadly two ways—artistically, in which you treat the 
architecture as a subject for free interpretation, or
you can attempt to be faithful to the architect’s 
design intentions. For technical renderings, you 
need to ensure that straight lines appear straight 
and, where possible, that parallel lines are also 
recorded as parallel. This means using lenses with
accurate drawing; that is, those that produce images
with minimal distortion. A secondary requirement is 
that the illumination of the image is as even as 
possible, so that the corners of the image are not 
darkened. In practice this is achieved with medium-
▼Dramatic highs 
The architect may not thank you for this vertiginous
view (of Singapore’s first high-rise apartment building), but
it effectively conveys the structure and its height. Wide-
angle views looking directly upward or downward are
usually quite disorienting, but added to the strongly
converging lines, the result is visually powerful.
KNOW YOUR RIGHTS
Areas open to the public, such as shopping malls,
or even landmarks, such as London’s Trafalgar
Square, may be privately owned—so if you intend
to publish pictures of a particular building, you
may need to obtain permission first. Avoid using
professional-looking equipment, and make your
shots swiftly to avoid drawing attention. 
  Fears that photographs may be used for planning
terrorist acts have caused some police and security
forces to prevent pictures being taken in certain
urban locations. In many countries you cannot
be made to delete your images or to hand over
your memory card without being charged with
an offense, but it is always best to cooperate with
the authorities when you are abroad.

56
ARCHITECTURE CONTINUED
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS
◀Vernacular
Pictures of buildings 
usually focus on the grand
and the monumental, but
there are many more 
possibilities. Buildings 
locally made without
design pretensions—
ranging from animal 
shelters, barns, sheds,
and farm houses to
fishing huts—are all
rich imagery sources.
Use local signage and 
street furniture to enrich
picture content.
speed prime or single-focal length lenses such as 
35mm, 28mm, or 24mm—all of around f/2.8
maximum aperture. Note that almost all zoom 
lenses cause unacceptable levels of distortion and 
uneven illumination, although some defects can be 
corrected in image manipulation software. 
Foreground reduction
You can also use software to improve the shape of 
buildings—correcting converging parallel lines and 
turning distorted rectangles into a squared-off 
(orthogonal) shape. But there are limits to how 
convincing image adjustments can be, compared to 
correct capture. Aim the camera level and square to 
any subject that you do not wish to distort. If you 
cannot capture the whole height of the building,
photograph from further away, if possible, or use a 
lens with wider angle. Both options result in
capturing a great deal of foreground, but this is easily
cropped off. For professional architectural work, the 
shift lens (see p. 205) is indispensable: the lens slides 
upward to crop out foreground.
View variety 
Extreme wide-angle views—that is, focal lengths less 
than 24mm or equivalent—are tempting, but objects 
near the edge of the frame appear distorted in small 
images when viewed close up. If you need really wide
views, you can stitch several shots together to create
a panorama (see pp. 190–1): this is best done with the
aid of a panoramic head and tripod (see p. 206).
Although it is natural to reach for a wide-angle 
lens to photograph buildings or interiors, a wide 
view is not always best. A carefully chosen, narrower 
field of view can reveal more of a building and its
surroundings, so remember to look for telling
details, such as a high-up window or decorative 
elements. In fact, the best way to improve your
architectural photography is not by buying a new
lens, but by being painstaking about choosing 
perspective and framing.
Dynamic color
Photography of buildings needs perhaps greater
flexibility with white balance than any other field 
of photography. This is because lights originating
inside the building are usually of a different color 
temperature to the light coming from outside. A
contrast of colors can be attractive, but too great a 
difference can distract from the building itself. For
the greatest amount of flexibility in adjustment, 
capture in RAW format (see pp. 158–61). You do 
not always have to correct color balance fully:
improvements can often be made simply by 
reducing the saturation of reds, or increasing their
lightness—or a bit of both (see pp. 140–1).

57
ARCHITECTURE
◀Distant charms
When in search of the
perfect Italian piazza and
the grandest duomo, you 
can start shooting long 
before you arrive. Here,
in Urbino, great towers 
dominate street views,
guiding your exploration 
of the town and inspiring
each step of the way. You 
can include the ephemera 
of street signs, hanging 
washing, and bunting or 
flags to provide context—or
avoid them, to reinforce 
the atmosphere of 
timelessness.
▲Opportunities
Even as you enter a hotel, you may spot a picture possibility.
Take a second out to make the shot, because the light may
change or you may lose the inspiration of the moment. If 
your lens does not take in a sufficiently wide-angle view, tilt
the camera to use the diagonal of the frame.
▲Leaning back
Pointing a camera upward to capture a building seldom
flatters it, but for specific pictorial effect, a steeply upward
view can work well. Use contrasting foreground elements
to help articulate the space in an engaging way.
TRY THIS
Photographing from one spot, using a zoom
lens to vary framing, helps train the eye to find
compositions. Choose a location to shoot from,
then create the greatest variety of images you can
by using only the zoom to change the framing.
Return to the same spot at different times of the
day and in different weather conditions to obtain
an even greater variety of images.

58
DOCUMENTARY PHOTOGRAPHY
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS
The full spectrum of documentary photography 
covers prosaic recording, or the “soft” story, such
as construction progress or family life, through to the
“hard” stories, such as a civil war or drug trafficking. 
Whatever the subject, what matters is the approach:
classic documentary is about recording with empathy 
the everyday existence of people, wherever they 
may live—if necessary revealing unpalatable truths,
and recording for posterity events that some would 
prefer to be forgotten.
Preparation
In this, perhaps the most vocational of all genres
of photography, subjects tend to choose you, the 
photographer. Injustices in an occupied territory may
suddenly come to your attention, and you feel you
must do something about it. Orphans in a city may 
break your heart, and you are moved to tell the world 
about them. While it is important to be motivated, 
it is also important to be a dispassionate observer. 
Study the subject area: read relevant legislation,
speak to people affected, talk to local experts and
charity workers—become an expert yourself. This
prepares you for the photography by informing 
your vision and directing your search for the telling 
image. It will also prepare you for the essential step
of writing informative, accurate captions.
When it is clear to your subject that you are 
serious in your intentions, know what is going 
on, and can be trusted, you will find it easier to 
obtain cooperation. This is vital a step, if only to 
ensure your safety: do not be too eager, nor believe 
that you have to be pushy and determined. And 
never forget that your safety is more important than 
any images you could obtain.
Softly, softly
Technically, documentary photography is 90 percent
being there, 10 percent pressing the button. Small,
discreet cameras such as point-and-shoot or
compact interchangeable lens (CIL) models attract 
less attention and are less intimidating than large 
SLR models with long zoom lenses. Cameras 
without mirrors are also quieter than SLRs—some
are totally silent in operation. Point-and-shoot
cameras are also much less expensive, so you can 
use two or three at the same time and you do not 
have to worry too much about damaging them
in rough conditions.
When choosing a camera, look for good low-light 
operation—rapid autofocusing and images with low
noise (see pp. 124–5)—so you do not have to use 
flash indoors or at night. Cameras with larger 
sensors—APS-C or larger—give the best performance
at high ISO settings, and CIL cameras can be fitted 
with very fast (large maximum aperture) lenses, for
example 24mm f/1.8. The ability of modern cameras
to capture high-definition (HD) video can also be 
invaluable in documentary work—more and more 
documentary photographers are combining moving
images and sound with still images.
Formal requisites
Reliable documentary work relies on the unaltered
digital image in order to be a truthful, unvarnished 
record. It is acceptable to make tonal, exposure,
and color balance corrections, and to convert to 
black-and-white. There should be no change of 
content such as the removal of distracting elements.

59
DOCUMENTARY PHOTOGRAPHY
▲Intermezzo
Dancers of the Singapore Dance Theatre relax between
rehearsals in an image that may not be first choice for
publicity or promotion, but is an affectionately truthful
portrayal of a moment in the lives of hard-working dancers.
◀ Container
movements
Even if circumstances—
such as safety concerns—
prevent you from being
close to the action, there
is always a way to pull
the viewer into the shot.
Here, by holding the
camera with an ultra-
wide-angle lens close to
the operator’s head, I
made him appear large
compared to the workers
behind. Converging
parallel lines draw 
attention into the
“back” of the image.
CITIZEN REPORTING
With more than 3 billion cameras and camera 
phones in use around the world, there is sure
to be a photographer near any newsworthy
incident. Increasingly, ordinary people are 
recording news instead of being passive
witnesses. It is essential that all of them accept
the responsibility for accurate reporting, with 
truthful, non-manipulated images and no staging
or reenactment of news events. Camera phones
are ideal for posting images to media news desks
and to social-network sites. Before submitting
images, including to photo-sharing sites, ensure 
you do not lose your rights to the image.

60
DOCUMENTARY PHOTOGRAPHY CONTINUED
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS
▲Proud portraits
Some people can be too cooperative, sitting to attention 
with a broad smile when they see a camera pointing at
them—as this melon-seller in Tajikistan did. Make the
exposure anyway, thank them and expose again when
they return to a relaxed, more natural pose.
▼Wordless image
The ideal documentary photograph says it all in the image;
there is no need for a caption to tell you what is going on. 
All you might need to identify is location: in this case,
Tashkent in Uzbekistan, where heavy rain in a desert-
dominated country is unusual.

61
DOCUMENTARY PHOTOGRAPHY
▼Eloquent scenes
It is easy to capture pictures of buildings and living spaces,
but it is always worth waiting for a little of ordinary life to
pass by. You never know what will turn up and what it will
tell you. Here, neglect of a traditional district is brought into
focus by a woman crossing the road.
▲Combining elements
In documentary photographs everything counts: there is 
information in every corner of the image, and every portrait
of a person is also a portrait of the place and the situation.
Make it all count: a boy tailing me wears local clothes, the
door casts shadows on carpets—all have stories to tell.
MODEL RELEASE FORM
If you take pictures of people and intend to use
them in commercial ventures, a legally binding
agreement between subject and photographer
allows you to use the pictures without any further
financial obligation or reference to the person
depicted. For the personal use of a photograph,
it is generally not necessary to obtain the model’s
release; however, if an image is intended for 
commercial use, it is advisable—sometimes
mandatory—to obtain signed consent. A simple
release statement is: “I permit the photos taken of 
me (subject’s name) by (photographer’s name) 
to be printed and published in any manner
anywhere and at any time without limit.” The
release form should also note the date and
location the pictures were taken and carry the
signature and contact details for both the subject
(or parent/guardian) and the photographer.
Both parties should sign two copies—one is kept
by the photographer, the other by the subject.
The payment of money or giving of a gift—for 
example, a print of the image—may be required
to make the contract binding.

62
STREET PHOTOGRAPHY
The invention of 35mm miniature film and small 
cameras completely freed photographers from the
studio to photograph the world at large. Since then 
the urban street, with its unending, bustling activity 
and unpredictability, has proved to be an 
inexhaustibly rich source of images. With your
camera, you can explore any city’s streets: the 
photographic rewards can be great, and you will 
also get to know your surroundings better.
Fortune telling
The core of street photography is the spontaneous 
juxtaposition of the different elements of a street 
scene—people, objects, and features of the urban
landscape—in such a way that the composition gains 
a meaning or significance that is greater than the
mere accident of its subjects being in the same place.
This means that composition and timing are 
crucial, but more importantly, street photography 
is driven by a keen, highly tuned awareness of 
movements and objects in the street. With practice 
this leads to what is almost an ability to read the 
future. This is essential because meaningful
compositions or juxtapositions usually appear with 
only a faction of a second of lead-in time, and 
dissolve in even less time. Therefore street 
photographers must anticipate every shot: a little
experience will show that if you merely try to 
respond to a situation that you are witnessing, 
you will already be too late.
Street wise
The great French photographer Robert Doisneau
explained that the secret of his success at street 
photography was to “Walk, walk, and walk some
more.” Explore your city on foot, watching and 
experiencing the variety of scenes and subjects on 
offer. Take advantage of the fact that many cameras 
are extremely compact and lightweight, and can be 
easily carried all day—keep your camera in your 
hand, powered up and ready to use. 
Use manual focus set, for example, to 13ft (4m),
and ensure you capture action within that distance:
this greatly speeds up your camera’s responsiveness. 
Remember that an imperfect shot perfectly timed is
preferable to a perfect shot badly timed. Be mindful 
of your own safety while you are shooting on 
the street, especially at night; conversely, if you 
sense that your presence is making someone
uncomfortable, desist immediately.
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS
▲ No room for boredom
While waiting for your bus or train, or even for a
thunderstorm to clear, you can help pass the time by
being observant and taking an interest in how people
behave. Here, a camera phone was the perfect tool for
capturing reactions to a downpour in London.
PRIVACY AND SECURITY
In some countries, the legal view is that people
have a right to private lives even in public.
Therefore taking photographs of people in
public spaces without their permission may be
an offense. In other countries, photography of 
people may be offensive on cultural grounds.
With increased awareness of photography
worldwide, the safest and most polite course 
is always to obtain permission whenever you
wish to photograph someone in such a way that
they will become the main focus of the image.
For an image to be used commercially, a model
release will be mandatory (see p. 61). Street 
photography featuring large numbers of people
is not usually problematic, but even so, you
should be sensitive to people’s feelings, which 
take precedence over your right to photograph.

63
STREET PHOTOGRAPHY
▲ Opportunistic juxtaposition
From a vantage point in a Brussels café, the signage on the
window provided a stylish framing for the activity on the
street below. By adjusting the camera’s position, the curves
fitted around the table below. All that remained was to pay
attention to what was going on. A compact camera is ideal
for such shots because it is easy to hold for long periods.
◀Blur of life
There are no rules in
photography: you do not 
have to frame or time your
shots precisely, you do not
have to capture expressions,
and your images do not
have to be sharp. Enjoy 
yourself by working 
with random occurrences
such as unexpected
combinations of color and
light—you can even 
capture them while on 
the move. In this shot, the 
varying degrees of blur add
textural variety.

64
VACATIONS AND TRAVEL
Modern cameras make it a fun pursuit to capture 
pictures of your vacation that will remind you of 
the trip for years to come. But you will find it far 
more satisfying to create images that can stand on 
their own, and that have an appeal and interest that
goes beyond your circle of friends and family. At the 
same time, if photography is not a priority for other 
members of the group, you need to be careful not
to spoil their fun or keep them waiting around while 
you take pictures.
This is us
An effective way to get everyone used to you 
pointing the camera at them is to start shooting
from the very beginning—for example, from the
moment you meet up at the airport. Avoid arranging 
everyone into a formal group shot, but capture 
your friends as they chat to each other, consult
maps, or send last-minute texts. Keep shooting as
you move from one location to another. Before
long, you will be creating a natural, sequential record 
of your trip, in which the more obvious shots of 
landmarks and monuments will have a fitting context.
Subjects and approaches
Looking to your broader surroundings, you can
develop photography projects that tell the viewer 
something about the location—for example, local
street food, posters, transportation, or graffiti—
whatever interests you. As you travel, your portfolio
will grow in depth and extent in a most rewarding
way. More importantly, you will find that as you
become attuned to your subject matter—perhaps
pursuing a particular theme and actively seeking
out interesting or unusual examples—your eye for
all kinds of other detail will be sharpened, with 
great benefit to your photography.
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS
▲Food and drink
Part of the fun of vacationing is experiencing different 
food in new locations. You can incorporate this into your
photography: record not only the meals, but the place
settings, the reflections of a sunset on the table and the
refractions of candlelight in your wine glasses.
▶ Sunbed views 
Even from a lazily prone
position, you will see
picture opportunities.
Be prepared to grab your
camera phone to snap the
shot, and then you can
get back to the serious
business of relaxing.

▲ Changing emphasis
Even when the weather is less than perfect, the observant
photographer can always find picture opportunities. In 
this view of downtown Auckland, New Zealand, rain from
a storm beats on the windows of an observation tower. It
is usual to focus on the distant view, but by concentrating
on the raindrops the scene shifts, and there is suddenly
a picture to be made.
▲ Key components
Instead of posing them in front of the sunset, try
incorporating your travel companions into the 
scene, so that their presence enhances the image.
Looking beyond
However, your travel pictures do not have to be
simply a record of a place, or of the day-to-day
minutia of your visit. If you can capture a human 
emotion, tell a story in which one picture entices 
the viewer to look forward to the next, and create 
images that inform as well as delight, you will make
a breakthrough. This takes skill: you will need sharp
reflexes to respond to changing circumstances—
your subjects may move unpredictably, you will be 
in unfamiliar situations, and light conditions may
change without warning. This calls for well-
practiced camera technique, and it helps if you 
have equipment that can react quickly. 
Even more important is acute sensitivity to the
friendliness or antipathy of your subject, and to
the cultural and social subtleties of your
surroundings. You will also find it much easier if 
you are engaged and involved with your subject 
on a personal level that goes beyond simply 
photographing them in passing. 
SHARING MEMORIES 
Of the many tasks to follow up after you return
home, perhaps the most easily forgotten is the
promise to send prints to people you have made
friends with and photographed on your trip.
However, digital photography makes this easier
than ever before. You can make individual prints
from files, or even travel with one of the very
small, portable printers available. You can also
post images onto social networking or picture-
sharing websites, then contact people you have 
met and direct them to the sites.

66
Recording relationships
A photograph of someone you meet on a trip is 
much more than a likeness: it is a record of your
encounter, the meeting of two worlds. Pictures of 
people are perhaps the single most rewarding
aspect of travel photography, particularly since 
developing genuine relationships with people opens 
doors that would otherwise remain closed to you.
A useful practice is to restrict your focal length 
(see box opposite). In order to fill the frame with
your subject, you will have to move physically 
closer. This is easier if you have first formed a
relationship with them—even if it is a fleeting one. 
Indeed, if you have created a rapport—often all that 
is needed is eye contact and a friendly smile—it is 
actually more comfortable to photograph from 
close up than from a distance. 
The eyes have it
The most eloquent part of a portrait image is a 
person’s eyes; that is what we instinctively look at 
first. Face to face, a glance at a person’s eyes tells us 
their mood and intention, and likewise with images: 
we immediately gather information about the 
VACATIONS AND TRAVEL CONTINUED
▼ Evocative imagery
The receding parallel lines of these railroad tracks in
Uzbekistan powerfully evoke a sense of space. In this image
I balanced the need to show a long stretch of track with the 
size of the people on the line. If they were too far away,
they would appear too small to have impact, and if they
were too near, they might overpower the background.
person from their eyes. The expression in your 
subject’s eyes concisely conveys the nature of your
relationship with them: if there is warmth and
cordiality, we will be drawn to the image. 
When you see someone you want to photograph, 
get your equipment ready. Set aperture depending 
on whether you want minimum depth of field with
a blurred background, or if you want your image to 
be sharp throughout. If your subject is dark-skinned, 
set any exposure compensation to underexpose by
around 2⁄2⁄23⁄3⁄ stop. Anticipate the best angle, bearing in
mind the direction of ambient lighting and the 
background, as well as what the subject is doing. 
Only when prepared should you reveal your 
intention to photograph. The rest involves simple 
life skills: approach honestly and openly, make eye 
contact, and say hello in the local language.
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS

67
◀ Incongruities
A glamorous pirate in sunglasses is not something you
encounter every day. But if you are in Arezzo, Italy, you may 
see a band of “pirates” rampaging through its most perfect
piazza regularly as an event put on for tourists. Treat such
unexpected opportunities as a gift, and photograph freely.
▲ Fresh views
Every corner of Burano, one of the prettiest settlements in 
the bay of Venice, cries out to be photographed. If you are
not satisfied making the same old images, there is still room
for innovation. You need a little more patience—here, to
wait for water to settle to mirrorlike calm—and a bit of luck,
too. By seeking out the unexpected, the surprising shots will
come to you: be ready for the unusual, and stay alert—you
may get only one chance.
TRY THIS
Restricting the focal lengths available to you helps 
improve agility, composition, and your ability to get
close to subjects. Start with a maximum of 90mm
or equivalent and compose your images by moving
toward or away from your subject. Try to fill the
height of a landscape format or width of a portrait
format with a person’s head and shoulders. Next,
learn to use a 50mm setting. Then a 35mm setting:
try to fill the frame with action and content. You
can do this only by stepping inside the action. As
you gain experience, try to use even shorter focal
lengths; however, 24mm or less is widely considered
very tricky for general use.
VACATIONS AND TRAVEL

68
▲An outsider’s eye
There is no clear distinction between travel and documentary
photography. A single shot of Himba and Herrero women
collecting water makes an engaging travel shot. But they
are walking in the heat of the day instead of the cool of 
evening: this tells us something is amiss. Indeed, there was
a lion attack earlier, so it was safer to walk during broad
daylight. Revealing aspects of a subject’s life can lend a
documentary element to your vacation photographs.
RESPECT YOUR HOSTS
You will find that when you dress and behave
appropriately, you will receive a warmer, more
cooperative reception when you want to
photograph. Treat your hosts’ country with the
same respect you would expect of tourists in your
homeland. Dress in a style that is appropriate to
the cultural or social expectations of the country
you are in: wear long sleeves and cover your legs
if you expect to visit religious sites. By the same
token, be respectful of the locals: don’t insist on
taking pictures of people if they wave you away
or seem unhappy about it. And always keep in
mind the sustainability principle that you should
leave a country as you would wish to find it.
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS
VACATIONS AND TRAVEL CONTINUED

69
▼On the road
The advantages of staying awake while traveling cannot be
stressed enough. After six hours on a bus it is easy to nod off,
but you would miss telling moments such as this: the driver
had to be paid from outside because the bus was so full.
◀ Way of life
It is natural to concentrate 
on the exotic beauties of a 
country, its customs and
way of life. While it may
not be very beautiful, the
realities of day-to-day
existence in a foreign land 
are not only more true and
useful for an understanding
of the country, they are
vastly more interesting.
You do not need to
seek out poverty or
destruction—you are not
working on a documentary
story. All it takes is to keep
your eyes open and camera
at the ready: this scene in 
Tajikistan came and went 
in a second. 
▶ Selective view
Ostensibly this is a study of contrasts—between the
baby’s hands and those of his grandmother; of colorful
clothes against tanned skin—but this view also delicately
draws the viewer’s gaze from the subjects’ faces, making 
an unusual portrait.
VACATIONS AND TRAVEL

70
WEDDINGS
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS
The documentary approach to weddings is as much
a reaction against stiffly posed formal shots as it is a 
product of improved cameras. This enables every
wedding guest—from grandmother to toddler—to 
capture pictures of the event. If you are not the 
official photographer, you can shoot freely without 
concerns for comprehensive coverage of all guests 
and ensuring all the formal groupings are captured. 
Professional challenge
The role of the professional wedding photographer 
is to provide a set of unique images that will record
and evoke the experience of one of the biggest days 
in a couple’s lives. To do this they must search for
angles and interpretations that, as well as being 
creative and inventive, raise their images well above 
the ordinary: a celebration of a special day should
be matched with some very special pictures. A
popular solution is to capture the couple in a 
fantasy setting. Use an off-camera flash to balance
against twilight skies or shoot the couple against a 
plain screen (green is preferred but any plain or 
black background can work) ready to composite 
against a glorious sunset or woodland scene.
At the same time, you need to capture all the key 
moments, too. Make sure you are familiar enough
▶Bride showered
The intimate moments
of preparation may be
barred to all but female
photographers or close
relatives, but it is worth
capturing the process
of adorning not only the
bride but the bridesmaids
and best man as well. The 
images display the process 
of transformation—from
the ordinary to the
celebratory. Use limited
depth of field to emphasize
key elements such as the
jewelry and accessories.
with the ceremony to position yourself ready to 
take the shot of the exchange of rings, the signing of 
the register, or the first married kiss. Take care not to 
interrupt delicate moments such as the exchange of 
vows or the blessing from the presiding person.
One 
straightforward 
way 
to 
distinguish 
professional work from others is to work with a very
large-aperture lens—for example, an 85mm f/1.4 or 
135mm f/2—which you can use exclusively at large 
aperture settings. The resulting shallow depth of 
field and softness is unlikely to be matched by 
people using compact point-and-shoot cameras.
Besides, the soft focus also perfectly suits the
romantic nature of the subject.
Another way to stand out from the crowd is to
use available light instead of flash when working
indoors or at night. Full illumination by flash is often 
necessary, but it easily destroys the atmosphere of 
dim or colored lights. 
Rounded views
The inventive wedding photographer does not
neglect to record those aspects which others may
not think of capturing, but which create a rounded 
record of the event. Often the most charming and
amusing moments occur in the run-up to the main 

71
▶Supporting cast
Everyone and everything is important on the big day: 
the bride’s flowers will be seen in many pictures taken
by the guests, so aim for a shot that is less obvious. Here,
backlighting and graceful continuation of lines gives charm
to the complementary beauty of bride and bouquet.
▲Hilarity seriously shot
The funny moments of a wedding are essential for
recreating happy memories of the event. However, you
can shoot them with some sophistication. Wide-angle
views lit with flash are commonplace. Try using a long
focal length setting and exploit blur and overlap. In this
shot, the blurred figures frame the beautiful profile of 
the bride, while the champagne glass helps anchor
attention around the smiling faces.
▲Transitional states
While the key moments, such as the exchange of rings and
the kiss, are must-have shots, the quiet moments also make 
up the event as a whole. These transitions often reveal
touching moments and true relationships between family
members and guests. Here, a bridesmaid walks happily
between older family members, her head of dark hair
framed by backlighting against the dark jacket of another 
guest in front of her.
event: seek out fleeting moments in the frenetic 
activity of preparation. A lot of effort goes into the 
details, so make sure you look at the rows of 
champagne glasses, the furniture decorations, and
the details of the clothing and flowers.
Follow on
Once you have captured all the happy moments,
you have completed only half the work. Unlike 
many photography assignments, the choice of 
images is one in which the photographer may be
expected to lead, as clients are usually not 
experienced in picture editing. In addition, some 
images are obligatory, whatever small technical
defect they may have.
Remember to be clear to the couple about the 
image rights at all times, and when handing over 
the images remind them that the pictures should 
not be reproduced or posted on social networking 
sites without further fees.
WEDDINGS

72
CHILDREN
Children tend to be photographed in different 
ways according to whether they are known to us 
or not. The reason for this is that we tend 
to approach familiar subjects in a different way to
unknown ones. For example, most people prefer
to photograph their own children when they are 
looking their best in attractive, clean clothes, and 
smiling for the camera. However, the opposite
approach may present itself when, for example,
you are visiting another part of the world and you
photograph a child as part of the local color of 
a street scene. This will naturally give your image a 
very different feel. 
A change of attitude
So the photographic challenge is clear: how to 
bring the two approaches together, being more 
honest when photographing our own children, 
while being respectful and considerate when 
our photographs feature other people’s children,
especially those from other cultures. 
Informed photography is the key, as the more we
know, the more perceptive our photography 
becomes. For example, try to learn about the games
that children play, or take an interest in their 
◀Having a chat
Children often learn to pose
for the camera from an
early age. If you are looking
for a more natural portrait, 
try engaging your subjects 
in conversation. When they 
become interested in what 
you are talking about, they
will stop playing up to the
camera. They also stop
running about and become
easier to keep in focus,
giving you a chance to 
set maximum aperture
to throw the background
out of focus, and use a
shorter exposure time.
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS
pastimes. If you are photographing your own
children, try to avoid obviously staged images, and 
instead concentrate on capturing some of the 
spontaneous moments that occur in everyday
family life. Children tend to pose either too readily 
or not at all. The trick is to wait for them to get 
bored of you. Keep shooting, whatever they do: 
aim at them if they are acting up, or aim away if they 
are being shy. Sooner rather than later, young
children will tire and let you get on with shooting. 
All you need is to have more patience than they do.
PUBLIC STANDARDS
Taking photographs of children may create
unexpected risks for the photographer because
of the—entirely understandable—desire to protect
children’s safety. Photography of children who
are not your own should be approached with
caution, particularly in public spaces such
as parks, beaches, and near schools. Always
seek the permission of parents or legal guardians
(caregivers may not have sufficient authority) 
before starting to photograph. If you are at all in
doubt, err on the side of caution.

▲ The eyes of mistrust
A lad in the high mountains of Tajikistan looks decidedly
cautious, as well he might. More important to him than
how he looks on camera is whether he will have to fight
▲ Child's world
Images of children are not only about them, but also about
the space they inhabit. By zooming out, you can show the 
child in relation to the world at large.
▲ Otherwise occupied
A distraction can be beneficial for the photographer: it
not only takes the child’s eye off the camera, it can show 
your subject lost in his or her world. Recording the best
of these moments may call for many exposures, but do
not be tempted to keep only “the best”: these judgements
vary over time, so hold on to everything you shoot.
With cheap mass storage readily available, your only
regret will be deleting an image.
to keep the birds he has captured in his makeshift cage.
Once he overcame his mistrust, a very different image
resulted, but it is this edgy image that is more interesting.

74
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS
HINTS AND TIPS
Children can be a challenge in technical terms, as
they are small, low down, and move quickly. They
require stamina and fitness on the part of the
photographer, as well as quick reflexes. You can
help yourself by trying out these techniques:
▪With very small children, work at a fixed distance:
focus your lens manually to, say, 18in (0.5m) and
keep your subjects in focus by leaning backward
or forward as they move. Small children move
very quickly but usually only over short distances.
This method requires little effort and can be
superior to relying on autofocus.
▪When you first photograph a group of children,
fire off a few shots in the first minute—they need 
to get used to the sound of the camera or light
from the electronic flash, while you need to
exploit their short attention span. Once they have
heard the camera working, they will soon lose
interest and ignore you. If, however, you wait for 
them to settle before taking your first picture, they
will be distracted by the noise.
▪For professional photography of children, the best
cameras to use are CXL (compact interchangeable
lens) or SLR cameras, preferably equipped with a
prime lens. These give you more flexibility than 
compact point-and-shoot cameras. You also need
the shortest possible shutter lag (the time interval
between pressing the shutter and actually recording
the picture) if you are not to miss out on the really
spontaneous images.
▪In low light, increase the ISO setting in preference
to setting the lens’s maximum aperture when using
nonprofessional lenses. If you have high-quality
optics, use the widest aperture freely, but you will
need to focus more carefully. Avoid using flash
lighting except as a fill-in (see pp. 40–9).
CHILDREN CONTINUED

75
CHILDREN
◀ A candid 
approach
A large fountain in hot
weather is irresistible to 
children anywhere in the
world. The problem here
was trying to photograph
the boys without them 
realizing—otherwise they 
would start playing to the
camera. I mingled with
the crowds, enjoying the
sun, and waited for a
suitable grouping and
rare moment of repose.
▶ Sibling rivalry
A set of nothing but
smiling, happy pictures
of children quickly makes 
for predictable and dull
viewing. Children also get
angry, cry with frustration,
exhaust themselves, and
fight or play with siblings.
With compact and
responsive cameras and
camera phones, you can 
be on hand to record all
those telling moments.

76
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS
LANDSCAPES
The natural landscape—topographies of land and
water decorated with plant forms and lit by sun 
and sky—is one of the most accommodating yet 
challenging areas of photography. A landscape may 
be photographed from any angle, at any time, and 
in any weather. But you have to do all the work. 
Stylistically, you also have decisions to make about 
how much of your own individual mark you wish to
make in your images.
Patience and perseverance
A vital but little-appreciated truth about landscapes 
is that anywhere can look wonderful at some point
in time. A plowed field, the edge of a forest, or a 
grand sweeping vista is, photographically, a set of 
ingredients just waiting for the key elements of light, 
sky, and your personal vision to come together to
concoct a stunning result. You just need to be sure 
to be there for the occasion. A glorious landscape 
photograph is seldom the product of a happy 
accident. While practice can prepare you to be in 
the right place at the right time, the truly great
▲Clarity and tranquility
Use man-made structures to contrast with topography:
these sharply-defined silhouettes provide a foil to the soft
clouds and distant hills of New Zealand’s Northlands.
▼Self inclusion
It is fun to include yourself in a view, but there are many 
ways to do it. Here, the long, late-afternoon shadows
suggested a natural way to put ourselves into the shot.
images are usually the result of a photographer
returning to the same spot again and again, 
sometimes over a period of years. From time to
time they may obtain a successful shot, but they 
know there will always be a better one—tomorrow,
next month, perhaps next year. Over time, these 
photographers also explore and refine their
viewpoint and composition, until, one quiet and 
perfect moment, everything comes together.

▲Upstaging
As one’s eye is drawn to the monumental landforms—here
in Valley of the Gods, USA—it is natural to focus on the
distant features. You could use extensive depth of field to 
keep the foreground in focus, too, but a more inventive
variation is to focus on the small elements at the front,
using a large aperture to blur the giants further away.
▲Three in one
Tone compression is effective not only for scenes with
extremely wide dynamic ranges, but also flatly lit scenes
where you wish to extract shadow detail. Combining three
different exposures of this subject, in the Welsh Marshes,
provided great flexibility over tonal control.
Bare necessities
There are therefore three essentials of landscape
photography—place, time, and means—but the 
most crucial of all is place. Once you see a view that
is promising, it is best to slow down completely—
even put your camera away. Then just walk and
look, walk a little more and look a little harder. What 
you are seeking is a manipulation of the relative 
scale of elements in the scene, with which to create
a powerful sense of space within the picture frame. 
For example, flowers in the foreground appear as 
tall as mountains in the distance, and pebbles in a 
river bed are the size of trees further upstream. Your
viewers share your experience of the world and the
distorting effects of perspective, so they understand 
the real relative sizes of objects. What they see in 
your image leads them to reconstruct the spirit of 
the landscape in their minds, but guided by you. 
You will find that miniscule changes in position or 
height can make the difference between a revealing
image and one that is unsurprising and ordinary.

78
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS
LANDSCAPES CONTINUED
Once you find your position, you may need to wait 
for the light to add the finishing flourish. This might
mean pausing while a cloud makes its way across the 
sky, or returning again and again until you catch the 
perfect moment. Light may be raking and dramatic 
in effect, or flat, bringing out subtleties of tone. On 
three different days you might obtain three very 
different images—and all from the same position.
Style and means
A tradition has developed that demands large,
high-resolution cameras for “proper” landscape
photography. This is an issue of style rather than
technique. If you wish to make poster-size prints 
and you prize extreme detail, by all means use the
highest quality equipment you can afford. However, 
even a camera phone is perfectly acceptable if 
you actively use the imperfections of the capture—
such as light fall-off—as features of your images.
Furthermore, any lens may be used, from ultra
wide-angle through to the longest telephoto.
▼Unconventional views
In a world saturated with beautiful travelogue-style 
landscape images, there is a place for the more dispassionate
view, one that does not flinch from showing scarring from 
agriculture or the impact of industry. This image, from the
Marche of Italy, was made with a long telephoto zoom to
pull far-separated elements onto the same plane.
Working in black and white is another way to 
individualize your landscapes: the exact way you
remove the variety of hues to translate a full-color 
facsimile of the view turns any black-and-white 
image into an artistic interpretation. You might also 
manipulate the image toward a vintage look, to 
make it appear to be the product of irregularities of 
processing. Other ways to build a personal style
include consistent use of extremely shallow depth of 
field, by setting apertures not smaller than f/2, for 
example. Some photographers use long telephoto 
lenses, while others exploit motion blur through 
long exposure. Or you could try overexposure in flat
lighting to obtain pale, bright results.

79
LANDSCAPES
◀Vintage views
While it always pays to
capture the best image
you can at the time,
the demands of the
environment may mean
that you have to grab what 
you can when you can. This
image of a snow-line walk 
in Tajikistan was improved 
in post-processing by 
adding a layer of tone and
vignetting to suggest it was
captured by early
processes.
▲ Friendly shadows
Often treated as an enemy, shadows are in fact a landscape
photographer’s friend: they sculpt shapes, define textures,
and delineate distance. Fully lit, this scene lacked depth, but
when a cloud darkened the foreground, it was visually
separated from the valley sides that were still in sun. A
duotone effect (see pp. 162–3) recompresses the tones.
▲ Cold toning 
Conversion from color darkened the blue shadow areas 
in this snowy scene in Kazakhstan, allowing sunlit areas to
define the topography. Changing to Duotone mode, a blue
tone was added to enhance the effect—with special care
taken to keep the highlights white (see pp. 162–3).
HINTS AND TIPS
All landscape views respond well to being shot as
black-and-white or converted from color. However,
default conversions often deliver a lackluster result.
▪Convert color using channel mixing or similar
controls that allow different tones to be assigned
to bands of color, for example, to make greens
lighter, or to darken the blues (see pp. 148–53).
▪After conversion, exposure and contrast may
need improvement: use tonal controls such as
Levels (see pp. 120–1) or Curves (see pp. 144–7)
to effect this. 
▪Try applying unsharp masking (see pp. 126–9): 
this applies a micro-contrast adjustment to
edges, which adds sparkle to an image.

80
LANDSCAPES CONTINUED
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS
▲Dawn mist
Landscape photography may seem leisurely, but often you 
have to act quickly. As I drove out of Auckland airport just
after dawn, this mist-shrouded scene presented itself. I
knew that it would disappear quickly, so I jumped out of 
the car and raced back down the road to record it. Just
seconds later, the rising sun masked the delicate hues in
the sky and the mist evaporated. 
▶Receding lines
It is unusual to find strong
parallels running from side
to side in a landscape.
Here, in the Cinqueterre, 
Italy, the eroded strata of 
the rocks in the foreground
inspired a composition
that strongly converges 
to the point of land at the
extreme right-hand edge 
of the picture. A gull
helpfully defines the
principal Golden Section 
of the image.
POLARIZING FILTERS
One of the most popular accessories for the
landscape photographer is the polarizing filter.
This is a neutrally dark filter in a rotating mount.
When fixed on the front of a lens, pointing away
from the sun, then rotated, it has the effect of 
making blue skies appear much darker at certain 
settings compared to others. This is because blue
light from a clear sky vibrates in a small range of 
angles: as you turn the filter it passes some light
at most positions but when it reaches the
“crossed” position it maximally blocks the
light from the sky, making it dark. 
Note that maximum darkening may not be a good
idea as the sky can appear almost black. The filter
can also be used to reduce reflections on glass,
leaves, or water. This makes it useful for controlling
scenes with a large luminance range, as it reduces
the specular shine on smooth surfaces. This filter
is best used on an SLR, where you can monitor
changes through the viewfinder. The circular type
of polarizer should be used with SLRs, but linear
polarizing filters may be usable with some cameras,
such as compact interchangeable lens cameras
(CILs); check your instructions to confirm.

81
◀ Lowly views
With experience, you will
find it helpful to work
within the framework 
of a project, rather than
searching for any kind of 
promising landscape. This
image was taken with a 
fish-eye lens as part of a
project that views the
world as seen by local
wildlife—from close to the 
ground, or partly obscured
by foliage, or both.
LANDSCAPES

82
CITYSCAPES
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS
As most of the world’s population lives in cities, it is 
natural that the city is one of the richest sources of 
pictures. In any city in the world, whether drab or 
stunning, medieval or modern, you will find endless
potential for photography. Indeed, entire careers in 
photography have been built on the photogenic 
qualities of cities as diverse as Prague, New York, 
Delhi, and Paris. Cityscapes concentrate on the 
architecture of the built environment and its layout,
shapes, and structure. While it does not actively
exclude people, cityscape photography largely 
ignores them, unlike street photography.
Finding inspiration
In choosing an approach, it is instructive to follow
in the footsteps of great photographers who have 
portrayed their beloved cities, such as Alfred Stieglitz 
of New York, Josek Sudek of Prague, and Eugene 
Atget of Paris. Their achievement was to show the 
myriad aspects of their cities without any kind of 
artifice, and all in black-and-white. In fact, working
in black-and-white can simplify your compositions, 
allowing the viewer to appreciate form, texture, and
depth without the distraction of color. 
However, you have important advantages over
photographers of the past: you are highly mobile 
and can work in just about any lighting condition. 
Exploit the capabilities of your camera and work to
capture images not only in bright sunshine, but on 
rainy days, in the fog, or at night.
Exploration
You can go further than the masters of the past: use
color in an abstract way, capture the surprisingly
deep and rich colors of the city at night, or zoom
into the distance to find magnified views that are 
not visible to the naked eye. 
The city is a rich source of reflections and 
unintended juxtapositions—of shapes, colors, and
signs. Just as a landscape can be seen in overview as
well as in detail, you will find cities yield different
layers of meaning and possibility with each change 
of scale. You could also choose one prominent
landmark and investigate the way it can be seen 
from different places all over the city.
▲London Eye
Capturing the colors of city lights at night is less of a
challenge than it used to be. This shot was taken from
London’s giant ferris wheel at the top of its trajectory,
using a high ISO and underexposing by 1.5 stops. 
BUILDING RIGHTS
In the majority of cities you can photograph
buildings freely. But exercise caution if any that
are in view are flying a national flag or appear
to be military in character. In some countries
photography of bridges, airports, police stations,
armed forces barracks, and government buildings
is illegal. Beware that commercial use of images
featuring certain iconic buildings such as
Rockefeller Center, the Flatiron Building (New 
York), the Eiffel Tower, the Louvre, and the Pei
Pyramid (Paris) may be subject to legal processes
by various rights holders. Restrictions may also
apply to commercial use of images that show 
works of art, such as installations or sculptures.

83
CITYSCAPES
▲ Contrasts and conflicts
Using a long-focal-length lens brings relatively distant
objects together, emphasizing their differences—old
apartments in Paris and the high-rise building appear
to be right next to each other, but are in fact hundreds
of feet apart. Frame from as far away as possible, using
a zoom to adjust image size and composition.
▲ City skies
The skyline of a city is defined as much by the sky above—
the so-called “negative space”—as by the outlines of the
buildings themselves. And if we are given a gloriously
fluffy-clouded sunset, so much the better. This view of 
Singapore needs to give emphasis to the sky as the “hero”
of the shot with the skyline taking a secondary role, so it
can be allowed to go into deep tones.
▼ Working with the enemy
Cars rarely contribute to city scenes in a positive way,
yet they are perennially present, and are therefore a
common problem for photographers. Try to use them
to your advantage, for example by making a feature of 
the red lights of a traffic jam at night, or by looking for
interesting reflections in their windshields, and so on.

84
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS
CITYSCAPES CONTINUED
▶ Supplementary flash
Noticing these flowers first, I went over to 
photograph them only to find the tower
unexpectedly in view. The flash on the camera
illuminated the foreground flowers but not
those a little further away. The shadow visible
on the bottom edge of the image was caused
by the lens obstructing the light from the flash.
▲Working around a subject
A simple exercise is to take an obvious
landmark and then shoot as varied a set of 
views of it as possible. These images of the
Sky Tower in Auckland, New Zealand, were
all taken as I went about my business in that
city. This shot, taken from a car, was very
nearly missed—it is of such an ordinary scene,
yet there is a rhythm in the multiple framing,
a sense of a hidden story. In addition, its crisp
colors make it a surprisingly rich picture. The
passenger seat of a car makes a wonderful
moving platform from which to work.

85
CITYSCAPES
◀ Distant view
The Sky Tower is visible even an hour’s 
ride away by hydrofoil. A strong 
telephoto perspective—produced by
the 35efl of a 560mm lens—leaps over 
the distance and appears to compress
the space between the intervening 
islands. The haze has desaturated
colors to give a nearly neutral gray.
▲Silhouette lighting
The silhouettes of a variety of trees 
serve to frame the sleek, industrial lines
of the distant tower. As the trees are
represented by shape alone, they look
very sharp—although depth of field in
such views appears extensive, it is, in
reality, an illusion of perception.
◀ Converging lines
Generally you would want to avoid
pointing the camera steeply upward at 
buildings, as the strong convergence of 
normally parallel lines causes distortion.
However, this can be exploited to create
the sense of disorientation or of being
loomed over. Its effectiveness is
increased in this view by avoiding any 
alignment between the picture frame
and the sides of any buildings.

86
LOW-LIGHT PHOTOGRAPHY
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS
Taking photographs in low light used to involve
extra lighting, the use of ultra-large aperture lenses,
or inevitable loss of image quality—or all of these 
things. No longer. The sensitivity of sensors has
improved to the point that images can be captured 
by the light of the moon. The result is an extension
of the world of available light photography. Simply 
set a high ISO setting, for example, ISO 1600 or
greater, and a large aperture: you are then ready to
concentrate on artistic issues, rather than struggle
with technical limitations. If your camera produces 
noisy images at high ISO settings, you can deal with 
the problem in post-processing (see pp. 124–5).
Perception shift 
The most thrilling aspect of low-light photography
is that the camera sensor is not subject to the same 
limitations as the human eye when perceiving color 
in low light. In brief, sensors see almost as much 
color in low light as they do in bright light (there is
a slight reduction due to increase in noise). This
means that scenes that appear lacking in color, or 
where lights appear white, will record with much 
more color than you can see. This is particularly true
of the evening sky: what appears gray to our eyes 
can be recorded as brilliant dark blues, while
colorless city lights can be recorded as yellows, reds, 
or even greens. With a little experience, you will 
learn how to exploit these differences between our 
own visual experience of low light and the images 
that can be captured on camera. 
Staying in the dark
One aspect of low light photography that poses 
problems for many photographers is how to allow
dark subjects to stay dark. In general, you are aiming 
for low-key images (see pp. 38–9), that is, images in 
which the key tones are darker than mid-tones. The
key tone should convey the sense of low light, while 
important details are distinguished and, at the
same time, colored lights are not overexposed. This 
means that you override auto-exposure to -1 to -2
stops; in other words, you set the exposure as
underexposed to the usual meter reading from -1
stop to -2 stops, or even more.
Remember to set any automatic flash to remain 
off. If the flash is effective at all, it is effective in 
destroying the character of the lighting. And at 
distances greater than about 10ft (3m), built-in flash 
has no effect whatsoever on the scene.
◀Twilight zone
The half-light between the day and the onset of full
nighttime darkness is a truly magical time as you can easily
balance foreground and sky light. At the same time, colors
seem much more intense than at any other time, with the
sensors capturing all the perceived brilliance. Underexpose
by at least 1 stop to obtain rich colors.

87
LOW-LIGHT PHOTOGRAPHY
▲ Noisy interior
Even when there is dazzling sunshine outside, the interiors
of buildings can be very dark—as was the case here in the
hall of The Casino, Venice. Tripods were not permitted, so I 
pressed the camera against the mirror to keep it steady
during the exposure, which I set at 1 stop less than metered.
As noise is greatest in dark shadow areas and this image is
almost all dark shadow, noise levels were judged to need
▲ Night blindness
To the eye, this scene appeared to be hopelessly dark, 
relieved only by the bright points of the city lights, and the
pale blue glow of the pool’s underwater illumination.
Exposed at -1.3 stop to the metered reading, the image 
revealed blues and purples in the distant hills and the city.
The image also made the light in the trees, which came
from distant street lamps, more easily visible.
▲Black as night
When there is very little light in the sky, any attempt to
capture it will result in overexposure of lights on the
ground. In this image of Pisa and the River Arno, the main
concern is to expose the street lamps correctly: the better-
lit buildings are overexposed and the sky is featureless. But
what we really want is the lovely reflection in the river.
post-processing. For normal purposes, noise reduction
filters in standard software such as Adobe Lightroom, Apple
Aperture, and Adobe Photoshop produce acceptable 
results. For high and obtrusive levels of noise, use speciality
software such as Topaz Denoise or Noise Ninja.

88
ANIMALS
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS
When photographing a much-loved pet, it is easy 
to let your feelings influence the creation of the 
image. A more detached approach—in which you 
aim for visual interest in addition to the aesthetic 
qualities of the animal—is sure to result in more 
successful images, with appeal that extends beyond 
immediate family. Look for interesting compositions 
by focusing not only on the face; wait for moments 
of elegant gesture or expressive action. 
Unusual approaches
You can broaden the scope of your images by
including the relationships between people and
their pets, or the contrasts between human and 
animal behavior. The challenge lies in finding original 
or illuminating approaches to the subject. One 
controversial technique is to use unusual props, or 
even clothes—take a look at the work of the artist 
William Wegman, who achieved worldwide acclaim 
for his portraits of Weimaraner dogs. Or you could 
experiment with abstract images. The isolated details 
of just about any animal can be rendered with 
beautiful results, for example using dramatic lighting 
to highlight sculptural detail on the body of a horse.
Consider shooting in black and white (with or 
without tinting) or sepia instead of full color. Basic 
manipulations such as cross-processing (see pp. 
164–5) can lift animal portraits out of the ordinary.
▶ All shapes
All kinds of animals are
kept as pets. Pursuing the
idea that owners look like 
the animals they adore, you
could track down people
who keep different kinds
of animals, and photograph
animal and owner together. 
This image of a golden
eagle with his falconer in
Kyrgyzstan provides a rich 
testament to relationships
between man and animal.

89
ANIMALS
◀Quick reflexes 
A cold, windswept beach
makes an unusual setting 
for pet photography, but
it also presents many 
opportunities. For a split
second a picture may 
present itself—you need to 
stay alert to record it. Here,
the dogs not only appear 
to blend with the tones of 
the beach, they also seem
to be responding to the 
contours of the landscape. 
The original color image
was converted to black 
and white, then tints
were added to hint at
the natural colors.
▼Laying low 
This puppy makes a 
wonderful subject, but 
you can raise the bar by
looking for an angle that 
is unusual, yet natural and 
intimate. As with people, 
work with your subject to
gain their trust so you can 
catch them looking happy
and relaxed.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICE
Proud pet owners seeking professional portraits
of their animals can provide a good source of 
work for a photographer. Although potentially 
unpredictable, pets can also be most rewarding
subjects, and the immediacy of digital photography
means that you should easily be able to make a
varied range of images for your clients to choose
from. You can display the images immediately
on a monitor, or even simply on the camera’s
preview screen—this spontaneity can be a great
asset, especially if the owners have seen you 
capturing their pets’ charming antics. It also saves
time and enables you to fulfill the order with the
bare minimum of delays.

90
ANIMALS CONTINUED
Know your subject
Animals can be notoriously tricky subjects. They 
do not respect your wishes—in fact, it often seems 
that they know precisely what you do not want 
them to do, and then do it. In these circumstances, 
knowledge of the animal’s behavior can be as
important as photographic skill. 
Having an appropriate lens for the kind of image
you want to make will also save you a great deal of 
time and trouble. Normal to medium-long focal 
lengths are the most useful for portraits, and wide-
angle lenses are good for shooting in aquaria, and 
for scene-setting shots. The smaller the animal,
the longer the focal length needed to fill the frame.
Very long focal length lenses are best for following
highly mobile animals, as you only need to pan the 
lens a little to follow them as they move about. 
Animals with very long heads such as horses are
also much easier to photograph from a distance: set
a medium-small aperture to ensure depth of field
covers the whole length of the head. 
Animals in captivity
Modern zoos in major cities are taking on the role 
as centers for the study and preservation of 
wildlife; they are often models of animal care. You
can see well-fed animals in something that 
resembles their natural habitat, and for many 
people, zoos offer the only chance to get up close 
to wild or exotic animals. Of course, this offers 
many opportunities for photographing animals 
you would not normally come into contact with.
Zoos are ideal places to practice elements of 
wildlife photography before venturing into the 
field. You will learn that if you set up at the right 
place at the right time, your wait for the right shot
can be greatly shortened—and from this you learn 
the importance of knowing your animal and its
habits. Try to pick a time for your visit when the 
zoo will not be too busy, for example midweek 
mornings. It may be possible to gain privileged 
access to some of the animals by approaching the 
relevant keepers or the zoo director, and offering
free photographs for use in the zoo’s publicity 
material or on its website.
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS
▶The right moment
When taking pictures of 
animals in zoos, you can
take your time to wait for
a perfect expression or
composition—family
groups are especially
interesting to watch. Keep 
shooting and pick the best
shots later: try not to review 
your images while on
location because you are 
bound to miss something.
▼Eye to eye
It is thrilling to be close to 
a normally elusive animal,
such as this giant otter.
Even if you know it is tame, 
it is wise to keep your
distance: use the long end 
of a zoom with a high ISO
setting to enable you to set
a combination of relatively
small aperture and short
exposure time.

◀In their element
In modern zoos it is possible
to photograph animals in
their element, such as a
polar bear underwater,
which only a very few 
specialists ever see in
the wild. Make full use
of the unusual level of 
access provided by the
artificial environment. 

92
PANORAMAS
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS
A panorama is an image that encompasses more of 
a scene than you could see at the time without 
having to turn your head from one side to the 
other. In fact, to obtain a true panoramic view, the 
camera’s lens itself must scan the view from one 
side to the other. 
Visual clues
The give-away visual clue to a panorama is that 
there is necessarily some distortion—if the 
panorama is taken with the camera pointing 
slightly upward or downward, then the horizon, 
or any other horizontal line, appears curved. If 
the camera is held parallel to the ground, any
objects near the camera—usually those at the
middle of the image—will appear significantly 
larger than any objects that are farther away from
the camera.
Digital options
In recent times, the concept of panoramas has 
been broadened (confusingly) to include wide-
angle shots that have had their top and bottom
portions trimmed or cropped into a letterbox 
shape. As a result, the images have a very long 
aspect ratio—that is, the width is much greater than 
the height of the image. These pseudo-panoramas
are popular because they do not suffer the
curvature of horizon or exaggerated distortion of 
image scale of true panoramas. They can be 
created simply by cropping any wide-angle image. 
True panoramas are almost as easy to create. For 
best quality, set the camera on a panoramic head
on a tripod, ensure the camera is pointed 
horizontally, and adjust for the lens in use. 
(Handheld capture can also give acceptable
results.) Next, capture a number of overlapping 
images of the scene from side to side or from top
to bottom. Once you are back at your computer, 
stitch or join all these individual views together 
using readily available software (see 190–1). Many
cameras offer a panorama mode, which stitches
images in camera: you turn on the mode, then 
swing the camera steadily across the scene as it 
takes either a single exposure or several, depending 
on the technology used.
▼ Landscape view
The landscape is the natural subject area for the panorama,
and it also presents the fewest technical problems. In
addition, it can transform a dull day’s photography into a
breathtaking expanse of quiet tones and subtle shifts of 
color. Here, a still day in Scotland creates a mirrorlike
expanse of water to reflect the fringing mountain, thus
adding interest to an otherwise blank part of the scene.
This image consists of six overlapping shots, and it was
created using Photoshop Elements.

93
PANORAMAS
▲Unlikely subjects
You can experiment with component images (left) that
deliberately do not match, in order to create a view of 
a scene with a contradicting or puzzling perspective. The
software may produce results you could not predict (above), 
since it is designed to make the best matches of subject
detail on either side of the join. You can crop the result to
form a normal panoramic shape or leave it with an irregular
shape. While the final picture is by no means an accurate 
record of the building, in Granada, Spain, it may give the
viewer more of the sense of the architecture—of the
never-ending curves and columns.

94
LIVE EVENTS
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS
Photographing live events such as parades, street
parties, or concerts presents many challenges: fast-
moving subjects, unpredictable lighting, and action 
that may be over in seconds. This is also true of 
weddings, family gatherings, or school sports days. 
Fortunately, with today’s marvelous cameras, you
do not need to worry too much about camera 
settings: “sports” mode should cover most of your 
needs. However, if you want more control, set a 
medium ISO of around 400 in good lighting. Using 
SLR and mirrorless cameras, you can set ISO 8000
or more indoors, with shutter priority and an 
exposure time of 1⁄1⁄1250
⁄2⁄
sec or shorter.
Right place, right time
The most important question here has little to do 
with equipment: where exactly should you stand 
to be sure to get the shots you want? The answer 
relies on one part instinct, one part planning, and a 
big dose of luck. 
Instinct is what might prompt you to walk that bit 
further than you intended, or to look around a corner. 
It is what tells you to wait a little longer to capture an
unexpected moment. The vital element to improving
your photography at events is taking the time to go 
this extra distance.
Combine your instinct with careful planning, 
and luck will favor you. Once you have explored the
location thoroughly, choose the best vantage 
points, and have your camera ready at all times. 
Then, when the bride unexpectedly turns around to 
flash a gorgeous smile, for example, you have your 
picture, not only because you were lucky but also 
because you were prepared.
Golden rules
Begin covering the event before it starts: images 
of preparations, such as set-building or makeup
artists at work, produce a well-balanced view.
During the height of the event, keep the camera
switched on and close to your face, or hold it at arm’s 
length above your head to shoot over the crowd. 
You need to be quick, so do not record at the
highest resolution or in RAW format if this slows 
down your camera’s operations.
STAYING SAFE
There are no medals for bravery in photography.
Do not put yourself or others at risk in pursuit of 
your photograph. Ask for advice from the staff 
in attendance, obey all safety notices, and wear
appropriate and high-visibility clothing. Have
your identification pass easily visible so you
aren’t asked to prove identity at inconvenient
times. When photographing high-speed
vehicles, do not shoot from corners unless
there is adequate protection. Keep your wits
about you at all times, and pay attention to your
surroundings, as well as to the viewfinder.

95
LIVE EVENTS
◀All aspects, great and small
Use the full capabilities of your equipment to cover the 
different aspects of live events—the main event, the
supporting activities, and the action on the periphery. Use
wide-angle settings and get into the thick of things whenever
possible. Use normal or wide-angle settings when shooting
people to ensure a good level of involvement. Look out for
colorful details, such as souvenirs and merchandising (above).
▶Character study
The reputations of live
events lie not only in the 
central attractions but also
in their environments. A full
account of an event records 
its context—whether it is a 
theater festival in a Greek 
amphitheater; a car rally
in the desert; or, as here,
at Glastonbury, in England, 
where the music festival
famously turns into a sea
of mud when it rains, as
it usually does.

96
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS
LIVE EVENTS CONTINUED
Sports coverage
While many professional sports events are now 
inaccessible to amateurs, there are still a vast
number of other sporting events open to 
photography. Outdoor events such as marathons 
and triathlons often welcome photographers, as do 
sailing events and gymkhanas. It is worth renting a
long lens such as 300mm or even 400mm, used 
with a monopod or tripod to enable you to “reach” 
right into the action. Amateur sportsmen like to 
have good images of their exertions, so you might 
find a ready market for your work.
When using a zoom lens, choose a loose, wide 
setting for the event, and avoid changing it while 
framing shots, since this slows you down. Don’t 
check the image preview during action: wait for a 
break before reviewing your shots. Remember: the
event is not over until you are off-site. Even when 
the action is over, you can shoot the clean-up, the 
exhausted players, and more.
▲Sharpness and blur
It takes the reflexes of a martial artist to photograph sports
well, and the better you know a sport, the greater your
chance of catching the moment of truth. But remember that
HINTS AND TIPS
The essence of the sports photograph lies in
choosing the right moment to press the shutter. A
split second can represent the moment one tennis
ace turns the tables on another, or one misjudged
tack separates the winner of a sailing regatta from
the also-rans. The strategy for sports photography
is, therefore, constant vigilance to ensure you are
at the right place at the right time.
▪Allow for shutter lag: The time interval between
pressing the shutter and actually capturing the
image is usually at least 1⁄1⁄110⁄1⁄  sec, but can be as
long as ¼ sec, depending on your camera.
▪Use balanced flash: For best results when using 
flash to capture movement, balance the flash 
exposure with daylight. Take care not to endanger
competitors by setting off your flash in their eyes
from close by. 
▪Position yourself carefully: Try to view the event
from a point at which you not only have a good
view of the action, but also from where your
target is not moving impossibly swiftly.
▪Know your sport: Use this knowledge in
your photography. As a race track becomes
worn down, for example, do the riders take
a slightly different route around it? As the sun 
moves across the sky, do the players pass the
ball from a different direction to avoid the glare? 
In dry conditions, do rally drivers take a corner
faster than in the wet?
sports are about movement, so sometimes it is appropriate
to use long exposures to capture action as a blur—this is
certainly true of fast-moving full-contact sparring.

▲Keeping up
Where you want to photograph a lot of activity concentrated
into a short period of time, the best chance of covering it all
is to work with two cameras. Use your compact point-and-
shoot in addition to your SLR, or supplement your compact
with a camera phone. The cameras can be set at different
focal lengths—one to capture wide-angle views (top), the
other to zoom in on the action (above). And if one slows 
down, you can give it a rest and use the other.
THE ART OF PASSES
Many public events around the world are tightly
controlled, both for security and to limit recordings
and photography of the event. From school sports
days to concerts with top artists, you may need to
obtain a pass before taking pictures. Apply to the
organizers for permission, explain your interest, and
give them a reason why they should welcome you.
With commercial events, you may have to sign a
contract limiting the use you make of photographs.
But before you sign away your rights, remember: 
you never know what might happen to make your
photography extremely valuable to you.

98
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS
The 
possibility 
of 
easily 
making 
lifelike 
representations of family and friends was what
most excited everyone about the invention of 
photography, and portraiture remains the most 
cited reason for making photographs today. With 
changes in society, a portrait now means any image
that shows an aspect of a person’s personality. This
means the face may not even be visible or clear. 
In short, stylistically, there are no limits.
Anything goes
It is a very exciting time to take up portraiture: while 
you cannot rest on formulaic solutions, you are also 
no longer limited by them. In fact, anything goes. 
Faces can be hidden in the dark with only a sliver of 
hair visible, or distorted by blur from movement or
lack of focus. You can photograph from behind, 
above, or below; you can have your subject pose 
naturally or with exaggerated artifice; and props, 
clothes, and makeup offer endless possibilities.
Relationship matters
Central to portraiture is your relationship with the 
sitter. How well you know them, and how much
they trust you, may dictate the kinds of poses and 
expressions your sitter can give you. Even with paid
models, a session will go more smoothly once they
understand what you are trying to achieve and are 
able to work with you on it.
A great variety of portraits is possible when
photographing a willing sitter. Once you have
covered the basic, straight-on shots, it is time to 
explore other approaches. Have fun, be inventive 
and, above all, work at a creative partnership with 
your sitter. The following tips will help you get the 
best results from your portrait session:
▪Agree with your sitter the kind of image you wish
to create, or that they wish to see.
▪Review the first few shots with the sitter to show
them what you are trying to achieve.
▪After the first shots, do not show the model any
images until the end of the session unless you wish 
to try some other pose or effect. Constant reviewing 
interrupts the flow of photography.
Technical pointers
We humans retain extremely clear ideas about the 
normal range of facial features: departures from
the norm are obvious. As a result, it is best to avoid 
approaching within touching distance of your 
subject when using short focal length lenses or a
zoom set to the short end of the range, unless you
◀At work
To photograph someone at
work, it is best to let them
do what they normally do:
if they move quickly, watch 
out for moments of quiet,
or learn when it is safe
to ask them to hold a
position. Use all local props
such as tools, desks, and
computers. In this shot, 
the light from a laptop
perfectly balances the
dim evening light in
rural Guyana.
PORTRAITS

99
PORTRAITS
BOKEH
In portraiture more than in any other genre of 
photography, the quality of the blur in the
out-of-focus parts of the image—the bokeh—is
vital to the picture’s success. Whether you expose
with maximum depth of field or not, it is usual for
the majority of the image to be rendered blurred.
If the lens creates blurs that do not blend
smoothly with each other, but instead create 
distinct disk-shaped blobs of color, the result is
very distracting. Good bokeh produces a fuzzy or 
feathered blur, even at high-contrast junctions. At
full aperture, virtually the entire image is composed
of blur, so if you intend to use a portrait lens at
full aperture it is vital that its bokeh is good, and
that is usually a product of top-class design and
construction—in other words, an expensive lens.
▲Transitional mystery
Portraits are most interesting when they do not tell the
whole story, and when they raise more questions than
they answer. In this image, the contrasts between the
refined clothing and the prosaic background, the strong 
shadow, and the cool color tones all intrigue, yet the
whole is visually appealing.
▲Editorial accuracy
Newspaper and magazine markets are the hungriest for
good portraits. There is a constant demand for images
that depict personalities in an attractive but accurate way
in an atmosphere or context that is appropriate to the
feature article or interview. Here the out-of-focus highlights
frame the profile effectively and sympathetically.
▶ Breaking rules
Less than half the face is visible here, the eyes can’t be 
seen, and the hair is obscured. Yet the strong character
and beauty of the subject is apparent. That is thanks to
the inclusion of the accessories: the chic hat, fashionista
shades, and expensive clothes. An image may break the
rules yet still deliver an effective portrait.

100
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS
intend to distort your subject comically. On the
other hand, being able to get so close to someone 
suggests trust and intimacy, so that can be a useful
signifier to exploit.
It is hard to go wrong if you focus on the eye 
nearest the camera, particularly if you are using a 
large aperture (f/2 or greater). This forces attention 
on the all-important eye, while painting the rest of 
the scene with broad, blurred brush strokes. If your
camera uses multiple focusing points, it is easiest if 
you set it to use the focusing point over or nearest
to the eye. It always helps to ensure there are no
highlights or specular reflections in the background,
unless it is an important part of the scene—a desk
lamp or the setting sun, for instance.
Environmental impact
By making portraits outside the studio, you can take
full advantage of your sitter’s environment—their
living or working space—as part of the observation 
about the person. Remember that the size of the
person in the image relative to the space shown is 
intuitively proportionate to the importance of 
the context to the person’s life. For example, if you 
make someone appear small in their work space
you are commenting on their relative power in that 
context: you could have shown them dominant in 
the same space. The environment and person 
reciprocally contribute significance to a portrait.
The following points are also worth bearing in mind:
▪Locating the sitter in the center of the image 
signifies that they truly are intended to be the
center of attention, even if they are small in relation 
to the background.
▪Locating the sitter to one side suggests that
atmosphere, mood, or the environment is just as 
important as the person, particularly if they are 
small relative to the background.
▪If you are working in color, pay particular attention
to colors of objects in the background: they can
contribute information and visual interest, or they 
can tear the image apart. Intense, hot colors are 
distracting, as are bright highlights and shiny objects 
with strong, geometrical shapes. Movement blur in
the background is also distracting.
▪Compositional techniques such as converging 
lines and framing devices, such as doorways or tree 
branches, help direct attention to your sitter.
▪Shallow depth of field with a varied background
works well to bring the sitter forward visually.
◀Team work
Group photographs may
concentrate on the team, in
which everyone is equally
important: the photograph
is really about the team
as a whole and is best
composed as such. Or
groups may be made up
of individuals: it is part of 
accuracy in visual language
that the composition
reflects the dynamics of 
the group of people. Here,
each person is shown
relaxing in different ways,
paying varying levels of 
attention to the
photographer, all held by
the receding lines and 
repeated chairs.
PORTRAITS CONTINUED

101
PORTRAITS
▲Grace under fire
Even when exhausted from hard training in stifling hot 
conditions, this dancer holds herself with peerless elegance,
surrounded by the paraphernalia of her studio. Greens,
browns, and pinks in the scene were too distracting, but 
▲Handyman
While the face is the most emotional and evocative part
of the body, telling much of the story, it does not tell the
whole story. Hands, feet, hair, and arms can all contribute.
In the case of working hands, they may be able to tell the
story by themselves. You usually have to work in low light,
so prepare your settings—high ISO and large aperture for
short exposure time—then approach closely and observe.
▲Keep it simple
For many purposes, such as small business websites,
pamphlets, and picture albums, the straight-forward posed
shot remains the best option. A smile and an example of 
the product in the context of the business is the kind of 
image that is equal to a thousand words. Shoot such images
in flat lighting, with centered composition with a normal or
moderately wide-angle lens.
rendered in black-and-white, we can concentrate on the 
dancer who is framed by the geometric shapes around her.
Unfortunately, the light behind her head is too bright to be 
welcome, but this can be easily removed digitally.

102
CAMERA PHONE PHOTOGRAPHY
PHOTOGRAPHY PROJECTS
The cameras built into modern cell phones
comfortably surpass the quality and capability of 
early digital cameras. By combining utmost 
convenience—you always have a camera with you 
because you always carry your phone with you—
with fair- to good-quality imaging, camera phones 
have become the most widely used type of camera. 
It is worth noting that the companies making the 
most cameras (by a very large margin) are, in fact, in 
the business of making phones.
Bare necessities
One of the main attractions of camera phone 
photography is that you are forced back to the very
basics: with minimal controls, you have no choice 
but to concentrate simply on picture-making. Some 
camera phones allow digital zooming, some offer 
touch-screen choice of focus point and exposure,
and many allow images to be shot in various modes
such as vintage (usually sepia), or with filter effects
applied, either after normal capture or as part of 
image processing (see pp. 156–7). But simplicity is 
the overriding virtue.
Bare technique
For all its simplicity, you can help your camera
phone to produce superior results. The Achilles heel
of the camera is the tiny lens: because it is so small, 
even the smallest smudge or smear will reduce the
quality of the image. Use a microfiber cloth to keep 
the lens scrupulously clean.
▪Hold the phone steadily during exposure: 
squeeze or tap gently for the shot.
▪Give the sensor plenty of light to work with: low 
light produces noisy images.
▪Give the camera time to focus: camera phones 
cannot focus as quickly as larger cameras.
▪Use features that give more accurate focus or
exposure control; for example, on touch-screen 
camera phones such as the iPhone, touching on the 
image shifts the focus and exposure determination 
to that part of the scene.
▪The flash on camera phones is very weak and is 
effective only to about 6ft (2m). Turn it off for more 
distant objects.
▲Project compilation
As image quality is more than acceptable in many camera
phones, there is no reason not to use them for photography
projects. They are especially useful for ongoing projects,
where you need to keep a camera with you at all times,
such as capturing a variety of weather conditions, collecting
interesting cloud formations, or cataloging landforms. 
If you need to make wide-angle views, you can take
overlapping shots that you then stitch together as
if making a panorama (see pp. 190–1).

▲App effects
There are a number of applications available that allow you 
to apply effects to your camera phone images. Some, such
as Instagram, apply the effect to a normally captured image.
Others, such as Hipstamatic, apply the effects as part of the
capture process. This commits you to the effect and is a
challenging and refreshing way to work.
▲Visual notebook
Camera phones are the ultimate visual notebook: you can
use them to snap images of captions in exhibitions, make
visual notes of items of furniture or objects for interior
design, or to help document a house-hunt. The ability to
attach GPS and other data to images increases their value 
for documentation. And, despite everyone being familiar
with phones being used as cameras, a camera phone attracts
much less attention than even a compact camera.
DIGITAL HUB
The modern cell phone is also a camera that
can make calls and connect to the world. Images
captured on a camera phone are easy to send
around the world to social-network sites such as
Facebook to be viewed by friends, upload to
picture-sharing sites such as Instagram or Flickr,
or attach to an email or text message.
▪Ensure the orientation of your images is correct
for its intended use before sending them out.
▪Resize the images to no larger than 640 pixels
on the longer side for quick transmission (if 
that option is available).
▪If you are not in your home country, sending
images can be expensive. Check with your 
service provider to ensure that you do not 
exceed your data limit.


IMAGE
DEVELOPMENT
3

106
WORKFLOW ESSENTIALS
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
Digital workflow is similar to processing black-and-
white film in that there are efficient ways and less 
efficient ways of working. And just like film 
processing, an error can reduce the quality of your
images, or even ruin them. The big difference is in
the numbers of images you can work with: now you 
could have thousands of images after a wedding. 
It is important to avoid having to spend hours in 
front of the computer wading through them. A little 
time planning a workflow will save days over
the course of a year.
Horses for courses
It makes sense to match the flow of images to
suit the project. If you shoot for yourself, a plan
that fine-tunes one image at a time is fine: this is
how it was done in the early days of digital 
photography. One simple plan is to set up
your camera so that you can use the images
immediately—on 
photo-sharing 
and 
social 
networking sites, or for printing out—without any 
post-processing. This workflow is almost effortless
and all that is needed for many users. It is only when
you want higher quality and more control that the
extra effort is justified.
Soft options
One of the key decisions you need to make
is whether to use the same software application—
such as Google Picasa, Adobe Photoshop
or Lightroom, ACDSee, or Apple Aperture—to 
manage and correct your images throughout. 
Lightroom, ACDSee, and Aperture treat all
images nondestructively, operating only on proxy 
files. Alternatively you can use a different 
software package for each task—for example, Photo
Mechanic for managing files, then Adobe 
Photoshop Elements for manipulation. Match the
type of software and its cost with your needs. 
Basic steps 
The principle of workflow is to minimize time at the 
computer by never duplicating work unnecessarily 
and ensuring that at any time in the future, it will be 
easy to find an image. At the time you upload your 
images is when all the details of the shoot are fresh 
in your mind and you know where, when, how, and 
why you made the images. This is when crucial
tagging data and notes should be appended to the 
image. Following the sequence below will give you 
an efficient and time-saving workflow:
▪Ingest: on your computer, create a new folder
named by subject, date, or location, and upload
your images into this. Add metadata such as subject, 
date, location, and copyright to each image. If 
necessary, you can rename the images with
sequential numbering. Finally, you should back up 
the images to a secondary disk. 
▪Inspect: check the technical quality of a sample
of your images. Ensure that they are sharp, well-
exposed, and have accurate white balance. If your 
camera does not turn images that you have shot in 
portrait format to the upright orientation, you
▲ Plain sailing
In the early stages of editing images, you may have wildly
differing images to choose from. Leave the final selection
until you have become very familiar with the shoot. Making
tonal and color adjustments is easiest with proxy-working
software such as Lightroom, Aperture, and ACDSee.

107
WORKFLOW ESSENTIALS
▲ Drastic changes
Substantial image changes, such as layering a sunset with 
a mid-afternoon scene, should be made on a copy of the
original file. Work at full resolution even if you need only
a small final image: perhaps one day someone will want
to use the image large, having seen it on your website.
should do that now. If any of the images appear
corrupted, upload them again.
▪Evaluate: locate the first choices, second choices,
and reject images, and apply ratings to rank them.
▪Apply 
metadata:
write 
information-rich 
captions. Make sure that you add identifying tags 
and other descriptive keywords.
▪Set up: create a new folder for work in progress.
Save images with new filenames if you are making 
changes to the original files. Use a storage device 
different from that holding the original image. 
Straighten, crop, or resize images as required.
▪Enhance: normalize the blacks and highlights
with exposure and curve correction.
▪Soft proof: check how the image will look when 
outputted by reviewing proof colors. Adjust the 
image settings as required.
▪Clean up: remove any flaws such as dust spots.
▪Final effects: apply any drastic changes, such as 
conversion to black and white or sepia. Leave noise 
reduction to this step; apply sharpening, if required.
▪Prepare: if you used layers, use Save As to keep 
the layered image in case you wish to modify the
corrections you applied. Prior to export, flatten the 
image, resize it, and save it in the required format.
▪Use: export directly to the target destination; for 
example, from Lightroom straight into your 
Facebook page. If you cannot export directly, create 
a transit folder for exports.
▪Archive and tidy up: Make backup copies of 
new files on hard disks. If you have created any
folders for temporary files or files for download, 
remove them from your main machine. Double-
check that you have two copies of images from 
your memory cards, then reformat the cards in your
camera so they are empty and ready to use.

108
DOWNLOADING
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
Like it or not, the center of your photographic work
is the computer. It is crucial to download images 
captured on your camera to hard disks under the 
control of the computer, as you can then back up 
and work on the images. Then, when images are
ready to be used, you will upload them from your
computer to picture sites or into emails.
Computer bypass
However, there are ways to avoid using the computer. 
You can download images from a memory card 
directly to a portable storage device that combines 
a hard disk drive with a card reader. Also, you can 
send images from camera phones directly to social
networking sites. Cameras equipped with Wi-Fi can 
connect to the internet and upload images to 
distributed networks—this is popularly known as 
Cloud computing. Having logged-on to your cloud
account using, for example, Google Docs, Dropbox, 
or Box.net you can upload your images to the 
storage space in your account. Sooner or later,
however, the images will need to pass through your 
computer. One reason for this is security: your
digital images are safe as long as you keep copies in 
different places at the same time.
Quick download
The fastest way to download images is to remove 
your camera’s memory card and use a card reader 
connected to your computer via USB 3.0, Firewire 
800, or Thunderbolt—whichever is your fastest 
connector. You can connect your camera directly 
but if you have multiple cards, it saves wear and tear
on the camera to use a dedicated card reader. 
The key to keeping your images safe is to 
download the pictures—as soon as possible—to
your computer’s hard drive or a mounted drive,
leaving the images on the memory card. When you 
can, copy the images to another hard disk, or DVD 
or Blu-Ray disk; then they will be in three different 
places and pretty safe from loss. If you are working 
wirelessly and subscribe to services such as Apple 
iCloud or Adobe Carousel, then upload to these 
services. Only when you are sure your images are
backed-up should you reformat the memory card. 
▲Auto correction
Images may be corrected automatically by the camera
when they are saved or downloaded. If there was a serious
error at the time of capture, the image may appear but be
seriously degraded, but the file itself is not faulty.
▲Incomplete scan
If data recording or downloading was interrupted for some
reason, this results in a blank area. The preview may be
visible but the full file may not open at all. The memory
card may be faulty or the download might need repeating.
▲Bit error
Errors in the memory card or occurring during download
cause a break in the sequence of data, so part of the image
looks fine but the rest is corrupted. Download it again to
isolate the error: if it recurs, the memory card is at fault.

109
DOWNLOADING
▲Choosing color mode
An image’s color mode is crucial to the success and
quality of manipulation. RGB is useful for most image
enhancements, but it is not the only mode. LAB is less
intuitive to understand, but it is most flexible and versatile 
when preserving color data to maintain image quality is a
high priority. Here, the initial RGB capture underwater
(above) was low in contrast and carried an overall green
cast. If left in RGB, Auto Levels correction gives it a bright,
colorful, but not accurate result (above right). In LAB mode,
Auto Levels correction produces true-to-life colors with 
accurate tonality (right).
CHECKING THE IMAGE
▪Check the color mode and bit depth. Files
from scanners may be saved as LAB files. Most
image-manipulation software works in 24-bit 
RGB color, and if the image is not in the correct
mode, many adjustments are unavailable or give
odd results. 
▪Check that the image is clean—that there are no
dust spots or, if a scan, scratches or other marks.
Increasing the contrast of the image and making
it darker usually helps to reveal faint dust spots.
▪Ensure that the image has not had too much
noise or grain removed.
▪Assess the image sharpness. If the image has
been overly sharpened, further manipulation
may cause visible edge artifacts.
▪Is the exposure of your pictures accurate? If not,
corrections may cause posterization or stepped
tonal changes.
▪Is the white balance accurate? If the file is not in
RAW format, corrections may cause inaccurate
colors and tones.
▪Are the colors clear and accurate? If not,
corrections may cause posterization, stepped
tonal changes, or less accurate hues.
▪Check that there is no excess border to the
image. It may upset calculations for Auto Levels
or other corrections. 
▪Check the file size. It should be adequate for your
purposes but not much larger. If it is too small,
you could work on it for hours only to find it is
not suitable for the output size desired. If it is too
large, you will waste time as all manipulations
take longer than necessary.
▪Check the color profile for the image: for general 
purposes, use sRGB; for demanding uses, set
Adobe RGB (1998).

110
IMAGE MANAGEMENT
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
Whether you are a casual, amateur, or professional
photographer, your photographs represent a 
considerable investment. It is not just the cost of the
camera and the computer equipment, but also the
time spent learning how to use the equipment and 
software, not forgetting the time spent on chasing
photos. And, no false modesty here, there is also the
valuable input of your artistry and skill. 
There are two sides to managing your 
photographic assets. One is ensuring that you do 
not lose any, and that they last forever. The other is
to make them easily available—at least to yourself 
and, at best, to anyone who wishes to use them.
Safety in numbers
In the current state of technology, no digital medium
can match film-based images for archival safety—
the ability to survive unchanged and easily used for
more than a hundred years. Those who would like
their legacy to stretch into the next century or two 
may be best advised to return to shooting on film. 
For the more modest, the best strategy is to keep
digital image files in multiple storage systems and in 
multiple places. For small numbers of images, use 
DVD or Blu-Ray disks to archive your images, even 
though these are slow to write and access. Hard
disk systems are much better for working with, but
are less reliable (see p. 216).
Hard disk systems called RAID (redundant array
of independent disks), which allow for the failure of 
one or more disks without any loss of data, are now 
affordable to anyone who takes photography 
seriously. They may cost as much as an SLR, but
they are arguably more important than an extra 
camera if you value your photos. The RAID’s
contents can be backed up on inexpensive desktop 
drives that are kept in different locations—for
example, at a relative’s house. 
Soft gold
The total number of pictures on the internet is
climbing well beyond a trillion, thanks to your 
contribution among several hundred million other 
photographers. Locating a particular image, for 
example, to illustrate a magazine feature or use on 
a leaflet, must be text-based. Metadata or tags (also 
called soft data) are descriptive words, names, and
other data added to or embedded in an image. 
We find an image of Cape Town, for instance, 
not by examining millions of images on the lookout 
for features belonging to South Africa’s great city, 
but by first looking for images carrying the name
tag “Cape Town.” What is more, you might have no 
idea what Cape Town looks like, yet you can collect
dozens of excellent shots merely by searching for 
the tag. In fact, any image failing to carry the tag is 
very unlikely to be found, even if it is the best 
possible shot of the city.
The addition of metadata is an essential skill.
Minimally, metadata should identify the subject or 
event, the date, the location, the copyright holder,
and the photographer. The information should be 
enough for anyone to know for sure what the 
picture is about and to be able to contact you, so it
should carry a caption and your details. In addition, 
keywords that refer to key elements of the image 
and a unique identifier, such as a serial number, can
help anyone to locate your image.
Caption marvel
The rule for an effective caption is simple: answer
the what, when, where, and who questions. Many 
agencies have a limit to the number of characters 
you can use, so it takes some skill and planning to 
get down all the information in the space available. 
While keywords are essential in helping a potential 
user to locate your photograph, the caption may
clinch the deal as it can confirm the exact details 
and timing needed.
Start today
It may seem unnecessary to organize a collection of 
a few hundred images, but it is an easy task, and 
you will learn through the process. If you start 
when you really need to—with a collection of 
thousands 
of 
images—the 
task 
could 
be
discouragingly onerous. So your most important 
decision is to decide to start right now, before you 
lose any precious images in a hard disk crash and 
long before it is really necessary.

111
IMAGE MANAGEMENT
◀File lists
Image files can be shown
in lists that display a 
thumbnail of the image 
together with all its 
associated metadata.
Selecting one of the images 
allows the metadata to be
edited. In software such as 
Apple Aperture (shown 
here) or Adobe Lightroom,
image-enhancement 
controls are available
alongside tools for
organizing material for
slide shows, web pages,
or books.
◀Management
software
One of the best ways to
organize your images is
to use management
software. Applications
worth considering include
Adobe Lightroom, Apple 
Aperture, Extensis Portfolio, 
ACDSee, and Camera Bits 
Photo Mechanic (shown 
here). Not only do all these
programs help you to keep
picture files organized, they
can also create “contact 
prints” and slide shows, as
well as publishing picture
collections to the web.
CALLING NAMES
▪There are two main ways you can name your 
images. You can use the names given by the 
camera, usually a generic DSC1234 or _IMG1234. 
(The underscore prefix means that the embedded
profile is Adobe RGB.) Alternatively, you can name
files more specifically. Professional users will
benefit most from using specific image names.
▪File names are most easily changed at download
time or renamed in a batch.
▪If you create specific names, keep a running
catalog to ensure that each is unique—for 
example, by job number or date.
▪Camera-generated names usually repeat after
9,999 images.

112
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
There is a story about a group of great photographers 
who decided to make a list of what could go wrong 
in photography. They gave up when they reached 
200 items. The defects highlighted here are only the 
common errors that are easy to miss—some even 
for the experienced photographer—leaving out 
the obvious such as poor focus or camera shake.
Original sins
There are two kinds of image defect: those arising 
from inadequacies of equipment such as poor 
image quality, flare, noise, and problems with 
▲Shadow clipping
The opposite of highlight clipping (above) is loss of detail
and color in shadows due to underexposure. It is usually
easier to extract some detail and color from clipped
shadows than from clipped highlights. Recording in RAW
(see pp. 158–61) increases the chance of a successful fill.
▲ Distractions
Some distractions may be avoided altogether through
careful choice of position and framing, but wires and cables
that stretch between buildings, spoiling the view of the sky,
are notoriously difficult to avoid. Treat them as an image
defect, whose removal is part of post-processing.
▲Highlight clipping
When overexposure causes highlights to lose all color and
detail they are said to be clipped. It is impossible to recover
these areas, so they are best avoided altogether. Recording
in RAW format and bracketing exposures for tone
compression (see pp. 168–9) may help.
▲ Noise
When visible, irregular spots of color or large “clumps” of 
light or dark pixels disrupt image detail and color. Noise is
commonly blamed on sensor performance, but can also be
made apparent by post-processing; it is the price you pay
for rescuing underexposed images.
CAPTURE DEFECTS
color. The other defects result from inadequacies 
in technique, such as poor focus or exposure,
camera shake, and unwanted distractions—such as
an object sticking out of a subject’s head, or 
telephone wires across the sky.
To varying degrees, all defects can be corrected
or hidden: this is one of the glories of digital 
photography. However, you will find that you save
yourself a great deal of time and frustration at the 
computer by taking utmost care when capturing 
the image. Your ultimate aim is never to have to 
manipulate an image to make it usable.

113
CAPTURE DEFECTS
▲ Tilted horizon
This problem is commonly caused by cameras that are
heavier on one side than the other, also by using small live
image screens. A tiny tilt looks like an error, but very obvious
tilts look deliberate and can be acceptable. Correcting the
tilt is easy but always involves cropping.
▲ Leaning verticals
Tilting the camera up to take in the full height of a building
usually causes the building to look as if it is leaning back
awkwardly. This often looks like poor technique. But tilting
up strongly is often accepted as a deliberate visual effect.
Small amounts of lean can be corrected.
▲Unbalanced color
Until more cameras use intelligent white balancing, a
common defect is the inaccurate capture of neutrals in the
presence of a strong illuminating color, such as here, where
the red candles cause the white walls to look blue. This may
need careful, hue-specific correction (see pp. 136–9).
▲Excessive depth of field
A common problem arising from the widespread use of 
small sensors, too great a depth of field gives too much
prominence to the background, distracting the viewer
from the main subject. Use post-processing to blur the
background selectively (see pp. 130–3).
Avoid if possible
Certain defects are impossible to correct fully. If a 
lens hood for a wide-angle lens is misaligned it will 
cause shadowing or vignetting in the corners: the 
only way to remove them is to crop the image. The 
same applies to tilted horizons. Flare caused by
pointing the camera at the sun can be extremely 
troublesome to remove or disguise. And, of course, 
poor focus leads to loss of details that cannot be
recaptured. However, some unsharpness or blur
resulting from movement can be reduced using 
modern algorithms.
WORSHIPPING QUALITY
Image quality is usually overrated. While the
combination of a stunning image with technical
perfection is a very fine thing, it is a common
mistake to focus on quality alone. Remember
that many of the greatest pictures in the history
of photography were made on equipment and
film far inferior to even today’s amateur cameras.
But no one complains about their grain or poor
color. Concentrate on making a wonderful image;
quality comes a long way behind.

114
COLOR MANAGEMENT
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
The aim of color management is to control the
imaging chain so that between the subject,
its captured image, the image displayed on a 
monitor, and any of its printed forms, there is the
least possible variation in appearance. The key 
strategy is to define the behavior of each component
in terms of a common standard, known as the
profile connection space.
Digital color management
The central problem is that the color gamut or 
range of reproducible colors of different devices 
vary considerably. It is easy to make a set of 
adjustments that ensure our images appear on our
monitor as they print out: this was what the old
Adobe Gamma control was used for. But we might 
change our printer or update our camera: each 
time we make a change—even of paper type—we 
need to make new adjustments.
The solution is to use a common color space—
essentially that which can be seen by the eye—to
describe how the color reproduction of a correctly 
set up device differs from the standard. This 
generates the device’s profile. Note that the
device must be correctly set up: this is the task of 
calibration. Cameras and printers are essentially 
self-calibrating, but monitors need to be set up
manually because a number of variables (gamma,
white point) need to be set by the operator.
Monitor calibration
There are software-based methods for calibrating
monitors and hardware-based methods. The
former is free but less accurate than the latter, 
which you have to purchase, but prices are now 
a fraction of what they used to be. CRT (cathode 
ray tube) monitors should be warmed up for
30 minutes before calibration, and should be 
recalibrated at least once a month. LCD monitors
need less warm-up time, but should also be 
recalibrated regularly.
After calibration, a profile for the monitor is
created. This should be used as the monitor profile.
In addition, you need to ensure that your work
takes color management into account. This profile 
can be set as the output space or applied to the 
viewed image directly. Applying an output profile 
usually makes the image look duller, but it should
be a close match to the print.
Viewing conditions
It is useful to consider the features of ideal viewing 
conditions, if only to make you realize how far your 
own conditions fail to reach them. Walls should be 
▲On-screen
calibration
On-screen calibration
offers prompts such as
the above, showing steps
for setting luminance
response curves and the
balance between the
three colors. Settings are
altered to match targets.
▲Linear gamma
With the screen set to
Linear Gamma, the overall 
result is very bright, blacks
are gray, and colors look
washed out. Images
adjusted on this screen
would look too dark,
saturated, and contrasty on
normally adjusted screens.
▲1.8 gamma
The 1.8 gamma was
formerly the default setting
in Apple Macs and the print
industry. It is now regarded
as too bright compared to
the 2.2 gamma standard
on Windows machines. A
gamma of 2.0 may be set 
as a compromise.
CALIBRATION
Using the most accurate
monitor calibrators or
using on-screen targets
will be of little help 
if the basic settings for 
gamma and white point 
are not carefully chosen
to suit the end use of 
your images. If you
supply to third parties 
such as stock agencies,
magazines, or printers,
consult them to find
out their preferred
monitor settings.

115
COLOR MANAGEMENT
painted white or a mid-tone neutral gray. Curtains
should not be colored, that is, they should block 
out the light without filtering it—neutral colored 
blinds are best. Light levels in the room should be 
constant, and preferably only bright enough to 
allow you to find your way around the room—
around 4 lux is ideal—and those parts of the image 
that are black should look black on screen.
The monitor should be hooded against local light
sources such as desk-lamps. 
Ideally, prints should be viewed in standard 
daylight viewing booths and transparencies should 
be viewed on standard light-boxes, placed as close
to the screen as possible. Booths should comply 
with ISO 3664:2000, that is, they should use the CIE
reference illuminant D50.
▲2.2 gamma
The standard on Windows 
machines, indicating a high
level of correction to the
monitor’s output. Colors
are rich, and blacks appear 
solid while retaining
shadow detail but the
image quality is a poor
match for print quality.
▲D50 target white
Formerly widely accepted 
as the standard target white
point for a monitor—that is,
the monitor attempted to
display white according
to the definition for D50.
The result appears to
modern eyes to be
creamy or yellowish.
▲D65 target white
As incandescent lights are
used less and more prints
are made on bright white
paper, the D65 target white
has become more widely
adopted. It gives a cooler, 
bluer result than D50 and is
a good choice for general
digital photography.
▲9300 target white
Suitable for domestic TV
and video, where the final
viewing is on TV sets, this
white point is generally 
too blue for digital
photography. Using 9300
will result in images that
look too red or yellow, and
with flattened contrast.
An image file may be embedded 
with a color profile so that it can
be accurately reproduced when
it enters a different working 
color space.
Source profiles are seldom used 
because the majority of files are
processed visually and are only
of value with digital images in 
highly controlled environments, 
such as studios.
Working color space is your 
starting point. The sRGB color 
space is widely used for digital 
cameras and gives acceptable 
results. Another standard is Adobe
RGB (1998), which gives better 
results for professional use.
CMYK output profiles are 
important for professional users 
and publishers of magazines and 
books, but they need not concern
the majority of photographers.
Ink-jet profiles are perhaps the 
most troublesome for keen
photographers. But produced
accurately and used correctly, they
can help maintain reliable,
consistent results.
Monitor profiles are important because they help
the computer system control the monitor, ensuring 
that colors are produced accurately.
PROFILE RELATIONSHIPS
This diagram demonstrates how color characteristics
of different devices can be translated to each other,
using color profiles and a common color space.

116
CROPPING AND ROTATION
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
The creative importance of cropping, to remove 
extraneous subject detail, is crucial in digital 
photography—it can even be used as a compositional 
tool in its own right. A single image can have many 
different interpretations according to how it is 
cropped, although you should not let this affect your
decisions when composing and framing your images.
Not only does digital cropping reduce picture 
content, it also reduces file size. Bear in mind that 
you should not crop to a specific resolution until
the final stages of image processing, as resizing by 
interpolation will then be required. This reduces 
picture quality, usually by causing a slight softening 
of detail. Image cropping without a change of 
resolution does not require interpolation.
Image rotation
The horizon in an image is normally expected 
to run parallel with the top and bottom edges of the
image. Similarly, you may want to make sure 
that vertical lines in your image are correctly 
aligned, particularly when photographing buildings 
(see pp. 55–7) or other subjects with strong
geometry. Slight mistakes in aiming the camera—
not an uncommon error when you are working 
quickly or your concentration slips—can be 
corrected by rotating the image before printing. 
With film-based photography, this correction was 
carried out in the darkroom during the printing 
stage. In digital photography, however, rotation is a
straightforward transformation, and in some
software applications you can carry out the
correction as part of the image-cropping process. 
Note that any rotation that is not 90°, or a
multiple of 90°, will need interpolation. Repeated
rotation may cause image detail to blur, so it is best
to decide exactly how much rotation is required, 
and then perform it all in a single step.
Correcting scans
Cropping and rotation are also useful tools if you 
are scanning old film images from your archive. For 
example, you may want to remove the border
caused by inaccurate scanning. This area of white or
black not only takes up valuable machine memory, 
it can also greatly distort tonal calculations, such as 
Levels (see pp. 120–1). If a border to the image is 
needed, you can always add it at a later stage using 
a range of different applications. 
Rotation can also be used to correct any 
inaccuracies in placement on the scanner. However, 
always check that scanned negatives are correctly 
oriented—that left-to-right in the original is still left-
to-right in the digital image. 
◀Creative cropping
Cropping can help rescue
an image that was not 
correctly framed or
composed. By removing
elements that are not
required or are extraneous 
to what you intended, you
can create a more visually
coherent final image. 
Beware that crops to one
side of a wide-angle image
may appear to distort
perspective, since the
center of the image will not
correspond to the center
of perspective. Cropping
decreases the size of the
image file and calls on
the image’s data reserves
to maintain image quality.

117
CROPPING AND ROTATION
◀Sloping horizon 
A snatched shot taken with a wide-angle lens left the
horizon with a slight but noticeable tilt, disturbing the
serenity of the image. But by rotating a crop it is possible
to correct the horizon (below), although, as you can see
from the masked-off area (left), you do have to sacrifice 
the marginal areas of the image. Some software allows
you to give a precise figure for the rotation; others
require you to do it by eye.
SAVING AS YOU GO
When working on image manipulations, make
sure you adopt good working practices: always
work on a copy of the original file, and get into
the habit of saving your working file as you
proceed: press Command + S (Mac) or Control
+ S (PC) at regular intervals. It is easy to forget in
the heat of the creative moment that the image
on the monitor is only virtual—it exists just as long
as the computer is on and functioning properly. If 
your file is large and what you are doing is
complicated, then the risks of the computer
crashing are increased (and the resulting loss of the
work more grievous). A good rule to remember is
that if your file is so large that making frequent saves
is an inconvenient interruption, then you definitely
should be doing it, inconvenient or not.

118
QUICK FIX POOR SUBJECT DETAIL
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
Producing the sharpest possible image in most 
situations provides the most flexibility later. You 
can easily blur a sharp image, but it is very difficult
to rebuild detail that is lost to blur.
Problem: Images lack overall “bite,” and sharpness
and subject detail is soft or low in contrast overall.
Analysis: Unsharp detail rendered with low 
contrast can be caused by any of the following: use
of a poor-quality lens; inaccurate focusing; dust or
scratches on the lens; or an intervening surface, such
as a window. Movement of the camera or subject
during exposure may also cause loss of detail.
Solution: The core technique for improving detail
is digital sharpening, or increasing clarity, using a
▲ Lacking bite
This snap of a bandsman lacks clean definition of detail, in
particular in the face. The shiny metal gives the impression
of sharpness, but that is just an illusion as a result of the
reflections and high-contrast lines. 
▲Clarity of detail
By applying strong unsharp masking to the image, its
impact is greatly improved. In particular, the musician’s 
eye reveals an intense concentration, probably focused
on the band leader.
▪Keep the front and back surfaces of your lens
and any lens filters clean. Replace filters as
soon as they are scratched.
▪Focus as precisely and carefully as possible.
▪Release the shutter smoothly, in a single action.
For longer handheld exposures, make the
exposure as you breathe out, just before you
start to breathe in. 
▪For long exposures, use a tripod or rest the
camera on some sort of stable support—such as
a table, window ledge, wall, or a pile of books—
to prevent camera movement.
▪Experiment with your lens—some produce
unsharp results when they are used very
close up or at the extreme telephoto end of 
their zoom range.
HOW TO AVOID THE PROBLEM
variety of techniques such as unsharp masking
(USM).  Some cameras also apply USM as they
record so that images appear sharper when viewed
on screen. However, too much in-camera sharpening
effectively reduces the final image quality, so it is best
to apply manually controlled sharpening, viewing
the effects on a large computer screen. Monitor
sharpening effects with your image at 100 percent
or larger while you apply them. For print use,
sharpen until the improvement is just visible. For
screen use, sharpen until the effect is apparent
but no more than that (see also pp. 126–9).
A boost of image mid-tone contrast and color
saturation also improves the appearance of image
sharpness. Sharpening filters cannot retrieve details
lost by movement during exposure, but new 
algorithms can help reduce motion blur. 

119
QUICK FIX POOR SUBJECT COLOR
QUICK FIX POOR SUBJECT COLOR
If subject color is disappointing despite your 
best efforts, the key to effective improvement 
is to be selective.
Problem: Your images are underwhelming,
with lackluster color vibrancy and dull tones
overall. These problems most often occur in pictures
captured on overcast days.
Analysis: Your camera may make conservative
adjustments to a captured image. In addition,
light that is lacking a full range of colors—for
example, on overcast days—is weak in warm
colors, resulting in a bluish color cast that gives dull,
cold images.
Solution: A sound first step is to correct the
white balance if it is too blue or yellow. Then the
simplest solution is to apply increased saturation
to the whole image. But this often overemphasizes
some colors in the effort to make others more lifelike.
It is better to analyze the image and decide which
colors—the yellows, say—would most benefit from
improving, then limit the increased saturation to
yellows (see pp. 136–41).
▶ Selective saturation
The original image (top) suffers from dull colors. An overall 
increase in saturation brings the green of the cranes back to 
the remembered color, but the face of the  supervisor is too
red (middle). We increase saturation limited to greens, for
the cranes; yellows, for the markings on the wharf; and
cyans, for the sky—by amounts to match needs. This allows
the skin tones to remain natural-looking (bottom).
▪In bright, contrasting lighting conditions, it may
help to underexpose by a small amount: set the
camera override to -1⁄1⁄12⁄2⁄ of a stop or -1⁄1⁄13⁄3⁄  of a stop,
depending on what the controls permit.
▪To avoid computer-based image manipulation,
try using camera modes that boost image
saturation. These are typically called something
like Landscape, Brilliant, or Vivid. 
▪Set your camera’s white balance to a setting
that is appropriate to the prevailing conditions—
for example, “cloudy” on an overcast day.
▪Avoid setting the camera to very high sensitivities,
such as ISO 800 or above. And if you still
work with a film camera, you should not use 
high-speed color film of any type if color
accuracy is crucial.
HOW TO AVOID THE PROBLEM

120
LEVELS
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
The Levels control shows a representation, in the 
form of a histogram, of the distribution of tone 
values of an image. Levels offers several powerful 
options for changing global tone distribution. The 
easiest thing to do is to click on the Auto Level 
button. This, however, works effectively in very few
cases. What it does is take the darkest pixel to 
maximum black and the brightest pixel to maximum
white, and spreads everything else evenly between 
them. This, however, may change the overall density 
of the image. 
Another control that may be available is Output
Level. This sets the maximum black or white
points that can be produced by, say, a printer.
Generally, by setting the white point to at least
5 less than the maximum (in other words, to
about 250) you prevent the highlight areas in your 
output image appearing totally blank. Setting the
black point to at least 5 more than the minimum
(in other words, to about 5) you will help to avoid 
the shadow areas looking overly heavy in your 
output image.
◀Auto Level
An underexposed image
contains dark tones with
few high-value ones (far 
(f(
left), confirmed in the
Levels display (bottom far 
left). The gap on the right of 
the histogram indicates an
absence of values lighter
than three-quarter tone,
with peak values falling in
deep shadow. Applying
Auto Level (left) spreads all 
available pixel values across
the whole dynamic range.
The new Levels display
(bottom left) has a
characteristic comblike
structure, showing gaps in
the color data. Auto Level 
not only brightens colors
and increases contrast, it
also causes a slight overall
color shift.
HOW TO READ LEVELS
The Levels histogram gives an instant check on image 
quality—perhaps warning of a need to rescan.
▪If all values across the range are filled with gentle
peaks, the image is well exposed or well scanned.
▪If the histogram shows mostly low values
(weighted to the left), the image is overall low-key
or dark; if values are mostly high (weighted to the
right), the image is high-key or bright. These
results are not necessarily undesirable.
▪If you have a sharp peak toward one or other
extreme, with few other values, you probably 
have an image that is over- or underexposed. 
▪If the histogram has several narrow vertical bars,
the image is very deficient in color data or it is
an indexed color file. Corrections may lead to
unpredictable results. 
▪A comblike histogram indicates a poor image
with many missing values and too many pixels of 
the same value. Such an image looks posterized
(see pp. 142–3).

121
LEVELS
▲Well-distributed tones
As you can see from this Levels histogram, a bright,
well-exposed image fills all the available range of pixels,
with no gaps. Since the image contains many light tones, 
there are more pixels lighter than mid-tone, so the peak of 
the histogram lies to the right of center. This image would
tolerate a lot of manipulation thanks to the richness of 
color data it contains.
▲Deficient color data
An image with only a limited color range, such as this
still-life composition, can be turned into a very small file
by saving it as an indexed color file. In fact, just 55 colors
were sufficient to represent this scene with hardly any loss
of subject information. However, the comblike Levels 
histogram associated with it indicates just how sparse the 
available color data was. Any work on the image to alter its
colors or tonality, or the application of filter effects that alter
its color data, would certainly show up artifacts and produce 
unpredictable results.
HISTOGRAM DISPLAY
The histogram for this image shows the mid-tones
dominated by green and red, consistent with the strong
yellows and browns of this warm, wood-dominated 
interior. Applications can be set to display histograms
for each RGB channel
or combined, usually
as luminance for
an accurate view 
of brightness.

122
BURNING-IN AND DODGING
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
The two key techniques for manipulating the local 
density of an image in digital post-processing are 
known as burning-in and dodging. 
Controlling density
Burning-in increases the density in the area of the 
image being worked on (it becomes darker), while
dodging reduces it (a dodged area becomes 
brighter). Both techniques change the tonal 
reproduction of the original to correct either errors 
or imbalance, or for visual effect. For example, 
the highlights and shadows in any image are low in 
contrast, and to counteract this you can burn-in 
and dodge to bring out what shadow and highlight 
detail does exist by increasing local image contrast.
The same techniques can be used in order to 
reduce contrast—to darken highlight areas, for
example—to bring them tonally closer to image 
mid-tones. An often-used application of this is
burning-in areas of sky to darken them while
dodging the foreground. This helps match the sky 
tones to those of the foreground. 
Precision work
Using the brushes available in all image-
manipulation software, you can apply effects over 
as broad an area or with as much precision as you
like—down to the individual pixel, if necessary. You 
can adjust brush size—the area over which an effect 
is applied—how cleanly the edge of the brush is 
defined, and also its “pressure,” or strength of effect.
Some software programs allow you to set “flow,” or 
how quickly the effect is applied. The tools should 
also allow you to set the tool to limit its effect to the 
shadows, mid-tones, or highlights alone.
The Burn and Dodge tools in classic image-
manipulation applications are relatively crude
compared to new tools. Some new brushes can 
▶ Correcting tonal
balance
Looking at the original
image (above), the 
temptation to burn-in
the foreground and some
of the background in order
to “bring out” the sheep
is irresistible. Brief 
applications of the Burn
tool on the foreground (set
to mid-tone at 10 percent)
and background hills, plus
the Dodge tool on the
sheep (set to highlight at
5 percent) produced an
image (right) that was very
similar to the scene as it
appeared at the actual
time of shooting.

123
BURNING-IN AND DODGING
▲Correcting exposure
An exposure biased for a tropical afternoon in Bali,
Indonesia, rendered the shadows too dark (above left).
By applying to the shadows a Dodging brush set to dodge
mid-tones, a great deal of formerly hidden detail has been
revealed (above right). Notice that colors emerge richer and
brighter. Details in the open area were also burned in
to extract more color from the dull light of the rainy day.
recognize edges and not apply an effect beyond the 
edge. Others can be set to adjust contrast as well as 
brightness when applied. Each tool is perfect for a 
different task, but you may need more than one
software application to find the right tool. 
You may also experiment with stronger effects by 
exploiting layer modes such as Color Dodge or 
Color Burn (see pp. 180–5). You create a new layer 
over your image, then apply tints: your choice of 
layer mode and layer opacity will control the density 
and contrast of whatever you apply.
▪Apply dodging and burning-in techniques with
a light touch. Start off by using a light pressure
or a low strength of effect—say, 10 percent 
or less—and then build up to the strength
the image requires.
▪When burning-in image highlights or bright 
areas, set the tool to burn-in the shadows
or mid-tones. Do not set it to burn-in the
highlights.
▪When burning-in mid-tones or shadows, set
the tool at a very light pressure to burn-in the
highlights or mid-tones. Do not set it to 
burn-in the shadows.
▪When dodging mid-tones, set the tool at very
light pressure to dodge the highlights or
mid-tones. Do not set it to dodge the shadows.
▪When dodging shadows, set the tool to
dodge the highlights. Do not set it to dodge
the shadows.
▪Use soft-edged or feathered Brush tools to
achieve more realistic tonal results.
HINTS AND TIPS

124
DUST AND NOISE
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
Two factors are the “forever enemies” of image 
quality: dust and noise. Dust spots on the image 
result when material lands on the photosensor of a
camera or on film to be scanned. It is a serious 
problem with SLRs as the debris is recorded on 
every image. Noise—usually seen as pixels markedly 
different to neighboring pixels and not caused by 
subject 
features—arises 
from 
the 
electronic
properties of the photosensor of a camera or scanner. 
Noise control
You can reduce noise where the noise has a higher
frequency than the image detail itself—in other 
words, if the specks are much smaller than the detail 
in the image. This is one advantage of increasing the
pixel count of images. In low-resolution images, 
applying a noise filter smudges image information 
along with the noise signals. Digital filters such as 
Noise Ninja are effective at reducing noise only
where required, and all raw converters can reduce 
noise. DxO Optics stands out by reducing noise 
before applying color interpolation.
▲Dust on sensor 
A 300 percent enlargement of 
the corner of an image shows a 
few faint specks of dust. They are
blurred because they lie some 
distance above the sensor, which 
“sees” only their shadows. However, 
with manipulation, the pale spots
will become more visible.
◀Dust revealed
The full extent of the dust spots
is revealed when we apply an
adjustment layer to increase contrast
and decrease exposure of the image.
This presents the worst-case scenario
and makes it easy to identify and 
eliminate the spots.
▲Dust removed
Use the Spot Healing Brush, Healing
Brush, or Clone Stamp tool to remove
the dust spots. Set the brush to just
slightly larger than the average spot,
with a sharply defined brush edge,
and sweep systematically in
one direction.
Dust-removal options
Some scanners provide features to mask dust damage,
replacing the resulting gaps in the image with pixels 
similar to those adjacent to the problem areas. These 
can work well, although some may disturb the film’s
grain structure, while others work only on color film. 
Many cameras incorporate mechanisms to
reduce dust, using, for example, rapid vibration to 
shake off particles or antistatic coatings to avoid
attracting particles. Certain SLRs offer dust-removal
software: you photograph a plain surface, have the
result analyzed by the software, which then creates
a “mask” that can be applied to images to remove
the dust. You can also help the camera directly by 
cleaning the sensor using ultrasoft microporous 
swabs or ultrafine brushes that sweep up the dust 
and reduce static charges.
Manual removal 
The key image-repair technique is to replace the
dust with pixels that blend in with neighboring
pixels. Depending on your tool of choice, you either 

125
DUST AND NOISE
▲Noise in detail
In this close-up view of an image, it is clear there is more
noise, or random pixels (seen as specks and unevenness
of tone), in the darker areas than in the brighter ones.
Compare the blue shadow area, for example, with the white
plate. This is because noise in the photosensor is normally
drowned out by higher signals, such as those generated
by strong light.
▲Noisy image 
Poor noise-suppression circuitry and
an exposure of 1⁄1⁄18⁄8⁄ sec gave rise to this
“noisy” image. Long exposures
increase the chance of stray signals, 
which increase noise in an image.
▲Screen shots
Examining the different channels 
(above) showed that the noisiest
was the green one. This was
selected and Gaussian Blur applied
(top). The radius setting was adjusted 
to balance blurring of the specks
while retaining overall sharpness.
▲Smoother but softer
The resulting image offers smoother
tones—especially skin tones—but the 
cost is visible in reduced sharpness of 
the orchids. You could select the red
and blue channels to apply Unsharp
Masking to improve the appearance 
of the flowers.
manually select the source for the pixels to cover 
the dust—this is Cloning—or you let the software
sample from around the dust and apply an 
algorithm that blends local pixels with the dust to 
hide the spots—in Photoshop, this is called Healing. 
Where the spots are too numerous, a blurring filter 
may help, but this will also blur image detail that is
the same size as the spots.
HINTS AND TIPS
▪Clone with the tool set to maximum pressure,
as lighter pressure produces a smudged clone.
▪In even-toned areas, use a soft-edged or
feathered Brush as the cloning tool. In areas
with fine detail, use a sharp-edge Brush instead.
▪You do not always have to eliminate dust specks;
reducing their size or contrast may be sufficient.
▪Work systematically from a cleaned area into areas
with specks, or you may find yourself cloning dust.
▪If cloning looks overly smoothed, introduce some
noise to make it look more realistic. Select the
area for treatment and then apply the Noise filter.

126
SHARPENING
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
The ease with which modern image-manipulation 
software can make a soft image appear sharp is
almost magical. Although software cannot add to
the amount of information contained in an image,
it can put whatever information is there to the best 
possible use. Edges, for example, can be given more 
clarity and definition by improving local contrast. 
Digitally, sharpen effects are true filters, as
they hold back some components and selectively 
let others through. A Sharpen filter is, in reality, 
a “high-pass” filter—it allows high-frequency image
information to pass while holding back low-
frequency information.
Unsharp Masking
The most versatile method of image sharpening is 
Unsharp Masking (USM). This takes a grid of pixels 
and increases edge definition without introducing 
too many artifacts. Unsharp Mask has three settings.
In Photoshop, they are called Amount, Radius, and
Threshold. Amount defines how much sharpening
to apply; Radius defines the distance around each
pixel to evaluate for a change; Threshold dictates 
how much change must occur to be acceptable 
and not be masked.
It is possible to overdo sharpening. In general,
assess image sharpness at the actual pixel level, so 
that each pixel corresponds to a pixel on the
monitor. Any other view is interpolated and edges 
are softened, or anti-aliased, making sharpness
impossible to assess properly.
As a guide, for images intended for print, the 
screen image should look very slightly over-
sharpened, so artifacts (such as halos or bright
fringes) are just visible. For on-screen use, sharpen 
images only until they look right on the screen.
Sharpening makes deep image changes that 
cannot easily be undone, so it is generally best to 
leave sharpening to last in any sequence of image 
manipulations, except for combining different 
layers. However, if you are working on a scan with 
many dust specks and other similar types of fault, 
you should expect the final sharpening to reveal 
more fine defects, so be prepared for another round 
of dust removal using cloning (see pp. 124–5).
▲Under-sharpening
In images containing large amounts
of fine detail, such as this scene taken
in Uzbekistan, applying a modest 
strength of USM filtering (55) and a 
large radius (22), with a threshold set
at 11 does little for the image. There 
is a modest uplift in sharpness, but
this is due more to an overall increase 
in contrast rather than any other effect.

127
SHARPENING
▲Over-sharpening
The maximum strength setting used for
this version results in over-sharpening—
it is still usable and is arguably a good
setting if you intend to print on
poor-quality paper. The same setting
applied to the Kashgar image (see pp. 
128–9) would simply bring out all the
film grain—a technique for increasing
noise in the image.
▲Ideal setting
The best settings for images with fine
detail is high strength with a small
radius and a very low threshold: here,
strength was 222, the radius was 2, and
the threshold was kept at 0. Details are
all well defined and if large-size prints
are wanted, details are crisper than
those obtained with sharpening using
a larger radius setting.

128
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
▲Over-sharpening
If you increase the sharpening effect
(222 in this version) and reduce the 
threshold (0), but reduce the radius 
to 2, virtually everything in the image
increases in sharpness. The result is
that film grain and fine detail are
sharpened to an undesirable extent.
Compare the result of these settings
with that of an image that contains a
mass of fine detail (see p. 126).
▲ Original image
This photograph of the main town square in Kashgar,
Xinjiang, China, has large areas of smooth tone with
little fine detail, and it would clearly benefit from the
effects of image sharpening.
HINTS AND TIPS
Using an advanced Photoshop technique for image 
sharpening, first mask off areas (such as a face) to
be protected from oversharpening and any
associated increase in defects. Next, produce a 
duplicate layer of the background and set it to Soft
Light mode. This increases contrast overall. Then
apply the High-Pass filter (found under the Filter
menu in Other > High Pass). Increasing the radius 
strengthens the effect (passes higher frequencies, or 
more detail). You can now enter Quick Mask mode 
or add a layer mask to control which areas of the
image will be sharpened by the High-Pass filter. This
method is also effective for sharpening an image
overall and can be controlled by direct settings and
by opacity. However, the preview window in the
dialogue box does not give an accurate view 
because it samples only the top layer.
SHARPENING CONTINUED

129
SHARPENING
▲Sharpening areas of tone
A moderate amount of sharpening (55)
and a relatively wide radius for the filter to
act on (22) improves sharpness where there
is subject detail, without bringing out film
grain or unwanted information, such as in
the subject’s skin-tones. A threshold setting
of 11 prevents the filter from breaking up 
smooth tonal transitions, as the sharpening
effect operates only on pixels differing in
brightness by more than 11 units.
▲Extreme settings
This version results from maximum
amount and radius settings. The effect is
extreme, but a threshold of 32 controls 
coloration. Even so, the image has highly
saturated colors and brilliant contrast.
In addition, film grain is emphasized. The
random appearance of film grain gives more
attractive results than the regular structure
of a digital image, so if you want to use 
this effect introduce image noise first.

130
BLURRING
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
Blur can be introduced by lowering contrast to give 
boundaries a less-distinct outline. This is the 
opposite of sharpening (see pp. 126–9). Paradoxically, 
blurring can make images look sharper; if you throw 
a background out of focus, then any detail in front
looks sharper in comparison.
Blur options
Blur effects are seldom effective if applied to the
whole image, since they often fail to respond to the 
picture’s content and character. The Median and
Dust & Scratches filters produce an effect like
▲Selective blur
Although you will not often want to blur an image in
its entirety, selective blurring, and thus the softening
of subject detail, can be extremely useful on occasion.
To take one example, the blurred areas of an image
could become the perfect background for typography—
perhaps on a web page—as the wording would then be
easier to read. Another example could be to introduce 
digital selective blur to simulate the appearance of using
a special effects, soft-focus lens filter. This type of glass
filter is designed to soften all but a central region of 
the image in order to help concentrate the viewer’s
attention on a particular feature. In the example shown 
here—an informal portrait of a traveler on a ferry on the
River Danube, Hungary—the high-contrast sunlight and
the sharpness of background detail was softened to
emphasize the girl’s features.
looking through clear, moving water. For some 
subjects this is appropriate, but for blur with some
clarity, other methods are better. One approach 
depends on the data-loss caused by interpolation 
when reducing file sizes. First, increase the image 
size by, say, 300 percent, using Resampling, and
then reduce it to its original size. Check its 
appearance and repeat if necessary. This does take
time, but it can give well-detailed, softly blurred
results. A quicker, though less-adaptive, method is
to reduce the file size, and then increase it, repeating 
this step as necessary.

131
BLURRING
▲Radial Blur
Use this filter to apply the blur along
lines radiating out from the center of 
the image. This can simulate the effect
of speeding into the distance. For best
results, apply in steps to selectively
smaller areas. In Adobe Photoshop,
the filter also offers an option for
simulating a zoom blur.
▲Dust & Scratches
While it is not strictly a blurring filter,
at large radius settings the Dust &
Scratches filter does an excellent job 
of blurring details while retaining
outlines to give a watery effect.
Setting the Threshold to higher values
retains more details. Reduce saturation
to create a watercolor look.
▲Motion Blur
This filter simulates the effect of rapid
movement across the field of vision.
Usual controls for this filter include
altering the angle of the “smear” as 
well as its length: greater lengths
suggest higher speed motion. For
unusual results apply different angles
to different parts of the image.

132
BLURRING CONTINUED
Having spent a fortune on lenses that deliver
super-sharp images, it seems madness to introduce 
blur into your images. But targeted blur is an 
essential part of the visual language: it can depict 
movement, it can be used to indicate centers of 
interest, and it can imitate effects created by 
articulated lens movements. The key to targeted 
blur is combining masks with blur filters.
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
Original image
This travel shot is clearly taken in an exotic
location, but lacks energy and a sense of movement.
The four-wheel-drive vehicle looks as though it is 
stuck in the sand or about to roll backward. We need
a sense of forward movement.
Motion Blur
On a duplicate layer, we apply a Motion Blur
filter: we line up the motion blur with the long axis of
the vehicle, adjusting its strength to avoid losing too
much detail.
Mask
We now apply a
mask over the majority
of the image—the sky,
the landscape, and the
front of the vehicle. It
now appears that the
exposure time was too
long to capture a sharp
image. But a reality
check will show that this
is a manipulated image:
the difference in
sharpness in the vehicle
gives the game away.
1
2
3
Motion parallax
Blur is the result of an image moving a visible
distance across the sensor. As nearby objects appear 
to move much more than distant objects, even if 
they are actually traveling at the same speed, they
always appear more blurred. You see this when 
traveling on a train: the trees nearby are always
blurred, but the mountains in the distance are 
CREATING MOVEMENT BLUR

133
BLURRING
High-angle original
Tilt shift gives the impression of a model, so
it works best on shots taken from a high angle, and
is effective with objects such as people and cars. This
street scene taken from a hotel window is perfect
for this effect.
Quick Mask
In Quick Mask mode, select the gradient tool,
draw a gradient from the center of the part you want
to be in focus to the edges of the image. A few attempts
may be needed to get the right area. The Quick Mask
mode allows you to see clearly what will be blurred.
Apply blur
Back in standard
mode, the lens blur filter
can be applied; again
this may take a few 
attempts to get it right.
You are able to preview 
the amount of blur
before you actually
apply it. Although the
effect will look finished
now, using the unsharp
mask filter makes the
people more clearly
defined and adds to
the toy model effect.
1
2
3
sharp. You can simulate this effect by applying blur
to the objects close to the camera while keeping 
distant parts of the scene relatively sharp.
Lens movements
A blur effect that is completely different from
motion is created by movement of the lens: this 
means that the lens is articulated so it can rotate at
REVERSE TILT EFFECT
right-angles to its optical axis. A forward tilt can
increase apparent depth of field, while a reverse tilt 
strongly reduces depth of field, making a scene
resemble a small scale model. The strength of the
effect depends on the angle of tilt and the working
aperture set. You can simulate this effect by using 
graduated masks to control a blur applied to the 
whole image.

134
QUICK FIX IMAGE DISTRACTIONS
▲Cloning
The clean background of one image was first made the
source for the clone. The Clone tool was then very carefully
aligned with the destination image and the cloned pixels
applied, making the passers-by disappear.
▲ Distracting movement
During a shoot in Manila, in the Philippines, the 
model’s best expression coincided with passers-by in
the background. Fortunately, there were many alternatives
with a clean background that could be cloned.
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
Unless there is a fundamental problem with your 
image, most minor distractions can be removed, 
or at least have their pictorial impact reduced, in
image-manipulation software.
Problem: While concentrating on your subject, 
it is easy not to notice distracting objects or colors 
in the picture area. This could be anything from a
passer-by or street litter, to patches of strong color.
Analysis: The small viewfinders or screens of 
many cameras make it difficult to see much subject
detail. Furthermore, although something is distant
and looks out of focus, it may still be within the
depth of field of your set aperture (see pp. 18–21). 
At other times, you simply cannot avoid including,
say, telephone wires in the background of a scene.
Solution: You may not need to remove a
distraction completely; simply reducing the
difference between it and adjacent areas may be
enough. The usual way to achieve this is with
cloning—duplicating part of an image and placing
it into another part (see pp. 186–7). For example, blue
sky can be easily cloned onto wires crossing it, as
long as you are careful to use areas that match
in brightness and hue. Clone from as close to the
distraction as possible (see also pp. 186–7). 
You could also try desaturating the color: select
the area of strong color, and lower it using Color
Saturation to reduce its impact. You can also paint
over the color by using the Saturation or Sponge
tool set to desaturate.
Another method is to blur the background
to render details less visible. This helps push the
details in the main subject into visual prominence.
Select the background directly, or if the main subject
is easier to select, make your selection and invert it.
Then apply a Blur filter (see pp. 130–1) that is
appropriate to the detail you wish to blur; try
different types of blur to evaluate their effect.
Select a narrow feather edge to retain sharpness
in the subject’s outline. Use caution with strong
Blur effects, because the selected region could be
left with a distinct margin. 
Check the viewfinder image carefully before
shooting. This is easier with SLR cameras and
those with large viewfinders. Long focal length
lenses (or zoom settings) reduce depth
of field and tend to blur backgrounds. And, if 
appropriate to the subject, use a lower viewpoint
and look upward to increase the amount of 
non-distracting sky.
HOW TO AVOID THE PROBLEM

135
▲Desaturated elements
A large, soft-edged Brush tool was chosen, and pressure 
was set to desaturation at 100 percent and applied to the
background. With a lighter setting of 50 percent, the
desaturation was also brushed over the clothes. 
▲ Background distractions
In the chaos of a young child’s room, it is neither possible 
nor desirable to remove all the distractions, but toning
them down selectively can help center the viewer’s
attention on the main subject.
QUICK FIX IMAGE DISTRACTIONS
▲ Selective blur
Despite using a large aperture, the high-contrast blur of 
a tree is still obtrusive. By selecting the background and
applying a large blur setting (see right), the impact of the
tree can be reduced. Care needs to be taken to ensure
the model’s face is not blurred and that the fringe
around the model is not left too sharp. You may need
to experiment with different feathering settings (see
pp. 172–5) until you get the best results.

136
WHITE BALANCE
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
The basis of accurate color reproduction is neutrality
in the whites, grays, and blacks in the image. When
you ensure these tones are not tinted with colors,
you establish the accuracy of the hues you record. 
The white balance control on digital cameras helps 
neutralize tints in whites and grays. When you open 
the image, you may take the process further and
adjust other dimensions of color, such as the
lightness and saturation.
What balance?
An image that is color balanced is one in which 
the illuminating light offers all hues in equal
proportion—in other words, the illumination 
is white and not tinted with color. Color 
balance is not to be confused with color harmony. 
Thus, a scene can be full of blues or greens yet still 
be color balanced, while another scene that features 
a well-judged combination of secondary colors
▲ Warm white point
The original picture of a
simple still life (above left)
has reproduced with the
strong orange cast that is
characteristic of images lit
by domestic incandescent 
lamps. The corrected
image (above right) was 
produced using Color
Balance. It is still warm 
in tone because a fully
corrected image would 
look cold and unnatural.
may appear harmonious, but may not be color
balanced at all. 
The aim of color balancing is to produce an 
image that appears as if it were illuminated by white 
light; this is achieved by adjusting the white point. 
However, there are different standards for white
light, and so there are different white points. For 
example, it would not look natural to correct an 
indoor scene lit by domestic lamps in order to 
make it look like daylight, so a warm-toned white
point is called for instead.
Color Balance control
This control makes global changes to the standard
primary or secondary hues in an image. In some
software, you can restrict the changes to shadows,
highlights, or mid-tones. This is useful for making 
quick changes to an image that has, for example,
been affected by an overall color cast. 
DROPPER TOOLS
A quick method of working when you wish to color-correct an image is to
decide which part of the picture you want to be neutral—that part you want to
be seen as without any tint. Then find the mid-tone dropper, usually offered in
the Color, Levels, or Curves controls in image-manipulation software. Select the
dropper, then click on a point in your image that you know should be neutral.
This process is made easier if you used a gray card in one of your images—all
images shot under the same lighting as the gray card will require the same
correction. Clicking on the point samples the color data and adjusts the whole
image so that the sampled point is neutral: the dropper maps the color data of 
all the image pixels around the sampled point.

137
▲Color Balance control
Strong changes brought about via the Color Balance
control, mainly by increasing yellow in the mid-tones—
which is the lowest slider in the dialog box here—make
the scene look as if it has been lit by an early evening sun.
▲Levels control
A golden tone has been introduced to the image here by
forcefully lowering the blue channel in the Levels control—
the middle slider beneath the histogram—thus allowing red
and green to figure more strongly. Red and green
additively produce yellow, and this color now dominates
the highlights of the image.
◀Original image
This original image has
not been corrected in any
way, and it accurately
reproduces the flat
illumination of a solidly
cloudy sky.
WHITE BALANCE
When working with raw files, the choice of color 
temperature (blue to red) and of tint (green to 
magenta) is yours. Usually, you choose color 
temperature and tint to ensure neutral (achromatic 
or colorless) colors are truly neutral.
Balancing channels
While the Curves control is most often used to 
adjust image tonality, by altering the Curves or 
Levels of the individual color channels, you apply a
color balance to the high tones that is different from 
that of the shadows. This is helpful, for example, 
when shadows on a cloudless day are bluish but
bright areas are yellowish from the sun. It is
easiest to work by eye, adjusting until you see the 
result you wish for, but for best control you can
analyze the color in neutrals and manually put in 
corrections to the curve. Working in CMYK, using 
Curves gives a great deal of control and the best
results for print. The Color Balance control is
essentially a simplified version of using the 
component RGB channels in Curves.
Channel mixing is effective where a small 
imbalance in the strengths of the component 
channels is the cause of color imbalance, due to, for
example, using a colored filter or shooting through 
tinted glass.
The Hue/Saturation control can also be used, as
it shifts the entire range of colors en masse. This can 
be useful when the color imbalance is due to strong
coloring of the illuminating light.

138
COLOR ADJUSTMENTS
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
One of the most liberating effects of digital 
photography is its total control over color: you can 
control effects from the most subtle tints to the 
most outrageous color combinations.
Curves
Manipulating Curves, either all at once or as 
separate channels, is a potent way to make radical 
changes in color and tone. For best results, work in
16-bit color, as steep curve shapes demand the
highest quality and quantity of image data.
Hue/Saturation
This control globally adjusts hues, as well as color 
saturation, and brightness. You may also select narrow 
ranges of colors to change, thus altering the overall 
color balance. Beware of oversaturating colors, as 
they may not print out.
Replace Color 
This replaces one hue, within a “fuzziness” setting or 
wave-band, with another. Select the colors you wish 
to change by sampling the image with the Dropper 
tool, and then transform that part via the Hue/
Saturation dialogue box (see opposite). By setting a 
small fuzziness factor, you select only those pixels
very similar in color to the original; a large fuzziness 
setting selects relatively dissimilar pixels. It is best to
accumulate small changes by repeatedly applying
this control. Replace Color is good for strengthening 
colors that printers have trouble with (yellows and
purples), or toning down colors they overdo (reds, 
for example).
▲ Curves control
A simple inversion of color and tone leaves dark shadows
looking empty and blank. Manipulating tonal reproduction
via the Curves dialog box, however, gives you more control,
allowing you to put color into these otherwise empty deep
shadows (the bright areas after inversion). In the dialog box
here you can see how the curve runs top left to bottom
right—the reverse of usual—and the other adjustments that
were made to improve density in the image’s mid-tones.
COLOR TEMPERATURE
The color temperature of light has, in fact, nothing
to do with temperature as we traditionally think of 
it; rather, color temperature is measured by
correlating it to the color changes undergone
by an object as it is heated. Experience tells us
that cooler objects, such as candles or domestic
lights, produce a reddish light, whereas hotter
objects, such as tungsten lamps, produce more
of a blue/white light.
The color temperature of light is measured
in degrees Kelvin, and a white that is relatively
yellow in coloration might be around 6,000 K, while 
a white that is more blue in content might
be, say, 9,500 K. 
While color slide film must be balanced to a
specific white point, digital cameras can vary their
white point dynamically, according to changing
needs of the situation.

139
▲Hue/Saturation control
In this dialog box you can see that image hue has been
changed to an extreme value, and this change has been
supported by improvements in saturation and lightness in 
order to produce good tonal balance. Smaller changes in
image hue may be effective for adjusting color balance. 
Bear in mind that colors such as purples look brighter and
deeper on a monitor than in print because of limitations in
the printer’s color gamut.
▲Replace Color control
Four passes of the Replace Color control were made
to create an image that is now very different from that
originally captured (see p. 137). The dialog box here shows
7)7
the location of the colors selected in the small preview 
window, and the controls are the same as those found in
the Hue and Saturation dialog box (above left), which allow 
you to bring about powerful changes of color. However, for
Hue and Saturation to have an effect, the selected values 
must indeed have color. If they are gray, then only the
lightness control makes any difference.
COLOR ADJUSTMENTS
WORKING IN RGB
The most intuitive color mode to work in is
RGB. It is easy to understand that any color
is a mixture of different amounts of red, green,
or blue, and that areas of an image where full 
amounts of all three colors are present give you
white. The other modes, such as LAB and CMYK,
have their uses, but it is best to avoid using them
unless you have a specific effect in mind you want
to achieve. When you are producing image files
to be printed out onto paper, you may think 
you should supply your images as CMYK, since
this is how they will be printed. However, unless
you have the specific data or separation tables
supplied by the processors, it is preferable to
allow the printers to make the conversions
themselves. In addition, CMYK files are larger
than their RGB equivalents and so are far less
convenient to handle.

140
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
Technically, saturation is the colorfulness of 
something judged in relation to brightness. Light,
low-saturated colors become darker as they
increase in saturation, while well-saturated colors
look brighter and livelier when their saturation is 
raised. This change in quality helps explain why we 
love to make highly saturated images: they look 
gorgeous on the screen. In image manipulation, 
Vibrance, rather than meaning “full of energy,” is a 
saturation control that adapts to certain colors.
Original
Young monks in Bhutan chat as they run an
errand on a sunny day—a delightfully photogenic 
scene. But overexposure in the capture leads to
poor saturation after adjusting Levels. The yellows
and reds are acceptable, but the greens are too dull.
High saturation
Increasing saturation globally renders the
grass rich and lively, and the robes and ropes stand
out in brilliance. But the flesh tones look too tanned,
and notice how the cattle have become more
prominent in the image.
High vibrance
Returning to the Levels-adjusted original, the 
vibrance setting is increased: the result is a marked
improvement over both the original and the high-
saturation version, with rich colors in the robes
and grass and natural skin tones.
Minimum vibrance
If we set minimum vibrance we see that
colors around flesh tones are reduced to almost
grayscale: different applications vary in how strongly
they reduce saturation of non-flesh tone colors and
the effect also varies with white balance.
1
2
3
4
Saturation
One of the most common enhancements made
to images is an increase in saturation: colors 
look richer, images look brilliant and, indeed, 
greatly 
enhanced. 
Camera 
manufacturers
deliberately process images conservatively because
oversaturation is hard to recover: variations of hue 
take on the same values, so any differences in hue
are lost forever. However, global increases 
in saturation rarely lead to better images. The most 
SATURATION AND VIBRANCE

141
SATURATION AND VIBRANCE
Low saturation, high vibrance
Combining the two controls can produce
highly effective results that balance delicate 
coloration with a strong sense of realism. If we
set a low saturation, all colors are globally made
grayer. Adding a high vibrance setting restores
5
red-yellow colors closer to their natural levels. The
difference in saturation helps the flesh tones to stand
out against the naturally tinted background. Notice
too how the cattle now “recede” into the background. 
effective way is to be selective: identify the colors 
that appear weakest. If you would like a bluer sky, 
for example, instead of increasing saturation over 
the whole image, select Blues in your software’s
saturation control and increase saturation only for 
blues. The result is powerful, yet subtle.
Vibrance
The Vibrance control adjusts saturation to minimize
clipping, that is, loss of definition at high values. 
Less-saturated colors increase their saturation 
more than the colors that are already saturated.
Most importantly, Vibrance produces a flatter
response with skin tones, which prevents them
from becoming oversaturated. Vibrance is very 
useful for reducing the saturation of other colors
while leaving flesh tones relatively unaltered.
The cool pallor that results can be effective in a
wide range of people-based photography—from
fashion to photojournalism.

142
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
Post-processing techniques are brilliantly powerful. 
But it is good practice to avoid creating unintended
defects while making corrections in some other part 
or aspect of the image.
Working methods
Like many other craft skills, post-processing proceeds
most smoothly when you work methodically and 
steadily. Plan what you want to do with an image
before you start working on it: you will make white
balance, exposure, and tonal adjustments before 
tackling deeper changes to the image, such as 
▲Over-sharpening
Sharpening filters such as USM (UnSharp Mask) improve
the appearance of sharpness but cannot make up for poor
focusing or blur from movement. High levels of sharpening
may improve blurred images but at the cost of creating
haloes and unnatural tones.
▲ Pixellation
The disruption of image detail caused by using too few 
pixels to create the image is relatively rare, now that
cameras use high-resolution sensors. However, it is possible
to use an icon or low-resolution version of the image by
mistake. Reopen with a larger file.
▲Cloning or healing defects
While cloning and healing tools for removing defects are
very powerful, they can introduce defects of their own, such
as the blurring of neighboring boundaries and multiplying
detail. Work at high magnification—at least 100 percent—
and use brushes just larger than the defects.
▲ Poor white balance
Scenes lit by colored lights such as candles or nightclub
spots gain a strong color cast. Even if the overall color cast 
can be removed to create neutral whites, other colors—such
as flesh tones—may be inaccurate. Record in RAW (see pp.
158–61) for the best chance of full correction.
MANIPULATION DEFECTS
cloning or working with layers. If you are using 
direct-working software such as Photoshop, make 
adjustments on Adjustment Layers where possible,
to help preserve quality. 
The majority of images will need only subtle or
soft changes to make a vast improvement to their
appearance: these types of change are unlikely to 
cause unwanted side effects. It is the application of 
strong changes that gives rise to the most problems.
One useful trick that may help to reduce side effects 
is to make a series of smaller changes to achieve 
the same result. 

143
MANIPULATION DEFECTS
▲ Boundaries with haloes
Sharpening filters such as USM (UnSharp Mask) and
adjustments such as Shadows/Highlights can cause
contrasting bands, or haloes, to appear around edges
when used with too high a setting (USM), or too small a
radius combined with high settings (Shadow/Highlights).
▲ Banding
Caused by having insufficient data to define smooth
transitions, banding is seen as stepped changes as the result
of applying strong tonal change via, for example, Curves,
Levels, or Shadow/Highlights controls. It is less of a problem 
than it used to be, thanks to improved sensor processing.
▲Noiseless
In the eagerness to eliminate all signs of noise from the
image, you can cause the image to look too smooth, with
silky textures that blur details. Where detail is near the size
of the noise, for example, the fine wires in this image, noise
reduction also smears the details.
▲Out-of-gamut colors
Brilliant colors can be made even more brilliant on
the monitor screen. The result is eye-catching, but some
colors may be impossible to print out, and some may
lead to solid blocks of color that look unnatural. Use
the saturation control conservatively (see pp. 140–1).
Principle of loss
A basic principle of digital photography is that loss 
of data from an image can never be recovered. 
Many manipulations, from adjusting levels and 
increasing sharpness or blur, to cloning—all destroy 
data. In recognition of this, if you are using 
applications such as Photoshop, Photo Painter, or
Paint Shop Pro, always work with a copy of the 
image, never the sole image file. If you wish to
create a completely new version of an image, open 
up a new copy of the original; do not reuse one that 
has already been heavily manipulated.
DEEP POCKETS
A class of image defects, including highlight
clipping, shadow clipping, and banding, can
be avoided by working with the data reserve of 
RAW format. The data in RAW may be extended
by outputting the image in high bits per channel.
Instead of the usual 8 bits per channel, RAW
converters allow images to be coded with
10 bits, 12 bits, even 32 bits per channel. This
results in large files that are capable of being
very extensively processed.

144
CURVES
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
The Curves control found in image-manipulation
software may remind older photographers of the
characteristic curves published for films. This is a
graph that shows the density of sensitized material 
that will result from being exposed to specific 
intensities of light. In fact, there are similarities, but 
equally important are the differences. Both are 
effectively transfer functions: they describe how
one variable (the input either of color value or of 
the amount of light) produces another variable (the 
output or brightness of the image). 
▲Boosting the mid-tones
The bow-shaped curve displayed here subtly boosts the
mid-tone range of the image, as you can see in the resulting
image (top). But the price paid is evident in the quarter-
tones, where details in the shadows and the details in the
highlights are both slightly darkened. The result is an image
with, overall, more tonal liveliness—note, too, that the
outline of the subject’s face has been clarified. With some 
image-manipulation software, you have the option of 
nudging the position of the curve by clicking on the section
you want to move and then pressing the arrow keys up or 
down to alter its shape.
▲ Original image and curve
Since the original negative was slightly underexposed,
the image from the scan is tonally rather lifeless. You
cannot tell anything about exposure by looking at the 
curve in the screen shot (above) because it describes 
how one tone is output as another. As nothing has been
changed, when it first appears the line is a straight 45°,
mapping black to black, mid-tone to mid-tone, and
white to white. It is not like a film characteristic curve,
which actually describes how film is responding to
light and its processing.
The principal difference is that when it comes to
image-manipulation software the curve is always 
a 45° line at the beginning. This shows that the
output is exactly the same as the input. However,
unlike the film curve, you can manipulate this 
directly by clicking on and dragging the curve or 
by redrawing the curve yourself. In this way, you 
force light tones to become dark, mid-tones to
become light, and with all the other variations in 
between. In addition, you may change the curve of 
each color channel separately.

145
▲Emphasizing the highlights
The scan’s flat, dynamic range suggests that it could make 
an effective high-key image by changing the curve to 
remove the black tones (the left-hand end of the curve in 
the screen shot is not on black but is raised to dark gray)
and mapping many highlight tones to white (the top of the
curve is level with the maximum for nearly a third of the
tonal range). The result is that the input mid-tone is set to
give highlights with detail. Very small changes to the curve
can have a large effect on the image, so if you want to
adjust overall brightness, it is easier to commit to the curve
and then use Levels to adjust brightness (see pp. 120–1).
▲Emphasizing the shadows
The versatility of the original image is evident here, as now 
it can be seen working as an effective low-key picture. The
mood of the picture is heavier and a little brooding, and it
has lost its fashion-conscious atmosphere in favor of more
filmic overtones. The curve shown in the screen shot has
been adjusted not simply to darken the image overall (the
right-hand end has been lowered to the mid-tone so that
the brightest part of the picture is no brighter than normal
mid-tone). In addition, the slight increase in the slope of the
curve improves contrast at the lower mid-tone level to
preserve some shadow detail. This is crucial, as too many
blank areas would look unattractive.
CURVES
What the Curves control does
The Curves control is a very powerful tool indeed
and can produce visual results that are impossible 
to achieve in any other way. By employing less 
extreme curves you can improve tones in, for 
example, the shadow areas of an image while 
leaving the mid-tones and highlights as they were 
originally recorded. 
And by altering curves separately by color 
channel, you have unprecedented control over an 
image’s color balance. More importantly, the color 
changes brought about via the Curves control can 
be so smooth that the new colors blend seamlessly
with those of the original.
Explore the image by running your cursor over 
the image: the majority of manipulation software 
gives a “running commentary” of color values and 
will also show the position of the point under the
cursor as a point on the curve. Click on the curve 
when you hit a tone you wish to alter, then use the
arrow up/down keys to adjust the position of this 
curve. Make small changes progressively: this helps

146
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
▲Reversing dark tones
A U-shaped curve reverses all tones darker than mid-tone
and forces rapid changes to occur—an increase in image
contrast, for example. The deep shadows in the church
become light areas, giving a negative type of effect, but
the clouds have darkened and greatly increased in color
content. The effect of using this shape curve is similar to
the darkroom Sabattier effect, when exposed film or paper
is briefly reexposed to white light during development.
CURVES CONTINUED
▲ Original image
The image you select for manipulating Curves does not
have to be of the highest quality, but it should offer a simple
shape or outline, such as this church. In addition, the range
of colors can be limited—as you can see below, dramatic
colors will be created when you apply Curves with unusual
or extreme shapes.
ensure you do not make dramatic changes which 
look impressive but usually lead to loss of quality.
Extreme curves
Curves are also a powerful and simple way to obtain 
extreme tonal effects, such as reversal of tones to 
imitate Sabattier effect. In general, the subjects that 
react best to the application of extreme Curve 
settings are those with simple outlines and large,
obvious features. You can try endless experiments 
with Curves, particularly if you start using different
curve shapes in each channel. The following 
examples show the scope of applying simpler 
modifications to the master curve, thereby changing 

147
▲ Reversing light tones
An arc-shaped curve reverses the original’s lighter tones,
giving the effect shown here. Although it looks unusual,
it is not as strange as reversing dark tones (left). Note that
t)t
the curve’s peak does not reach the top of the range—the
height of the arc was reduced to avoid creating overbright
white areas. The color of the building changes as the
red-green color in the normal image was removed by
the reversal, allowing the blue range to make its mark.
▲Tone/color reversal
Applying an M-shaped curve plays havoc with our normal
understanding of what a color image should look like.
Not only are the tones reversed as a result, but areas with
dominant color whose tones have been reversed will also
take on a color that is complementary to their own. And
since parts of the tonal range are reversed and others are
not, the result is a variegated spread of colors.
CURVES
all channels at the same time. Note how seemingly
even areas of tone can break up into uneven 
patches when an extremely steep curve is applied: 
this is due to a lack of data, which leads to aliasing
or posterization.
The turning point of a curve also places great 
demand on image data. If you wish to maintain 
smooth tonal transitions, you need access to as
much image data as possible. Where extreme
adjustments are anticipated, record your images in 
RAW format, then convert to RGB applying 16 bits 
per channel, or even more. With modern high
resolution cameras and image processing, high-bit 
images are very resistant to breakup of the image.

148
COLOR TO BLACK AND WHITE
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
Creating a black and white picture from a color
original allows you to change the shot’s emphasis.
For example, a portrait may be marred by strongly
colored objects in view, or your subjects may be 
wearing clashing colored clothing. Seen in black 
and white, the emphasis in these pictures is skewed 
more toward shape and form.
The translation process
A black-and-white image is not a direct translation 
of colors into grayscale (a range of neutral tones 
ranging from white to black) in which all colors 
are accurately represented—many cameras favor
blues, for example, and record them as being lighter
than greens.
When a digital camera or image-manipulation 
software translates a color image, it refers to a built-
in table for the conversion. Professional software 
assumes you want to print the result and so makes
the conversion according to a regime appropriate 
for certain types of printing press and paper. Other 
software simply turns the three color channels into
gray values before combining them—usually giving 
dull, murky results.
There are, however, better ways of converting to 
black and white, depending on the software you 
have. But before you start experimenting, make
sure you make a copy of your file and work on 
that rather than the original. Bear in mind that 
conversion to black and white loses color data 
that is impossible to reconstruct.
Before you print
After you have desaturated the image (see box 
below), and despite its gray appearance, it is still 
a color picture. So, unless it is to be printed on a 
four-color press, you should now convert it to 
grayscale to reduce its file size. If, however, the 
image is to be printed in a magazine or book, 
remember to reconvert it to color—either RGB or
CMYK. Otherwise it will be printed solely with black 
ink, giving very poor reproduction.
Four-color black
In color reproduction, if all four inks (cyan, magenta, 
yellow, and black) are used, the result is a rich, deep
black. It is not necessary to lay down full amounts of 
each ink to achieve this, but a mixture of all four 
inks (called four-color black) gives excellent results
when reproducing photographs on the printed 
page. Varying the ratio of colors enables subtle 
shifts of image tone.
DESATURATION
All image-manipulation software has a command
that increases or decreases color saturation, or 
intensity. If you completely desaturate a color 
image, you remove the color data to give just a
grayscale. However, despite appearances, it is still 
a color image and looks gray only because every
pixel has its red, green, and blue information in
balance. Because of this, the information is
self-canceling and the color disappears. If, though,
you select different colors to desaturate, you can
change the balance of tones. Converting the image
to grayscale at this point gives you a different result
from a straight conversion, since the colors that you
first desaturate become lighter than they otherwise
would have been.
▲Saturation screen shot
With the color image open you can access the
Saturation control and drag the slider to minimum
color. This gives a gray image with full color
information. In some software you can desaturate 
the image using keystrokes instead (such as Shift+
Option+U in Photoshop, for example).

149
COLOR TO BLACK AND WHITE
▲Color saturation
While the original color image is full of light and life, the
colors could be seen as detracting from the core of the
image—the contrasts of the textures of the water, sand, and 
stones. This is purely a subjective interpretation, as is often
the case when making judgments about images.
The strong reds and blues (above left) 
t)t
distract from the friendly faces of 
these young monks in Gangtok,
Sikkim. However, a straight
desaturation of the image gives us
a tonally unbalanced result. Attempts
to desaturate selectively by hue will
founder because the faces are a pale
version of the red habits. We need
to compensate for the tonally
unattractive product of desaturation
(middle) by redistributing the tones
to bring attention to the boys’ faces.
This involves reducing the white point
to control the sunlit area in the
foreground, plus a little burning-in
to darken the light areas of the habit 
and the hand of the monk behind.
Then, to bring some light into the
faces (right), we use the Dodging tool
set to Highlights.
▲Color desaturation
By removing all the colors using the Saturation control
to give an image composed of grays, the essentials of the
image emerge. The Burn and Dodge tools (see pp. 122–3)
were used to bring out tonal contrasts—darkening the
lower portion of the picture with the Burn tool, while
bringing out the sparkling water with the Dodge tool.
◀Levels screen shot
With the desaturated image open, move the
white point slider in the Levels dialog box
to force the brightest pixels to be about a fifth
less bright: in other words, to have a value no
greater than 200. 
▲Overcoming distracting color

150
COLOR TO BLACK AND WHITE CONTINUED
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
Channel extraction
Since a color image consists of three grayscale
channels, the easiest way to convert the color to 
grayscale is to choose, or extract, one of these and 
abandon the others. This process is known as 
“channel extraction,” but it is available only as part of 
more professional software packages.
When you view the image on the monitor 
normally, all three color channels are superimposed
on each other. However, if you look at them one 
channel at a time, your software may display the 
image as being all one color—perhaps as reds of 
different brightnesses, for example, or as a range of 
gray tones, according to the software preferences
you have set. If your software gives you the option,
choose to view the channels as gray (by selecting 
this from the preferences or options menu). Then, 
simply by viewing each channel, you can choose
the one you like best. Now when you convert to 
grayscale, the software should act on the selected 
channel alone, converting it to gray.
Some software may allow you to select two
channels to convert to gray, thus allowing you a 
great deal of experimentation with the image’s 
appearance. In general, the channels that convert
best are the green, especially from digital cameras,
because the green channel is effectively the
luminance channel, and the red, which often gives
bright, eye-catching results.
Another method, available in Photoshop, is to
use Split Channels to produce three separate
images. With this, you save the image you like and 
abandon the others. Note, however, that this
operation cannot be undone—the extracted file 
is a true grayscale, and is just a third of the size of 
the original file.
▲ Red-channel extraction
While the colors of the original image are sumptuous
(above left), black and white seemed to offer more promise
(above right). It is clear that the sky should be dark against
the mane and cradling hand, so the green and blue
channels (right) were of no help. Neither was the lightness 
channel (opposite), as it distributes tonal information too
evenly. The red channel, however, presented the blues as
dark and the brown of the horse as light. So, with the red
channel extracted, no extra work was needed. 
▲Channels screen shot
If your software allows, select color channels 
one at a time to preview the effects of extraction. 
Turn off the color if the software shows channels
in their corresponding colors.

151
COLOR TO BLACK AND WHITE
LAB MODE
When you convert an RGB color image to LAB, or Lab, mode
(a shortened form of L*a*b*), the L channel carries the
lightness information that contains the main tonal details about
the image. The a* channel values represent green when negative
and magenta when positive; the b* represents blue when negative,
yellow when positive. Using software, such as Photoshop, that
displays channels, you can select the L channel individually and
manipulate it with Levels or Curves without affecting color balance. 
With the L channel selected, you can now convert to grayscale and
the software will use only the data in that channel. If your software
gives you this option, you will come to appreciate the control you 
have over an image’s final appearance, and results are also likely to
be sharper and more free of noise than if you had extracted another 
of the channels to work on. The extracted file is a true grayscale, and
so it is only a third of the size of the original color file.
▲ LAB channels
In the Channels palette of Photoshop,
you can select individual channels, as
shown above. In this example, the
screen will display a black-and-white
image of the girl (as above, right).t)t
▲ Comparing channels
RGB color images comprise three
grayscale images. Here, the B channel
is dark while the R is too light, but the
green is well balanced, as it carries 
the detail. This is confirmed by the 
L channel in LAB mode (far right
(f(
).
Blue channel
Green channel
LAB (with Lightness channel extracted)
Red channel

152
COLOR TO BLACK AND WHITE CONTINUED
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
BLACK-AND-WHITE
CONTROL
This conversion method offers the greatest
control by separating the additive and subtractive 
primaries so that each can be individually
adjusted. This means that, for example, the band 
of magenta colors in an image can be made dark
while the red band can be made lighter. This gives
a fine degree of control that enables you to
separate tonalities of different colors with more
accuracy than using Channel Mixer, and is more
convenient than methods based on using layers.
Adjacent bands should not be adjusted to be very
different, however, as this can cause posterization
or break-up of the image.
The workflow is to capture in full color.
Optimize the image for exposure and tone, then
adjust the Black and White settings to obtain the 
results you like. Ensure that you save the settings
as a preset that can be applied to other images:
this will save you a great deal of time. You may
need to make final tweaks with curves and levels.
▲Black and White control
The default setting renders a natural-looking black-
and-white version of a color scene. In this control,
from Photoshop, you can easily add a tint by ticking
the box, and adjusting the hue and saturation sliders.
▲ Original image
A simple conversion of this image
could make colors look lifeless—
a problem avoided by using the
Channel Mixer control (below). 
▲ Working in RGB mode
In RGB, the blue channel was reduced, 
making the sky dark, and the red was
increased to compensate. Results of 
using these settings are contrasty
and dramatic, but the foreground
is too bright. 
▲ Working in CMYK mode
With the original image translated
into CMYK mode, results are
noticeably softer than those achieved
via the Channel Mixer in RGB mode.

153
COLOR TO BLACK AND WHITE
▲ Separating tones
Starting with this color image (top
left), a standard grayscale conversion 
gives acceptable results (middle left),
but channel mixing separates out the
tones more effectively, particularly
in shadow areas (bottom left). The 
settings required were complicated,
and arrived at by trial and error (screen
shot above). The work done reduces 
the need for further processing of the
image, but if you wish to refine the
results further, a channel-mixed image
makes such techniques as burning-in 
and dodging (see pp. 122–3) easier
to apply, since, as you can see, the
shadows on the shirts are far more
open and susceptible to local
density control.
To help learn how to isolate colors using the tools 
available in your software, start by selecting
a bright, multicolored image—perhaps a
collection of fruit, a flower stall, or something 
similar. Working on a copy of the image, now 
decide which color you wish to emphasize by
making it light after conversion to grayscale. Use
Color Balance, Replace Color, Hue and Saturation,
or Channel Mixer tools to obtain the required
result. If your first try does not work, return to
the image and try a series of new settings.
When you have a result you are happy with,
note the settings. Use this information to
replace another color in the image, and see
if you can get to the desired result more quickly
than the first time.
TRY THIS

When less is more
This scene, near Samarkand, Uzbekistan, 
was full of bright and dusty colors.
A conversion to black and white pares
the image back to the essentials: the
relationships between people.


156
VINTAGE EFFECTS
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
The popularity of vintage effects, such as the look of 
distressed film, irregular blurs and flare, darkened
corners, and distorted colors is, perhaps, a natural
reaction against the modern, clinically-clean color 
image. These effects have found huge favor with 
casual snappers, particularly those using camera 
phones or Holga film-using cameras. For them, part 
of the appeal is in the way that the effects help to 
“fill in” empty areas in the image, immediately 
“improving” snapshots. At the same time vignetting 
serves to tighten picture composition, an effect that
has been recognized since the dawn of photography.
Filters or apps
The traditional way to create vintage effects is to
capture an image normally, then apply filter effects 
using image manipulation software. This allows you 
to apply different effects to the same image and to 
undo any effects you do not like. You can create
your own vintage looks from scratch or use presets 
Original image
A passenger on a ferry sliding slowly into
the port of Brindisi, Italy looks full of wistful thoughts.
It is an image that suggests itself for a nostalgic
treatment to convey the timelessness of the mixed
feelings experienced when arriving at a new port.
Lower contrast
Open the image and lower contrast with the
Levels or Curves control, then reduce the black and
white points. Vary the balance of color channels
in Levels or use a color balance control to produce
an overall tone.
Apply irregular overlay
Open another image that has tones you like, 
select the portion that you want to use, and copy
and paste it onto your original image. Resize to fit,
then choose a layer mode (here it is Overlay) that
gives your image the tone that suits your purpose.
Apply lighting effects
Using a lighting filter in your image
manipulation applications, apply a lens flare
or vignette effect on the top layer. Or use a Brush
set with an irregular head, such as rough bristles—
loaded with a light color to paint on lighting effects.
1
2
3
4

157
VINTAGE EFFECTS
Create an irregular border
Select the Eraser tool with irregular “bristles,”
and set to a wide diameter with a low Flow setting.
Run the eraser along the edge of the image. If you
wish to have repeatable results create a layer mask
using the Paint tool. An alternative option is to
copy an image that has an irregular border and use
this as the new border. For this image, I pasted one
of my Hipstamatic shots on top, adjusted its shape,
inverted its tone, then set the layer to Divide mode. 
A little extra erasing refined the final effect.
5
for software such as Adobe Lightroom and Apple
Aperture, or plug-ins such as Topaz Adjust or Alien
Skin Exposure. Apps for iPhone such as Instagram
apply a limited set of effects but are very easy to 
use. A more recent approach is to make the image 
through an application such as Hipstamatic, which
applies the effects during image processing, saving 
the image in its final “vintage” form. This is more 
challenging as you need to be able to pre-visualize 
the results, but it is fun and saves on post-processing.
Suppose you would like an image with a vintage 
sepia look: a low-contrast brownish tone with 
some lens flare, vignetting, and a “hand-crafted”
appearance. By adding effects systematically you 
will understand how the image is created and can
refine the process, for example, by adding an 
irregular border that mimics brushed-on emulsion. 
If you use an application that can record the steps
as a script or “action,” do so, so that you can apply 
them to another image.

158
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
WORKING WITH RAW
It is a popular notion that RAW files offer the best 
possible image quality. However, some in-camera
processing 
can 
produce 
results 
that 
are
unobtainable with RAW. The real advantage of 
recording in RAW is that it provides the largest 
reserve of data for image manipulation.
Extracting color
Before opting for a RAW workflow, it is sobering to
consider the JPEG alternative. All sensors produce
raw image data. When a camera saves the image as
a JPEG (or, rarely, as a TIFF) it first extracts the full 
color information from the sensor, then applies
adjustments regarding contrast, color saturation,
sharpness, and so on. These parameters have been
designed by experts in color science and sensor 
technology. If you think you can do better than 
them, by all means work with RAW files. But 
a common complaint is of RAW processing 
producing images inferior to camera JPEGs.
Advantages of RAW
Nonetheless, while working with RAW requires a
great deal more time and effort than with JPEG files, 
the rewards are there for those who truly require
the quality—because they need to enlarge images to 
their limits, or publish them in top-class print media. 
RAW processing preserves the maximum amount
of original image data—particularly in shadow and 
highlights—which helps to ensure the highest
possible image quality from each file. It offers you 
maximum flexibility with image brightness, white 
balance, and color space. However, remember that
if you make prints smaller than the maximum
recommended for your files, many of the advantages 
of RAW processing will be lost in the print.
Batch conversion
The job of a RAW file converter, then, is to apply all 
the processing that the camera would normally do
to deliver vibrant, sharp, and well-exposed images.
All RAW conversion software allows you to save 
settings then apply the same setting to entire folders
full of images: this is known as batch processing, 
and clearly it can save a great deal of manual
effort and time-consuming supervision. However 
processing large numbers of images will take
some time, even on fast computers, because of 
the large files involved.
You can go further than any camera by tailoring 
the presets to different conditions. With landscapes, 
for example, you may aim for higher sharpness and 
saturation than you would when making portraits.
You can create presets to suit different subjects and
styles: high saturation, contrast, and sharpness for
landscapes and urban views; low vibrance for
documentary photography; sepia tone and soft 
contrast for portraits, and so on. This workflow is 
flexible yet it saves a great deal of time.
RAW styles
Not all RAW conversion software is created equal.
Indeed, not only do the interface design, ease and 
speed of operation, support for your camera, and
cost vary, but each application applies subtly 
different philosophies to image processing; for 
example, noise reduction being preferred over detail 
preservation. Nonetheless, where output has been 
expertly processed, it is very hard to identify any 
significant differences. With modern solutions, it is
safe to select an application based on what you find 
easiest to use, but first ensure that your camera’s 
specific RAW format is supported.
DNG
Adobe Digital Negative (DNG) is an attempt to 
bring order to the proliferation of RAW formats
by creating a common “wrapper,” or structure, 
for the data. Introduced in 2004, it is based on a
standard format known as TIFF-EP. It is designed
to accommodate metadata (such as MakerNotes
for the camera) in order to allow for any DNG-
compliant RAW converter to work on raw data
irrespective of its source. As of 2010, DNG was 
supported by over 300 non-Adobe products and
software—but is by no means universally
adopted, particularly among the larger camera 
manufacturers. Suffixes for files are .dng or .DNG.

159
WORKING WITH RAW
▲Bright and dark
A hot desert sun burns through the clouds over Utah, while
shadows in the foreground are rich in detail. Faced with
such a subject, the best course is to record in RAW in the
expectation of needing much remedial post-processing.
▲ Top and bottom
Strong recovery in the high values as well as darkening
of blues brings the sky under control without banding
(aliasing) artifacts. At the same time a great deal of digital 
“fill light” recovers lots of detail from the shadows.
▲ Detailed promise
In addition to tonal recovery and repair, the other reason
for working with RAW is to capture as much detail as
possible. This means we need to do more than resolve the
fine, spikey cactus needles convincingly. We also need the
resolving power for accurate tone reproduction—here, to 
render with accuracy the extremely soft tonal transitions 
within the clouds and in the sky. In this enlargement—
equivalent to a print about 33in (84cm) wide—there is
smoothness as well as fair micro-contrast that should
satisfy all but the most critical viewer.

160
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
When you first open a RAW file in a converter, the
image will have been processed using the default
conversion settings. The software will have identified
the camera used, looked up its database of RAW
formats and applied the appropriate settings. 
RAW flow
If you use proxy-working, nondestructive software
such as Adobe Lightroom or Apple Aperture,
the workflow is very simple. After downloading 
WORKING WITH RAW CONTINUED
the images through the software, you work on the 
images and export only as you need: the applications 
provide an accurate preview of the output image. In 
addition, all the enhancements you make to images 
are automatically saved (see also p. 106).
If you use stand-alone RAW converters, such as
Adobe Camera Raw, DXO Optics, Phase One, or
Nikon Capture NX, open your RAW image from the 
backup copy, then:
▪Make settings—exposure, contrast, white balance,
Conversion fine tuning
Assess the image in detail: you may need 
only small changes in brightness, hue, or sharpness,
to perfect it. Some converters have a moiré control
that applies a filter to reduce artifacts resulting from
a clash between regular patterns and the sensor.
Color temperature
The potential of the image emerges when we
decrease color temperature; that is, warm the white
balance. This also brings out shadow detail because it
is largely composed of dark reds. But it has the effect
of making the greens dull, which we need to correct.
3
4
Tough conditions
An overcast, stormy day produces dull
lighting, but the luminance range—between the sky
and the shadows behind the window—is nonetheless
very wide. At the same time, there are subtle skin
tones that we will wish to preserve.
JPEG roughness
The importance of working in RAW is most
evident in transitions from dark mid-tones with
detail to the deepest shadows. Manipulation of this
JPEG version results in unattractive, sudden changes
of tone and color, due to poverty of data.
1
2

161
WORKING WITH RAW
and color adjustments; correction for chromatic
aberration; and sharpening—or load and apply saved 
settings to the image.
▪Set pixel dimensions, bit-depth, output resolution,
and color profile for the output.
▪If you made a new set of settings, save it to use on 
other images made in similar conditions.
▪Output or export the image in a standard TIFF or 
JPEG file, with a new name, to a new or work-in-
progress folder.
Data mining
The image resulting from the RAW conversion
is entirely usable, but we can do better. The warming
of the white balance improved the skin tones but
compromised the greens and also reduced the
brilliance of the raindrops. So we need to top up
vibrance to improve the greens, leaving the skin
tones alone. Burning-in set to Shadow darkens the
shadows around the raindrops, which has the effect
of accentuating them. A final touch is to use the Clone
tool to remove the window catch by the model’s face.
5
TRY THIS
Get familiar with the different RAW converters 
before you purchase. Modern software allows you
a trial—some give a generous 30 days full function,
others are less generous—so take full advantage of it.
Download and install the converters, collect some of 
your RAW images, then convert them with each trial
version. Allow yourself at least four hours using the
software before making any judgments about its 
suitability and quality of conversion. 

162
DUOTONES
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
◀Simple duotones
This view of Prague (left)
has been rendered in
tones reminiscent of a
bygone era. After turning
the image to grayscale,
two inks were used for
the duotone, neither of 
them black. This gave a
light, low-contrast 
image characteristic of 
an old postcard.
▲ Duotone Options screen shot
The curve for the blue ink (above) was lifted in 
the highlights in order to put a light bluish tone
into the bright parts of the image and also to help
increase the density of the shadow areas.
Much of the art of traditional black and white 
printing lay in making the most of the limited tonal 
range inherent in the printing paper. A common 
tactic was to imply a wider tonal range than really 
existed by making the print contrasty. This suggested 
that shadows were really deep while highlights were 
truly bright. The success of this depended on the
subtleties of tonal gradation between these extremes.
A further technique was to tone the print, adding 
color to the neutral gray image areas.
Modern digital printers have opened up the 
possibilities for toning well beyond that possible in 
the darkroom. The range of hues is virtually
unlimited as you can simulate all those that can be
created with the four-color (or more) process.
Creating a duotone
Starting with an image, even a color one, first 
turn the file into a grayscale (see pp. 148–53) using, 
in Photoshop, the Image > Mode menu. This 
permanently deletes color information, so you
need to work on a copy file. Similar results can be 
obtained in the Sepia Tone effect, a menu option in 
almost all image-manipulation applications. 
Now that you have a grayscale image you can 
enter the Duotone mode, where you have a choice 
of going it alone or loading one of the preset 
duotones. If you are not familiar with the process,
use the Duotone Presets (usually found in the
“Presets” folder of Photoshop). Double-click on any 
one to see the result.

163
DUOTONES
▲ Retaining subject detail
In the original image (above left), there was so much
t)t
atmosphere it was a pity to lose the color. But the
resulting duotone, with a green second ink, offers 
its own charms (above right). To reduce overall
contrast and allow the green ink (chosen via the 
Color Picker dialog box, bottom left) to come 
through, it was necessary to reduce the black ink
considerably—as shown by the Duotone Curve
dialog box (center left). The low position of the 
end of the curve in the dialog box (center left)
indicates a low density of black, but the kinks in
the curve were introduced to increase shadow 
contrast and retain subject detail. The lifted end
of the curve shows that there are no real whites:
the lightest part still retains 13.8 percent of ink,
as shown in the top box labeled “0:” in the
Duotone Curve dialog box.
Clicking on the colored square in the dialog
box (see opposite) changes the color of the
second “ink.” Bright red could give an effect of gold 
toning; dark brown, a sepia tone. This is a powerful 
feature—in an instant you can vary the toning 
effects on any image without any of the mess and 
expense of mixing chemicals associated with the 
darkroom equivalent.
If you click on the lower of the graph symbols,
a curve appears that tells you how the second ink
is being used, and by manipulating the curve 
you can change its effect. You could, for example, 
choose to place a lot of second ink in the highlights, 
in which case all the upper tones will be tinted.
Or you may decide to create a wavy curve, in 
which case the result will be an image that looks
somewhat posterized.
In Photoshop, you are able to choose to see
Previews. This updates the image without changing
the file, thereby allowing you to see and evaluate 
the effects in advance.
You need to bear in mind that a duotone is likely 
to be saved in the native file format (the software’s 
own format). This means that to print it you may
first have to convert it into a standard RGB or CMYK 
TIFF file, so that the combination of black and
colored inks you specified for the duotone can be 
simulated by the colored inks of the printer. This is 
the case whether you output on an ink-jet printer or 
on a four-color press.

164
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
Of the numerous unorthodox ways to process color 
film, perhaps the most popular was developing 
transparencies in chemicals designed for color 
negatives, and processing color negatives in 
chemicals designed for color transparency film.
Cross-processing techniques made fundamental
and irreversible changes to the image, so there is 
much to be said for simulating the effects using
digital image-manipulation techniques. There is a 
further advantage to working digitally. Color negative
film was overlaid with an orange-colored mask
whose job it was to correct inherent deficiencies in 
the color separation or filtering process during 
exposure. Before the final print could be made, this 
mask had to be replaced or neutralized.
Color negative film to transparencies
Results from this type of cross-processing had flat 
tones and muted colors due to the fact that color 
negative film was low in contrast, and transparency 
processing chemicals compress highlights. Color
was also unpredictable, resulting in color balance in 
the highlights being different from that in the lower 
mid-tones and shadows.
Digitally, the Curves control is the best way to 
simulate this effect, though do not be alarmed if your
CROSS-PROCESSING
▲Processing negatives as transparencies
The flattening out of image contrast and the semblance of color toning
that resulted from processing color negative film in chemicals intended
for transparencies can create an interesting portraiture effect. By applying
different curves to each color channel (above), the color balance was shifted away 
from the red (above left) toward the yellow-green coloration that is 
typical of this form of cross-processing (left). The curves that are given here
are for your guidance only: you can start with these but you are likely to
want to adjust them, particularly the master RGB curve, to suit the particular
images you are working on.

165
CROSS-PROCESSING
image becomes too dark or light—you can adjust 
overall brightness later. Another possible image
outcome is posterization. If you find this effect
unattractive, then the quality of the scan may not
be good enough. If that is the case, your only 
option is to rescan the original image, possibly to 
a higher bit-depth.
From transparencies to color negatives 
Results from processing transparencies as color
negatives were often contrasty, with color shifts 
toward cyan. They also had an open tonality, often 
with highlights reproducing as featureless white. 
This occurred because of the need to print
inherently high-contrast transparencies on paper 
meant for the lower contrast of color negatives. 
The best way to create this effect digitally is to 
manipulate the separate channels in the Curves
control. When you have a set of curves that work,
you can save and reapply them to any image.
If you find it hard to concentrate on the overall
lightness of the image while juggling with different 
channels, leave overall density to the end and work
just on the colors and contrast. Once you are
satisfied with these, call up the Levels control
(see pp. 120–1) to adjust overall brightness.
▲Processing transparencies 
as negatives
The high-contrast effect that resulted from
cross-processing color transparency film in
color negative chemicals works with subjects 
that have strong outlines and punchy colors
(above left). By applying the set of curves 
shown here (right), the result is brilliant color
and the type of washed-out highlights typical
of this form of cross-processing (above right). 
As the highlight areas are tonally balanced
by the full shadows and strong colors, they
are more acceptable than in an image with
a normal tonal range. The curves given
here are for your guidance only: you can start
with these but you are likely to want to adjust
them, particularly the master RGB curve, to
suit your particular images.

166
TINTS FROM COLOR ORIGINALS
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
It is not necessary for color images to be strongly 
colored in order to have impact. You can, for 
example, use desaturated hues—those that contain
more gray than actual color—to make more subtle 
color statements. In addition, selectively removing
color from a composition can be a useful device for 
reducing the impact of unwanted distractions
within a scene (see pp. 134–5).
For global reductions in color, you need only
turn on the Color Saturation control, often linked 
with other color controls, such as Hue, in order to
reduce saturation or increase gray. By selecting a 
defined area, you can limit desaturation effects to 
just that part of the image.
Working procedure
While working, it may be helpful to look away 
from the screen for each change, since the eye finds 
it difficult to assess continuous changes in color 
with any degree of accuracy. If you watch the
changes occur, you may overshoot the point that
you really want and then have to return to it. The
resulting shuffling backward and forward can be 
confusing. Furthermore, a picture often looks as if it 
has “died on its feet” when you first remove the 
color if you do it suddenly—look at the image again 
after a second or two, and you may see it in a more 
objective light.
For an extra degree of control, all image-
manipulation software has a Desaturation tool. This
is a Brush tool, the effect of which is to remove all
color evenly as it is “brushed” over the pixels. Work 
with quite large settings—but not 100 percent—in
order to remove color quickly while still retaining 
some control and finesse.
Another way of obtaining tints of color from
your original is to select by color, or range of colors. 
If you increase the saturation of certain colors,
leaving the others unchanged, and then desaturate
globally, the highly saturated colors will retain more
color than the rest of the image, which will appear 
gray in comparison. 
Bear in mind that many pixels will contain 
some of the color you are working on, even if 
they appear to be of a different hue. Because of 
this, it may not be possible to be highly selective 
and work only over a narrow waveband. 
Photoshop allows you to make a narrow selection:
you can use Replace Color as well as the
waveband limiter in Hue/Saturation.
▲ Global desaturation
For a selective desaturation of the original (above left), the 
whole image was slightly desaturated, while ensuring that
some color was retained in the apples and hands (above
right). The process was paused so that the apples and hands
could be selected, and then the selection was inverted, with
a large feathering setting of 22. This is easier than selecting
everything apart from the hands and apples. Desaturation
was again applied, but this time just to the selected area.

167
TINTS FROM COLOR ORIGINALS
▲Partial desaturation
The best way to desaturate the original highly colorful
image (above left) was to use the Desaturation tool (also
known as Sponge in the Desaturation mode), since it
allowed the effects to be built up gradually and for precise
strokes to be applied. Although the intention was to
desaturate the trees completely, in order to emphasize the
glorious colors of the women’s clothes, as the strokes were
▲Selective color
The original shot of a park in Kyrgyzstan (above left) was too
colorful for the mood I wanted to convey. In preparation
for a selective desaturation based on colorband, I first
increased the blues to maximum saturation in one action
by selecting blues in the Saturation sub-menu. Then I
opened Saturation again and boosted yellows (in order
to retain some color in the leaves on the ground and the
distant trees in the final image). The result of these two
increases produced a rather gaudy interpretation (above
right). Normally, a 40 percent global desaturation would
remove almost all visible color, but when that was applied
to the prepared image, the strengthened colors could still
be seen while others, such as greens, were removed (right).
applied it became clear that just a partial removal and
toning down of the green would be more effective (above 
right). The image was finished off with a little burning-in to
tone down the white clothing.

168
HIGH DYNAMIC RANGE
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
The dynamic range of a scene is the difference in 
brightness between its lightest (or brightest) part 
and the darkest (or blackest) shadow; formerly it
was known as the scene luminance range. Dynamic 
range is high relative to the recording method we 
use: we say it is “high” where the scene’s range of 
brightness is too large to record all the details we
want, given the equipment being used. For this 
reason, a scene in which the dynamic range is “high”
to a camera phone could be easily accommodated 
by a large-sensor SLR camera.
Capture range
Typical high-dynamic range (HDR) scenes are, for 
example, a landscape that contains bright sky or sun 
with deep shadows under trees, or a portrait by a
window in which we wish to record skin tones in 
shadow as well as the sunlit garden beyond.
One way to consider a scene in which the 
dynamic range exceeds the recording capacity of 
our equipment is that the bright parts need one 
exposure setting, such as f/22 at 1⁄1⁄160⁄6⁄  sec, while the 
darker parts need another, say f/2 at 1⁄1⁄1 5⁄1⁄  sec. A full
range of tones can be captured by blending two or 
more different exposures: one correctly exposed for
the lower mid-tones and one for the upper high
tones. There are various HDR techniques available,
which calculate the blending in different ways, but
the majority of “HDR images” are created through
tone mapping. This compresses the range of tones 
HOW TO TONE MAP
To create tone-mapped images, you need to take 
a series of shots at different exposures that cover
the dynamic range, without moving the camera
between each. Note that tone mapping works best
on static subjects.
▪Set the exposure mode to Aperture Priority:
this ensures there are no changes in focus or
depth of field with each exposure.
▪Lock the camera on a tripod, rest it on a stable
surface, or turn on image stabilization.
▪Set the camera to bracket exposures: best results
come from making more exposures (5 is ideal,
3 is the minimum for good results), and having 
smaller differences between exposures (1 stop
differences are better than 3 stops).
▪Make the bracketing exposures: wait for a still
moment when there is no wind or movement.
▪Open the set of images in software such as
Photomatix or Photoshop (File > Automate >
Merge to HDR), and blend your images.
▪Experiment with using different settings.
▲ Highlight/Shadow effect
By using controls that bring out shadow and highlight
details, you can simulate the appearance of HDR;
indeed, these controls work by compressing an
image’s tonal range. However, the effect usually looks 
unnatural and is further marred by halos around the
subject (above).
into the compass of a normal monitor or print
image. At the same time, details can be smoothed, 
saturation raised, and curves adjusted to create an
attractive image. These can range from the realistic
in appearance to images that are strongly painterly, 
with bold colors expressed in only mid-tones.

169
HIGH DYNAMIC RANGE
MERGE TO HDR
This shot of two friends by the sea originally
came out as a silhouette, with poor details in the
shadows. I wanted to retain some feeling for the
silhouette, but extract some shadow detail, too.
From the RAW file, I made some versions that
darkened the bright light on the sea, and some
that opened up the shadows. In Merge to HDR,
the best result was from the Exposure and Gamma
option. A little adjustment in Levels improved the 
overall contrast (see below). 
In Photoshop, Merge to HDR offers four different
algorithms for combining images: the “best” option 
depends on the characteristics of your image. In most
cases, Exposure and Gamma is the most useful, and it 
offers fine-tuning controls that are not available in the 
other methods. Local Adaptations produces highly 
graphic results and offers radius-based fine-tuning.
▲Limits to blending
A raw image of an unlit room taking in the sunny view 
outside can be darkened to bring color to the window 
(top left), while another version may be lightened to 
bring out detail in the flowers in the foreground
Exposure and Gamma
Equalize Histogram
Local Adaptations
Highlight Compression
Underexposed 1 stop
Original image
Underexposed 2 stops
Overexposed 1 stop
(above left). Blending the images using Blend Options
partially succeeds (above), but transitional mid-tone
areas, such as those around the window, are
not well blended.

Constructed tones
Tone-mapped to ensure all tones
approximate to mid-tone, the blending
of images of moving waves adds a
unique swirling blur to the rendering
of the troubled seas.


172
SELECTING PIXELS
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
There are two methods of localizing the action of 
an image-manipulation effect. The direct way is to 
use a tool that applies the effect to a limited area, 
such as the Dodge tool or any Brush. The other
method is to first select an area or certain pixels 
within the image, then apply the effect. This ensures 
that only the selected pixels will be affected. 
Selection is founded on a continuous boundary 
of difference between two areas. This means that, 
with a bit of guidance from you, the software can 
compute the rest.
Masks and selections
It is important to understand that fundamentally
there are two different ways of applying effects to a 
limited area of an image. Both define the areas that 
you can edit or in which you can apply an effect: 
these are called editable areas. A mask works by 
protecting an area from an effect—like an umbrella 
keeping you dry while all else gets rained on.
A selection does the opposite: it limits an action to 
the area it encloses—like watering only on a flower 
bed but not outside it.
There are also other differences. First, a selection
is essentially a temporary mask—it disappears as 
soon as you click outside the selected area (some 
programs allow you to save a selection, to reapply it
later or to use it on another image). If it can be
saved for reuse, it is known as an alpha channel
(technically a mask). Second, in software with
Layers, the selection applies to any layer that is 
active. Third, you can copy and move selected 
pixels—something that cannot be done with a 
mask. In practice you will switch frequently
between masks and selections.
Selections
A selection defines the border of the editable area, 
usually by showing a line of “marching ants” or
moving dots. In fact the line joins the mid-points
▲ Selecting clean shapes
This view of a church in New Zealand
shows the clean lines of the wooden
windows, but they look too dark and
colorless. In order to make the
windows lighter, but without affecting
the pale wooden walls, we need to
select the windows individually.
▲Making a selection
Using Photoshop’s Lasso, with a
feathering width set to 11 pixels,
I selected the dark glass within the
window frames. To start a new area to
be selected, hold down the Command
key (for Macs) or the Control key (for
PCs)—the selected area is defined by
moving dashes, known as “marching
ants.” When the Levels command is
invoked, settings are applied only to
the selections.
▲Final effect
In some circumstances, the somewhat 
uneven result of using the Lasso
selection can produce more realism
than a perfectly clean selection would
give. The dark areas remaining toward
the bottom of the right-hand
windows correspond to the area
omitted from the selection in the
previous image (above left). 

173
SELECTING PIXELS
▲ Selecting irregular shapes
This back-lit portrait is rather harshly lit 
by the open window, although the
darkness behind the curtains softly
rim-lights the face. Clearly, removing
the face from the background will be a
challenge because of the man’s beard.
▲Quick selection
The Quick Selection tool in Photoshop 
selected the head swiftly, but as the
darkness at the top blended into the
background, the selection extended
too far, so had to be reduced. Then,
zooming in, a small Brush was used to
apply Quick Selection to individual
hairs. In Quick Mask mode you can
see that the background will be 
removed so we can apply the face
to a different background.
▲Layer over
When you have masked away the
original background, you are free
to apply any other image as the
background. An alley in Greece at 
night was chosen, as the lighting 
matches that of the portrait yet
provides a much softer backdrop—
one which makes the most of the
sparkle in the eyeglasses.
between pixels that are wholly selected and those 
that are fully ignored—others lie on a transitional 
zone, which is known as the “feather” region. It 
follows that selections are most accurate when the 
feather region is not wider than a few pixels; with a
wide feather region it becomes difficult to know 
exactly where the editable area starts and stops. An 
important option is the ability to partially select a 
pixel near the edge of a selection. This is called 
“feathering.” It creates a gradual transition across the
boundary from pixels that are fully selected, through 
those that are partially selected, to those that are 
unselected, thus smoothing out the effect you
apply. A feathering of 0 means that the
transition will be abrupt; more than 1 pixel will give 
a more gradual transition. Note that the effect of 
increased feathering is to smooth out any sharp 
angles in the selection.
The appropriate feather setting depends on the 
subject and type of selection you want. Cleanly 
bounded subjects, such as buildings against the sky
or a figure against a white background, benefit from
a narrow feather range. On the other hand, a wide 
feathering suits images with blurred outlines due to 
limited depth of field.
Quick mask
When you make a selection it is very useful to be
able to judge its effect—to see what has been 
blocked out and what is left in. The quick mask
mode, available in many applications, switches 
between showing the selection and showing the
equivalent mask—usually as a red overlay. In this 
mode, you can adjust the mask by erasing parts you
wish the selection to reach, or painting to increase 
the reach of the selection. 
Make a choice
There are two fundamentally different ways of 
making selections. Some, like the Lasso or Marquee

174
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
SELECTING PIXELS CONTINUED
tool, indiscriminately gather up all the pixels within 
the area they define, taking no account of pixel 
values. On the other hand, value-sensitive 
selections, such as Magic Wand or Color Range,
look at values and the location of pixels—for 
example, whether they are touching similar pixels 
or not—when calculating the selection.
The basic Lasso tool is best for selecting disparate
areas with different colors and exposure. Where
you have clearly defined objects that are distinguished 
by color and exposure from the background, 
Magnetic Lasso or the equivalent, is a good choice. If 
you need to select irregular areas with straight-line 
borders, the Polygonal Lasso is the obvious tool.
Tools that select like pixels include the Magic 
Wand tool; you can click directly on the image to 
select pixels that are similar to the sampled area.
With the Color Range command you click on a 
preview to select all related pixels. The control is 
useful for locating out-of-gamut colors in order to
bring them into gamut. More sophisticated tools
can select pixels by computing their degree of 
similarity, which can give excellent results even for
the unskilled.
Computed choice
Some boundaries are extremely complicated or 
subtle, or both, with hair and glass commonly 
regarded the trickiest subjects. Tools in software
such as Topax Remask and Adobe Photoshop have
eased the problem. All work by first defining a 
transition region, such as the edge of a wine glass. 
Then you define the region to keep and the region 
to cut. The boundaries do not have to be drawn 
with great precision, but the tighter and more 
accurately drawn the transition area—so that 
unwanted colors are not included—the more
accurate the selection will be. The software then
computes the mask to apply; the best create soft
and hard edges as demanded by the image.
▲ Transparent choice
A wine-glass of water presents the
paradox of a transparent edge. Color
shows through the glass, but if we
want to add another glass to the table
we do not want to lose the edge. A
combination of personal judgement
and computation will be needed.
▲Remasking
Using a masking plug-in such as
Remask (illustrated) or Perfect Mask
takes several stages. After defining the
transition area—the areas to keep and
areas to lose—you need to refine it.
Here, parts of the glass will be lost
(red) but other parts will be kept. The
transition area is not perfect but
computation will clean it up.
▲Double or dare
The masked image is placed on a layer 
over the original, so it can be moved
easily. Here, it was moved to occupy
the empty space, the water was
turned to wine with a brush loaded
with yellow, and the glass was made
a bit smaller than the original as it is
a little further away.

175
SELECTING PIXELS
HINTS AND TIPS
▪Learn about the different ways of making a
selection. Some are obvious, such as the Lasso or
Marquee tool, but your software may have other
less-obvious methods, such as Color Range in
Photoshop, which selects a band of colors
according to the sample you choose.
▪Use feathered selections unless you are confident
you do not need to blur the boundaries. A
moderate width of around 10 pixels is a good
start for most images. But adjust the feathering to
suit the task. For a vignetted effect, use very wide
feathering, but if you are trying to separate an
object from its background, then very little
feathering produces the cleanest results. Set the
feathering before making a selection.
▪Note that the feathering of a selection tends to
smooth out the outline: sudden changes in the
direction of the boundary are rounded off.
For example, a wide feathering setting to a
rectangular selection will give it radiused corners.
▪The selected area is marked by a graphic device
called “marching ants”—a broken line that looks like a
column of ants trekking across your monitor screen:
it can be very distracting. On many applications
you can turn this off or hide it without losing the
selection: it is worth learning how to hide the “ants.”
▪In most software, after you have made an initial
selection you can add to or subtract from it by using
the selection tool and holding down an appropriate
key. Learning the method provided by your software
will save you the time and effort of having to start
the selection process all over again every time you
want to make a change.
▪Examine your selection at high magnification for
any fragments left with unnatural-looking edges.
Clean these up using an Eraser or Blur tool.
▪Making selections is easier to control with a
graphics tablet (see p. 216) rather than using
a mouse.
▲Selecting like colors
The brilliant red leaves of this 
Japanese maple seem to invite being
separated out from their background.
However, any selection methods 
based on outlining with a tool would
obviously demand a maddening
amount of painstaking effort. You
could use the Magic Wand tool but
a control such as Color Range
(above right) is far more powerful
and adaptable.
▲Color Range screen shot
In Photoshop, you can add to the
colors selected via the Eye-dropper
tool by using the plus sign, or by
clicking the Eye-dropper tool with a
minus sign (beneath the Save button).
However, you can refine the colors 
selected. The Fuzziness slider also 
controls the range of colors selected.
A medium-high setting ensures that 
you take in pixels at the edge of the
leaves, which will not be fully red.
▲Manipulated image
Having set the parameters in the
Color Range dialog box (above left), 
clicking “OK” selects the colors—in this
case, just the red leaves. By inverting
the selection, you then erase all but
the red leaves, leaving you with a
result like that shown here. Such an 
image can be stored in your library 
to be composited into another image
or used as a lively background in
another composition.

176
MASKS
Masks allow you to isolate areas of an image from 
color changes or filter effects applied to the rest of 
the image. Unlike real-life masks, digital types are 
very versatile: you can, for example, alter a mask’s 
opacity so that its effects taper off allowing you to 
see more or less clearly through it. Using image-
manipulation software you can alter a mask until 
you are satisfied with it and then save it for reuse. 
When you do so, you create what are known as
“alpha channels,” which can be converted back to 
selections. Technically, masks are 8-bit grayscale
channels—just like the channels representing the
colors—so you can edit them using the usual array
of painting and editing tools.
If your software does not offer masks, don’t 
worry—it is possible to carry out a good deal of 
work by the use of selections. But remember that 
selections are inclusive—they show what will be 
included in a change; masks work the opposite way, 
by excluding pixels from an applied effect. 
Software takes two approaches to creating 
masks. First is Photoshop’s Quick-mask, which gives
direct control and allows you to see the effect of 
any transitional zones. Or, you can create a selection 
that is turned into a mask. This is quick, but 
transitional zones cannot be assessed.
Quick-mask
In Photoshop and Photoshop Elements you hit the
Q key to enter Quick-mask mode. You then paint
on the layer and hit Q again to exit, but in the 
process, you turn the painted area into a selection.
You can also invert your selection (select the pixels
you did not first select)—sometimes it is easier to 
select an area such as bright sky behind a silhouette 
by selecting the silhouette and then inverting the 
selection. You then turn the selection into a mask
by adding a layer mask. 
The layer mask makes all the underlying pixels
disappear, unless you tell it to leave some alone. 
When applying a layer mask, you can choose to 
mask the selected area or mask all but the selected
area. The advantage of Quick-mask is that it is often 
easier to judge the effect of the painted area than it
is to make many selections. It also means that an
accidental click of the mouse outside a selection
does not cancel your work—it simply adds to the 
mask. Use Quick-masking when you have many
elements to mask out at once.
Turning selections into masks
Some methods of selecting pixels have already 
been discussed (see pp. 172–5). If you need a sharp-
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
Bottom layer
Quick-mask, or any method where you
“paint” the mask, is best when you are not attempting 
to enclose a clearly defined shape, such as a person’s
silhouette. It is best first to place the image that will be
revealed under the mask—here, an Islamic painting.
Creating the mask
Next, the mask is applied to the main leaves
in this negative image. The red color shows where
the freehand masking will be created. When it is
turned into a mask, this is the area that will allow 
the base image to show through.
1
2
USING QUICK MASK

177
MASKS
edged selection whose scale you can change 
without losing crispness of line, then you need to 
create a clipping path. 
Although almost anything you can do with 
masks you can do with selections, it is convenient 
to turn a selection into a mask as it is then easier to
store and reuse—even for other images. It is good 
practice to turn any selection you make into a mask 
(just in case you wish to reuse it), particularly if it
took a long time to create. 
ALPHA CHANNELS
Alpha channels are selections stored as masks
in the form of grayscale images. The convention 
is that fully selected areas appear as white,
nonselected areas are shown black, while partially
selected areas appear as proportionate shades
of gray. In effect, an alpha channel is just like a 
color channel, but instead of providing color it
hides some pixels and allows others to be 
visible. An alpha channel can be turned into
a selection by “loading” the selection for that
channel. The term “alpha” refers to a variable
in an equation defining the blending of one
layer with another.
▲ Limiting filter effects
Here (top), the mask “protects” the child’s face from the effect
of the Stylize/Extrude filter. Note that when you turn the
painted area into the selection, the mask would be applied
only to that selection, so you have to invert the selection to
take in everything but the face. When the filter was applied
(above), it worked only on the pixels that were not protected.
Quick-mask Layers screen shot
This dialog box shows that the painting
forms the bottom layer (but not the background,
as masks cannot be applied to the background).
The top layer consists of the grass and, to the right,
the mask is also shown.
Final effect
You can move the underlying image
around until you are happy with the results—
in other words, when the most effective areas
are showing through within the areas defined
by the masking.
3
4

178
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
QUICK FIX REMOVING BACKGROUNDS
One of the most common image-manipulation
tasks is the elimination of backgrounds. There 
are two main methods: one is to remove the 
background directly by erasing it (which is time-
consuming); the other is to hide it under a mask. 
Problem: The main problem is how to separate
a foreground object from its background while 
retaining fine edge detail, such as hair, or maintain
the transparency of a wine glass and retain shadows
and blurred edges.
Analysis: Almost all edges in images are slightly
soft or fuzzy—it is more the transitions in color and
brightness that define edges. If a transition is more
sudden and obvious than others in the locality, it is
seen as an edge. If you select the foreground in such
a way as to make all its edges sharp and well defined,
it will appear artificial and “cut-out.” However, much
depends on the final size of the foreground: if it is to
be used small and hidden by a lot of other detail,
you can afford a little inaccuracy in the selection.
If not, you must work more carefully.
With objects you expect to separate out, it is
best to work with a plain backdrop. However,
while a white or black background is preferable
to a varied one, even better is a colored ground. 
The aim is to choose a color that does not
appear anywhere on the subject—if your subject
is blond, has tanned skin, and is wearing yellow, a
blue backdrop is perfect. Avoid using rimlighting,
as this imparts a light-colored fringe to the
subject. In addition, avoid subject-movement
blur and try to keep an extended depth of field so
that any detail, such as hair behind the subject’s
head, is not soft or fuzzy.
HOW TO AVOID THE PROBLEM
Solution: Make selections with edge transitions
that are appropriate to the subject being extracted.
The usual selection methods—Lasso or Magic Wand—
are sufficient most of the time, but complicated
subjects will need special tools, such as Corel
KnockOut, Extensis Mask Professional, or the
Extract Image command in Photoshop.
▲High tolerance
If you set too high a tolerance, you
will capture parts of the building
where it meets the sky. Here, notice 
the result of setting a large feathering
(111 pixels) to the selection—pixels a
long way either side of a target pixel
are chosen. As a result, the selection
is smoothed out and the boundary
is very fuzzy. 
▲Low tolerance
With simple tasks, such as removing 
the sky from this image, the Magic
Wand or similar tool, which selects
pixels according to their color and is
available in almost all image-
manipulation software, is quick to use.
It has just one control—the tolerance—
which allows you to set the range of 
colors to be selected. If you set too low 
a tolerance (here the setting was 22) 
you obtain a result in which only a part
of the sky is selected, seen by the
marching ants occupying just the
right-hand portion of the sky and
small, isolated groups.
▲Removing the sky
Adjusting the tolerance setting in
small, incremental steps allows you to
see when you have captured just the
right area to be removed. Then, 
pressing “OK” removes your
selection. The edges of the selection
may be hard to see in a small image,
but are clearly visible on a large
monitor screen.

179
QUICK FIX REMOVING BACKGROUNDS
Original image
This original image of a young Afghan girl—an
expert carpet weaver—shows her taking to the floor
to dance. Unfortunately, the distracting background
does not add to the image as a whole.
Knocking out the background
Now, while the mask hides part of the image
on its own layer, it does not affect images on another
layer (below left). Therefore, if you place an image
behind the mask, you will see that image appear.
Defining fore- and background
Using Corel KnockOut, I drew inside the girl’s
outline to define the foreground and then outside it to
define the background. Between is the transition area
that allows soft boundaries to be smoothly masked.
Making the mask
Using the information from step 2, a mask was
created. This outlines the foreground and hides the
background: the black shows the hidden area and the
white where the image will show through.
Layers screen shot
The Layers dialog box shows the girl and the
associated mask lying over the introduced image.
Because the mask was produced by extracting the
girl, the original background is gone, awaiting a new 
background image to be introduced.
Masked combination
The background was lightened to tone in with
the colors of the girl. The mask has preserved the
softness of her outline, and now she appears to be in
front of the wall-hanging. An extra refinement may be
to soften the background so that it appears less sharp.
1
4
2
3
5
6

180
LAYER BLEND MODES
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
The “layers” metaphor is fundamental to many
software applications, such as desktop publishing,
video animation, and digital photography. The idea 
is that images are “laid” on top of each other, though 
the order is interchangeable. Think of layers as a 
stack of acetate sheets with images; where the layer
is transparent, you see through to the one below. 
However, not all software layers have the same 
resolution, start with the same number of channels, 
or have the same image mode. The final image 
depends on how layers blend or merge when they 
are “flattened,” or combined, for final output. Before 
then, however, they allow you to make changes 
without altering the original data, while each 
remains independent of the others. 
Color as layers
A key point to remember is that the basic color 
image is comprised of red, green, and blue layers—
normally called channels. In essence, the terms
“layers” and “channels” are interchangeable. Masks,
too, are channels, as they work with a layer to affect 
the appearance of an underlying layer. 
By analogy, if you see a face through a layer of 
misted glass it looks soft or diffused. Now, if you 
clean off part of the glass, the portion of face lying
directly under the cleaned-off area becomes clearly 
visible, without being obscured as it is under other 
parts of the glass. So the glass is a layer over the
underlying layer—the face—and by doing something 
to part of it, but not the whole, you have applied a 
mask, which is, in effect, another layer.
Using layers
The main use for layers (also known as “objects” or
“floaters” in some applications) is to arrange 
composite images—those made up of two or 
more separately obtained images. You can place 
images on top of one another—varying the order in
which they lie; duplicate smaller images and place 
them around the canvas to create a new image; or 
change the size of the individual components or
distort them at will. At the same time, the ways in 
which one layer interacts or blends with the 
underlying layer—known as the blend modes—can 
also be altered. Finally, you can control the 
transparency or opacity of the layers, too—from 
high opacity for full effect (or low transparency),
to barely visible, when you set a high transparency 
(or low opacity).
▲Original 1
The dreamy spires of a Cambridge college in England
offer the clean clarity of shape and line that are ideal
for work with superimposing images. The actively
clouded sky also adds variety without too much detail.
Prior to use, the image had its colors strengthened by
increasing saturation and the towers were straightened
so that they did not lean backwards.
▲Original 2
The outline of wintry trees in France provides fascinatingly
complicated silhouettes for the image worker. Taken on
a dull day, the sky was too even to be interesting for this
exercise, so a rainbow-colored gradient was applied
across the whole image. Finally, the colors were
strengthened and the outline of the trees sharpened
to improve their graphic impact.

181
LAYER BLEND MODES
▲Normal
The Normal blend is often ignored but it is a proper
blending mode—provided you lower the opacity of the top
layer below 100 percent, the lower layer then becomes
progressively more visible. Here, the top layer at 50 percent
shows a useful blend is possible—one that cannot be
replicated by other blend modes—and it does not matter
which is the topmost image.
▲Multiply
This mode is the digital equivalent of sandwiching two
color slides—densities multiply and the image darkens.
Here, the upper layer was reduced to 60 percent opacity 
to stop the trees turning black. Multiply mode can be
used to recover images that are too light (overexposed
slides or underexposed negatives). Duplicate the image 
into another layer and set this new layer to Multiply.
▲Overlay
This mode is able to mix colors evenly from both layers,
and is very responsive to changes in opacity. It works by
screening light areas in the upper layer onto the lower and
by multiplying dark areas of the upper layer onto the lower, 
which is the opposite effect of Hard Light (see p. 182). At
lowered opacities, its effect is similar to that of the Normal
blend but with more intense colors. It is useful for adding 
textures to an image.
▲Screen
Adding together the lightness of corresponding pixels
is like projecting one slide from a projector onto the 
projected image of another slide—the result is always
a lighter image. By reducing the opacity of the top layer,
you control image darkness. This mode is useful for
lightening an overly dark image (the opposite of 
Multiply). Simply duplicate the image onto another
layer and set the top to Screen, then adjust opacity.

182
LAYER BLEND MODES CONTINUED
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
▲Soft Light
Soft Light blending darkens or lightens image colors,
depending on the blend color. The effect is similar to 
shining a diffused spotlight on the image. Now, painting 
with pure black or white produces a distinctly darker or
lighter area but does not result in pure black or white. This
is a very effective way of making local tonal adjustments.
It is a softer, and generally more useful version of the Hard
Light blending mode.
▲Hard Light
This mode is similar to Soft Light: it darkens image color 
if the blend layer is dark, and lightens it if the blend is
light, but with greater contrast. It simulates the contrasty 
projection of the image onto another image. It is generally
less useful than Soft Light but can prove valuable for
increasing local contrast—particularly if applied as a painted 
color at very low pressures and lowered opacity.
BLENDING MODES
Interactions between layers are tricky to learn, as their precise effect
depends on the value of a pixel on the source (or blend, or upper) layer
compared with the corresponding pixel on the destination (or lower) layer.
The most often-used method is simply to try them out one by one (hold the
shift key down and press “+” or “-” to step through the menu) until the effect
looks attractive. This can distract from your initial vision by offering effects
you had not thought of—but that is part of the fun of working with powerful
software. With experience you will get to know the Blend modes that are
most pleasing and plan your images with them in mind.
One key point to remember is that the effectiveness of a mode
may depend to a great extent on the opacity set on the source layer—
sometimes a small change in opacity turns a garish result into one that
is visually persuasive. So if you find an effect that does not look quite
right, change the opacity to see what effect this has.
Of the many blend modes available in such software as Adobe
Photoshop or Corel Painter, some of the most useful are:
▪Soft Light: Offers a useful approach for making tonal adjustments 
(see above).
▪Color: Adds color to the receiving layer without changing its
brightness or luminance—useful for coloring in grayscale images.
▪Difference: Produces dramatic effects by reversing tones and colors.
▪Color Burn/Dodge: Useful for greatly increasing contrast and color
saturation or, at lower opacities, making global changes in tone and
exposure (see opposite).
▲ Interaction modes
The different ways in which 
layers can interact also apply
to other situations, such as
painting, fading a command,
and cloning. Experience with
different effects helps you to 
previsualize results.

183
LAYER BLEND MODES
▲Color Dodge 
At first glance, Color Dodge appears like Screen mode
(see p. 181) in that it brightens the image, but its effect 
is more dramatic. Black in the upper layer has no effect 
on the receiving layer, but all other colors will tint the
underlying colors as well as increasing color saturation and
brightness. This mode is useful when you want to create
strong, graphic results. Note that when you change the
order of the images you get markedly different effects.
▲Color Burn
This blend mode produces very strong effects as it
increases color saturation and contrast. At the same
time, it produces darkened images by replacing lighter
underlying pixels with darker top pixels. Be aware that 
both Color Burn and Color Dodge modes often produce
colors that are so extreme they cannot be printed—in other
words, they are out-of-gamut for printers.
▲Darken 
The Darken mode applies only darker pixels from the
top layer to the bottom layer. Here, the black branches
of the trees overshadow anything that lies under them,
showing the importance of using clear but interesting
shapes. This mode does not strongly change colors. If, for
example, there is no difference between the corresponding
pixels on the top and bottom layers, there is no change—
so this mode cannot be used to darken an image (but see
Multiply, p. 181). 
▲Difference 
The Difference mode is one of the most useful for giving
dramatic and usable effects, since it reverses tones and
colors at the same time—the greater the difference between
corresponding pixels, the brighter the result will be.
Notice how the dark forms of the trees are rendered
in the negative, while the blues of the sky turn to magenta.
Therefore, where top and bottom pixels are identical, the
result is black, and if one is white and the other black,
the result is white.

184
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
LAYER BLEND MODES CONTINUED
◀Luminosity 
This blend mode is a variant of Hue and Color: this time,
the luminosity of the top layer is retained while the color
and saturation of the underlying layer are applied. It is
always worth trying the layers in different orders when
working with these modes, particularly with this group
consisting of Hue, Color, and Luminosity. In this image,
reducing the opacity of the top layer produces a soft, 
appealing image, in contrast to the more high-contrast
result when both layers are left at full strength.
▲Saturation
Here, the saturation of the underlying layer is changed to
that of the corresponding pixel in the top, or source, layer.
Where saturation is high, the lower image returns a richer
color. It is useful where you wish to define a shape using
richer or weaker colors: create a top layer with the shape
you want and change saturation only within the shape,
then apply Saturation mode.
▲Hue
In this mode the colors of the top layer are combined
with the saturation and brightness (luminosity) values of 
the lower layer. The result can be a strong toning effect, 
as seen here, or it can be weak, depending on the images
used. It is worth comparing the effect of this mode with
that of the Color mode (below).
▲Color 
Both hue and saturation of the upper layer are 
transferred to the lower layer, while the luminosity of 
the receiving layer is retained. This mode simulates the
hand-tinting effect of black and white prints. Note that
the receiving layer does not have to be turned to a
grayscale image for this mode to be effective. Compare
this with Hue mode (above).
▲Exclusion
A softer version of Difference mode (see p. 183), Exclusion
returns gray to pixels with medium-strong colors, rather
than strengthening the colors. A useful variant is to
duplicate the top layer and apply Exclusion to the duplicate
layer—now topmost. This creates something similar to the 
Sabattier effect.

185
LAYER BLEND MODES
▲Vivid Light
This both burns and dodges: lighter blend colors
decrease contrast and lighten the receiving layer
(dodges), while darker ones increase contrast and
darken the lower color.
▲ Pin Light
Blend colors lighten or darken the underlying layer
according to the blend color and underlying color.
The results are tricky to predict, but visually appealing
effects are often produced.
▲ Linear Burn
The receiving colors are darkened to match the blend color.
This burns or darkens the image without increase
in contrast. The strong darkening effect is best tempered
through opacity control.
▲ Linear Light
Similar to Vivid Light, this burns or dodges in response
to the blend color by changing brightness. Its effect is
to increase contrast—as darker colors are darkened, lighter
ones are lightened.
▲ Linear Dodge
Similar to Color Dodge (see p. 183), this blend mode
brightens the base or receiving layer to match that of the
blend layer, thus blends with black produce no change. It
is an effective way of brightening an image to a high-key 
effect but has a tendency to produce too much blank white.
▲ Lighten
This mode chooses the lighter of the two colors being
blended as the result of the combination. This blend
tends to flatten or reduce contrast, but it is effective for
producing pastel tones. Images that originally have subtle
tones respond very well to this mode.

186
CLONING TECHNIQUES
Cloning is the process of copying, repeating, or
duplicating pixels from one part of an image, or 
taking pixels from another image, and placing them 
on another part of the image. First, you sample, or 
select, an area that is to be the source of the clone,
and then you apply that selected area where it is 
needed. This is a basic tool in image manipulation, 
and you will find yourself constantly turning to it
whenever you need, say, to replace a dust speck in
the sky of an image with an adjacent bit of sky, or 
remove stray hairs from a face by cloning nearby 
skin texture over them.
This is only the start, however. Such cloning 
makes an exact copy of the pixels, but you can go 
much further. Some applications, such as Corel
Painter, allow you to invert, distort, and otherwise 
transform the cloned image compared with the 
source you took it from.
HINTS AND TIPS
The following points may help you avoid some
of the more obvious cloning pitfalls:
▪Clone with the tool set to maximum (100 percent).
Less than this will produce a soft-looking clone.
▪In areas with even tones, use a soft-edged, or
feathered Brush as the cloning tool; in areas
of fine detail, use a sharp-edged Brush.
▪Work systematically, perhaps from left to
right, from a cleaned area into areas with 
dust specks—or else you may be cloning the
specks themselves. 
▪If your cloning produces an unnaturally smooth-
looking area, you may need to introduce some
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
▲Original image
An unsightly tarred area of road left
by repairs marred this street scene in
Prague. All it will take is a little cloning
to bring about a transformation.
▲History palette
The screen shot of the History 
palette shows the individual 
cloning steps that were
necessary to bring about the 
required transformation.
▲Manipulated image
The result is not perfect, since it has
none of the careful radial pattern of 
the original, but it is far preferable
to the original image. It was finished
off by applying an Unsharp Masking
filter plus a few tonal adjustments.
noise to make it look more natural: select the area
to be worked on and then apply the Noise filter.
▪You can reduce the tendency of cloning to produce
smooth areas by reducing the spacing setting. Most
digital Brushes are set so that they apply “paint” in
overlapping dabs—typically, each dab is separated 
by a quarter of the diameter of the brush. Your
software may allow you to change settings to that
of zero spacing. 
▪If you expect to apply extreme tonal changes using,
say, Curves settings, apply the Curves before cloning.
Extreme tonalities can reveal cloning by showing
boundaries between cloned and uncloned areas.

187
CLONING TECHNIQUES
◀Original image
Suppose you wished to remove the lamp on the far
left of this image to show an uninterrupted area of 
sky. You could use the cloning tool to do this, but it
would be a lot of work and there would be a danger
of leaving the sky’s tones unnaturally smoothed-out
in appearance.
Marquee tool
The Marquee tool was set
to a feather of 10 pixels (to blur its
border) and placed near the lamp
to be removed to ensure a
smooth transition in sky tones.
Removing the lamp
By applying the Marquee
tool, you can see here how the
cloned area of sky is replacing
the lamp. Further cloning of sky
was needed in order to smooth
out differences in tone and
make the new sky area look 
completely natural.
Looking at details
The final removal of the
lamp was done with a smaller
Marquee area, with its feather
set to zero (as sharp as possible).
Finally, the lamp behind the
one removed was restored by
carefully cloning from visible
parts of the lamp.
Cleaned-up
result
As a finishing touch, a
small area of cloud was 
cloned over the top of 
the lamp and its lid was
darkened to match the
others left on the pier.
1
2
3
4

188
SIMPLE COMPOSITE
Composite images bring together disparate elements
from different images. The resulting combination 
could be fantastical—an underwater tea party for 
lions—or it could be prosaic—a tea party on the 
lawn with a few extra people. Sketch out an idea in 
your mind before starting work. You will then find 
it easier to trawl your picture library for suitable 
elements. Before you start work, collect all the 
working images at their full size into one folder, 
then create a canvas of the size you wish to create.
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
Original image
A rather lackluster image of the Plaza Blanca,
New Mexico, USA, is asking for some added pizazz.
The sky could be more exciting, and the foreground
is woefully lacking in active interest.
Choosing a dramatic sky
The skies of the American Midwest famously
yield a rich variety of formations. The choice is
restricted by the lighting in the original, in which
the pale sun comes from the left of the image.
Cutting out
We could cut out the rocky skyline using a 
selection tool or, because it is a very easy outline, we
can exploit the precision of the pen tool. We increase
contrast and decrease exposure using an adjustment
layer to give the sky more impact.
Finding a contrasting subject
A sleek dog strolling in the Moroccan port of
Essaouira makes an outstanding candidate to occupy
the foreground of the landscape. The shape is easily
cut out, and the black color means there will be no
problems with tonal matching.
1
2
3
4
Big match
Whatever kind of image you work on, the key to 
success is the match: the final image will work best
when all the elements blend well. Images should
share lighting (shadows should fall consistently),
and tone and contrast should be appropriate—that 
is, elements that are further away should be lower in
contrast. The detail resolution of different 
components should match, and, finally, color
balance across the image should be consistent.

189
SIMPLE COMPOSITE
Adding in dog and shadow
We cut out the dog and paste it. We then
select the dog’s shape, then fill with black to make
the shadow. We adjust opacity for a natural-looking
density, then use the Free Transform tool to flip and
position the shadow to make it look realistic.
Making color adjustments
Using adjustment layers for Hue/Saturation
and for Color Balance, we tone down the colors to
produce a soft, tinted look. The sky is masked in order
to apply stronger adjustments to the foreground to
subdue the strong orangey/pink color.
5
6
▲FINAL SHOT

190
IMAGE STITCHING
IMAGE DEVELOPMENT
Panoramic views can be created by “stitching,” or 
overlaying, images side-by-side (see pp. 92–3). 
Essentially, a sequence of images is taken from one
side of the scene to the other (or from the top to the
bottom). The individual images are then overlapped 
to create a seamless composite. 
You do not need special software to achieve
panoramas if the original shots are taken with care. 
You simply create a long canvas and drop the 
images in, overlapping them. However, small errors 
in framing can make this a slow process, since you
must blend the overlaps to hide the joins. 
Appropriate software
Speciality panoramic software makes joining up 
component shots far easier, especially if they were 
taken without a tripod. The available software 
packages offer different approaches. Some try to 
match overlaps automatically and blend shots
together by blurring the overlaps. The results look 
rather crude, but are effective for low-resolution
use. 
Other 
software 
applications 
are 
able 
to recognize if the overlaps do not match and try to
accommodate the problem—some by distorting 
the image, others by trying to correct perspective. 
Many 
digital 
cameras 
are 
supplied 
with
panorama-creation software.
For more unusual effects, experiment with
placing incongruous images together, or deliberately
distort the perspective or overlaps so that the 
components clash rather than blend. There is a 
great deal of interesting new work still to be done. 

191
IMAGE STITCHING
◀Assembly
To start the assembly (left), 
move the component
images into a single folder
where the software can 
access them. With some
software, you will be able
to move images around to
change their order, while
in others you will have to 
open the images in the
correct order. To merge
the images, the software
may need extra
instructions, such as the
equivalent focal length of 
the lens used.
▼Final version
The component images
show very generous
overlaps, which make it
easier for the software to 
create smooth blends. Once
the component images are
all combined on one canvas,
you can use the facilities
offered by the particular
software to blend and
disguise the overlaps to 
create a seamless, single
image (below). Once you are
happy with your work, save 
the file as a TIFF, not as a
JPEG, for best-quality results.
HINTS AND TIPS
▪A panorama resulting from, say, six average-size
images will be a very large file, so reduce the size
of the component images first to avoid stretching
your computer’s capacity.
▪If you want to create a panorama that covers half 
the horizon or more, it may be better to stitch it
in stages: three or four images at a time, then
stitch the resulting panoramas. Keep an eye on
the image size.
▪Place all the component images together into one
folder: some software will not be able to access
images if they are in different folders.


BUYING
GUIDE
4

194
CAMERA PHONES
BUYING GUIDE
The capabilities of camera phones range from 
handsets that simply make phone calls and 
snap pictures to those that can apply image
manipulations, upload images to remote websites, 
and more. The so-called “smartphone,” with
multimedia capabilities and multiple functions, is
invariably equipped with a camera, and one with 
increasingly respectable performance that is able to 
rival that of simple point-and-shoot cameras.
The camera in your pocket
When the emphasis is on being ready to grab a shot 
whenever it may occur—particularly in a dramatic,
once-in-a-lifetime 
situation—the 
best 
camera,
without doubt, is the one that is in your pocket. That 
is most likely to be the camera on your phone.
The differences between camera phones and 
point-and-shoot cameras has narrowed to the
extent that camera phones can start up, respond, 
and shoot almost as rapidly as point-and-shoot
cameras. However, flash is much weaker on camera
phones and they are not usually equipped with 
either fast (large-aperture) or zoom lenses. Low-
light capabilities of camera phones are much
weaker than those of compact cameras. Most use 
a combination of ISO selection and exposure time 
to adjust exposure. 
The largest weakness of camera phones is their
unprotected lens. Even when they are recessed for
protection, lenses easily attract dust and fingerprints.
Keep the lens clean by regularly using a microfiber
cloth to remove grease and dust.
▲High resolution
Camera phones offering high
resolutions—of 23 megapixels or
more—can make a good substitute for
a point-and-shoot camera if they offer
fast autofocus. Modern cameras can
also record 4K (Ultra HD) video.
▲ Multifunction
Some designs are famed for the
quality of their cameras, which may
include image stabilization, as well as 
many built-in filters. High-end camera
phones offer high-resolution screens
and 4K (Ultra HD) as standard.
▲Accessorizing
A camera phone’s built-in lens may be
supplemented by attaching converter
lenses. Ranging from fish-eye lenses
to telephoto, these vary greatly in
quality, but generally speaking, the 
more you pay, the better the results.
DIGITAL ZOOM 
This feature takes the image produced by the 
lens’s longest focal length setting and
progressively enlarges the central portion. The
camera appears to offer a zoom range that is
longer than that of the lens alone, but this comes
at the price of a reduction in image quality.
Longest zoom setting
Digital zoom enlargement

195
CAMERA PHONES
Camera phone features 
While a simple camera phone, offering essentially 
no more than a shutter button, may seem restrictive, 
many photographers enjoy the return to absolute
basics. With nothing to adjust, you can concentrate
fully on the subject and respond with uninhibited 
spontaneity. Many smartphones allow you to touch 
the screen to select the focus or exposure point, 
which is useful for back-lit conditions and off-
center subjects. Some provide digital zoom to 
increase the reach of the view; these work best with 
high-resolution cameras (see box opposite). 
Choosing your camera phone 
Fitting a camera into the tiny space of a cellphone 
demands compromises, so it is best to look on the 
camera element as pared-down and simplified.
Choose a phone that works well for you, before
checking that the camera part performs well. You
should be able to access the camera in a single
movement; it should be able to take pictures at a
rate of at least one frame per second; and uploading 
images to your computer should be easy—through 
USB or wirelessly through Bluetooth.
▲ Stereoscopic
Camera phones with two lenses can
capture stills and video in stereo, and
also play back in stereo. Modern
systems do not need special glasses:
the stereo effect is built into the
screen, giving impressive results.
▲ True zoom
Some camera phones are true hybrids:
cameras that can make phone calls, 
and vice versa. Equipped with a zoom
lens, flash, and many camera-like 
controls, these may be ideal for the
keen, connected photographer.
▲Tablets
Many tablets are equipped with both
backward- and forward-facing cameras 
but they do not make the most
convenient cameras. They are ideal for
showing pictures, and for monitoring
views thanks to their large screens.
EXTENSION BY APP
A most significant aspect of camera phone 
technology is the ability to extend what they can
do by downloading and installing applications
on the camera phone itself. They do this by
running with standard operating systems such as
Android or iOS. Essentially they are computers 
that can be expanded if you supply more and
more applications. 
  You can install applications that link GPS
(Global Positioning System) data with your
images, or that can even send the images to your
computer or photo-sharing site automatically.
There are numerous applications that make it 
easy to post-process your images, giving them
vintage or other special effects. You can install
apps to add grids to your screen to aid
composition, add anti-shake features to reduce
blurry pictures, or even add a self-timer. Other
apps make it easy to share your images with 
social networks or dedicated photo-sharing sites. 
All these extend the feature-set of a camera 
phone without physically changing the phone.

196
COMPACTS
Palm-size and as easy to use as to carry around,
compact point-and-shoot cameras did more than
take photography to the masses—they took 
photography into every corner of modern life. From 
the most private and prosaic tasks, such as brushing
your teeth or cooking last night’s meal, to the most 
important occasions, from births to weddings, 
anything and everything was caught on camera.
Point-and-shoot cameras
Compact 
point-and-shoot 
cameras 
are 
so 
ubiquitous and widely used that it is easy to take
them for granted. With more computing power and 
high-grade optics in each camera than took man to 
the moon, they are capable of amazingly good 
results in a wide range of conditions. And no longer 
are the color choices black or silver: many models
offer body colors ranging from pink to purple 
through yellows and blues.
▪Ensure the camera is not too small: you should be 
able to use the controls while holding it.
▪Compacts are high-precision optical instruments: 
they will not survive for long in the bottom of a 
handbag, and will need to be looked after.
Enthusiast or advanced compacts
When images from camera phones can make it on 
to newspaper front pages and be seen all around 
the world, keen photographers should not dismiss
simple point-and-shoot cameras too quickly. But if 
BUYING GUIDE
▶Autofocus
compact
These small cameras 
offer a winning
combination of 
high performance,
compactness, and 
connectivity.
▲Entry-level compacts
Basic cameras are very easy to use 
and can produce very good 
results despite their low cost.
Although perfect as a back-up 
camera, they may not be ideal for
a beginner as their basic controls 
limit experimentation.
▲Rugged camera 
A compact camera can be made very 
rugged by the addition of rubber
bumpers all around, sealing against 
dust and water to allow underwater
operation, and with oversized
controls to allow for use with gloves
in cold weather conditions.
▲Stylish compact 
Sleek and beautifully made and
finished, today’s compact cameras
can be very stylish yet still give 
excellent results. Extensive use of 
touch-screen controls eliminates
virtually all buttons, and compact 
dimensions make for easy portability.
Mode dials are easier 
to operate than
touch-screen controls.
A zoom with 
21x ratio 
makes for 
a versatile 
camera.
Wi-Fi or Bluetooth enable 
connection with TVs and
the internet.

197
COMPACTS
▲Super zoom
By compromising on a slightly larger
camera, the lens can be of larger
aperture and focal range. Modern 
super-zooms offer very wide-angle
performance, for example from 
24mm to 350mm extreme telephoto
with full camera controls.
▲ Prime-lens compact
For the enthusiast or purist who does
not need a zoom lens, a compact
such as this model, with a fixed zoom
(28 mm or 35 mm equivalent), may
be an acceptable option. It is easy to
operate and places an emphasis on
the quality of image capture.
▲Enthusiast zoom
Even in a compact body, modern
cameras can offer extensive zoom 
ranges of 14x or greater. However, 
maximum aperture at the telephoto 
end may be limited to f/8 or less,
which restricts photography in 
low-light conditions.
you enjoy cameras with many features, such as fully 
manual controls plus a choice of capturing in raw or 
JPEG, then enthusiast compacts will fit the bill. Some
models offer zooms that are wider than usual (for 
example, 24mm or 25mm), some offer fast lenses 
with maximum apertures of f/2 or better and, as a 
class, every aspect of handling and image quality 
can be expected to be superior to that of less costly 
point-and-shoot models.
▪If you wish to shoot raw format images, check 
how quickly the camera works with the resulting 
large files.
▪If your camera is a back-up to a larger model, 
ensure that you can share the same type of memory
cards and cables.
▪Check the availability of a hot-shoe if you may 
wish to use an accessory flash-gun.
Super-zoom cameras
Advances in lens technology have enabled
extremely long-range zooms to be squeezed into 
very compact housings. Ranges of 20x are common, 
and 50x is possible. The wide-angle end is as short
as 20 mm (usually 24mm to 35mm), while the long
end of the range can reach an amazing 1,000 mm 
or more. This means you can expect a lion’s head to 
fill the frame at usual viewing distances on a safari.
To ensure that you can obtain sharp images
at the longest zoom settings, built-in image 
stabilization is a must. Maximum apertures at the
long end may be limited to as small as f/8; this is a
severe limitation on working in low light or if you 
wish to obtain short depth-of-field effects. These
cameras are ideal for travel and vacation photography 
as they are very compact yet highly versatile.
▪Check the sturdiness of the lens housing at full 
extension: it will be a little loose, but should not 
bend visibly.
▪Limit use of the zoom in very dusty conditions to 
avoid sucking up dust into the mechanism.
RESOLUTION AND
QUALITY
The word “resolution” is used in several different
senses in photography. Applied to camera
sensors, it measures the number of photo-sites
used to capture the image. The resolution of the
image itself is often equated with image size, or
its number of pixels. In the context of lens
performance or image quality, it is a measure of 
how well a system separates out fine detail. 
These measures are related, but not directly. 
For example, the resolution of a sensor sets the
upper limit of image quality, but not the lower
limit: a high-resolution sensor may deliver a
poor-resolution image if the quality of capture,
lens, or image-processing is poor.

198
BUYING GUIDE
Within a few years of its introduction in 2010, the 
mirrorless interchangeable lens compact camera
proved to be an innovative development. By 
disposing of the mirror used by SLR cameras (see 
pp. 200–1), this new design could be made slimmer 
and more compact. By offering an interchangeable 
lens mount that is very close to the sensor, these 
cameras can offer compact lenses of their own and
also make use of virtually any lens in existence
simply by fitting an appropriate lens adapter to 
interface between lens and camera.
The right camera for the job
Mirrorless cameras exploit a range of sensor 
sizes—from Nikon’s 13.8 x 10.4 mm, through the 
popular Micro 4/3 and 4/3 sizes, to “full-frame” 
24  x  36 mm. If you need the most compact 
designs, choose cameras fitted with smaller 
sensors. The lenses will also be more compact
than those for larger sensors. If you fit a lens
designed for a larger sensor, you will multiply the 
effective focal length, giving extra telephoto reach 
but reducing wide-angle views (see also p. 203).
A cover hides and
protects sockets for 
HDMI, USB, and
other cables.
Zoom or fixed-focal length
lenses can be fitted.
▶ Full-frame
compact
A  relatively small body
equipped with a 35mm
format sensor offers a
winning compact but
high-quality package
taking a vast range of 
interchangeable lenses.
Compromises come with
reduced battery life and
sturdiness.
Multiple modes, overrides, and 
many menu options give versatility.
The high-resolution 
electronic viewfinder 
(EVF) is ideal for 
accurate framing.
▲ Compact interchangeable
By including an APS-C sensor size and
only a rear LCD screen, models of this
type can be very light and compact.
Interchangeable lenses—ranging from 
wide angles to long zooms—and flashes
extend its versatility.
▲ Modern retro
The controls may look old-fashioned,
but their chunkiness improves
handling and usability, complementing 
touch-screen controls. These compact
and light cameras use a CX-format
sensor (just 14 mm on longest side).
▲Top-end siblings
You don’t have to pay big money to
benefit from the superior technology
of top-end models. By sacrificing a few 
features, such as optical rangefinder,
you can still capture high-quality
images with a mid-budget camera.
MIRRORLESS COMPACTS

199
MIRRORLESS COMPACTS
Picture quality is not necessarily inferior with smaller 
sensors, given the high quality of modern signal
processing. For the best compromise between size 
and image quality, choose cameras with APS-C size 
sensors or similar—that is, about 24 x 15 mm.
These cameras are all absolutely packed full of 
functions, so they offer users extreme versatility. 
Their capabilities may be extended by installing
apps from the internet, and many models offer the
ability to connect wirelessly to the Web or to 
computers and printers.
Using the EVF
In addition to the monitor screen included on the 
backs of all cameras, the more advanced models
offer users an electronic viewfinder (EVF). This is a 
small but very high-resolution screen that is looked
at through an eyepiece. The EVF gives you the best 
image for evaluating and framing your subject. It
works well in the dark and can give fairly accurate 
representations of color balance and exposure 
override, as well as special effects. The EVF can 
display camera settings clearly, too, so you do not 
need to take your eye away from the viewfinder in 
order to check the camera’s settings.
Interchangeable lenses
As sensors improved in quality, the search began
for camera designs that could combine the image 
quality and versatility of single-lens reflex (SLR) 
cameras with the compactness and portability of 
point-and-shoot models.
The 4/3 (Four Thirds) format is an open standard
for single-lens reflex cameras—they have a mirror
box and reflex optical viewfinder behind a standard 
lens mount. The sensor has an imaging area of 
17.3 x 13.0 mm (21.63 mm diagonal), with a 4:3 
aspect ratio. This results in a focal-length factor of 
2x—for example, a 25 mm lens on 4/3 format is 
equivalent to a 50 mm lens on full-frame (see p. 200).
Video capable 
Almost all modern models are capable of capturing
video, and when possible they will capture HD 
(high definition). Some can even record at 4K (Ultra 
HD). These cameras can produce footage of film-
studio quality and are, indeed, even used in the
motion-picture industry. These cameras helped
revolutionize independent filmmaking. For best
results, ensure you equip the camera with high-
quality, high-speed memory cards.
▲SLR look-alike
It may seem like an SLR, but this model
is considerably smaller and lighter.
Thanks to its Micro 4/3 lens mount, it 
accepts a wide range of excellent optics
to give professional-grade imaging in
the mid-price range.
▲Compact capable
Cameras that do not offer the highest
resolution or fastest lenses benefit users
who wish to balance high quality with
convenience and speedy operation. 
These cameras are also suited to smaller
budgets or those just starting out.
▲Advanced CIL
High-specification compact
interchangeable lens (CIL) cameras
with APS-C sensors bridge the gap
between truly professional models 
and others. The most recent models
also offer 4K video recording.

200
SLRs
BUYING GUIDE
At one time, the dominance of the digital single-
lens reflex (SLR) camera seemed unassailable. It 
gives the clearest, most precise view of the subject
with accurate feedback on focus. But the SLR has 
lost ground to compact interchangeable lens 
cameras using high-resolution electronic viewfinders.
Entry-level SLRs
The entry-level SLR is fully capable of professional 
quality results but is built to offer many features at
low cost, using the APS-C or Four Thirds sensors.
These cameras will accept most, if not all, of the 
lenses and accessories that can be used on larger 
SLRs but are smaller, lighter, and generally offer 
lower 
specifications 
than 
their 
professional 
equivalents. Therefore, they make good backups to 
professional gear. All current models offer HD video
recording in addition to a full range of stills settings.
Professional SLRs
There is no clear line between entry-level SLRs and 
professional-level SLRs, as different models are
used by both amateurs and professionals. The larger
cameras—such as the EOS-1D series from Canon, 
Some systems offer more than
50 interchangeable lenses.
Pentaprism cover conceals 
a pop-up flash unit.
▶SLR
The most reliable, sturdy, 
and consistent performance 
can be expected from
today’s SLR cameras. All the
technology used is highly
refined and all controls are 
easy to access, allowing for 
fluid, versatile photography
at professional levels for 
affordable prices.
35mm film area
Sensor 
area
Projected 
image
SENSOR SIZE AND FIELD OF VIEW 
A camera lens projects a circular image. The sensor captures a
rectangular area centered on this image. If the rectangle extends
to the edge of the circle of light, the sensor captures the full field
of view. But if the capture area falls short of the edge, the field of 
view is smaller. Many SLR cameras accept conventional 35mm
format lenses but use sensors that are smaller than the 35mm
format (around APS, or about 24 x 16mm). The result is that the
field of view is reduced, which in turn means the focal length is
effectively increased, usually by a factor of around 1.5x. This means
that a 100mm lens used on full-frame 35mm is effectively a
50mm lens when used with an APS-size sensor. The convention is
to relate the actual focal length to the 35mm format equivalent.
Peppering of
buttons on camera
may take some
time to master.

201
SLRs
the D3 series from Nikon, and certain models from
Sony 
and 
Olympus—are 
designed 
for 
the
professional. 
They 
feature 
high-specification
shutters, a sturdy build, seals against dust and
moisture, as well as superior-quality viewfinders 
and features. Some cameras use a full-frame, 36 x
24mm sensor; others use smaller ones, with 
resolutions ranging from 10 MP (megapixels) to
25 MP or more, depending on whether the 
emphasis is on quality or speed of operation.
Choosing an SLR
For the beginner, the best-value cameras are those
that have been supplanted by a new model or two. 
Their price will be much lower than when they were
first introduced, yet their performance will be more 
than satisfactory. This is because, by 2010,
technological development had reached a plateau 
with all camera models capable of producing image 
quality that easily matched the professional levels of 
a few years earlier.
▪Choose a camera that you find easy to hold,
comfortable to use, and easy to set up.
▪You almost certainly do not need the highest 
resolution camera: 12MP is ample for most image 
uses, such as in websites and publications.
LIVE VIEW AND VIDEO
The normal way to view through an SLR is to
examine the image reflected onto the focusing
screen by the mirror. In some models, you can 
view the image via the LCD display, just like
using a compact camera—this is called live view, 
and it gives you more viewing options. To
enable this, either the mirror is raised and the
shutter is opened, to allow light to fall on the
sensors, or the focusing screen image is
reflected onto a sensor.
  When live view is enabled, the sensor receives
light continuously. This makes it possible for
the sensor to record video—an advantage fully
exploited by today’s cameras. The result is that
modern SLRs can now capture high-definition 
video—of 720 or 1080 lines in resolution.
However, SLR lenses are not as well made as
cinematic lenses, so zooming, aperture control, 
and focus are not as smooth. SLR cameras also 
capture lower-quality sound than professional
HD video cameras. Furthermore, SLR cameras
tend to capture highly compressed video, which 
limits post-processing. However, video quality
can be excellent, and at a fraction of the cost of 
professional HD cameras.
▲Entry level
SLR cameras designed for amateurs are
the best value cameras ever made. They 
deliver excellent-quality images with
accurate focus, color, and tonality
while being able to accept a wide range
of new and older lenses.
▲Multifunction
Cameras that use semi-reflecting mirror
technology can capture high-definition
video with full autofocus conveniently—
that is, without having to flip up the 
mirror. High-resolution still images can
also be captured at fast frame rates.
▲Large professional
Top-resolution cameras are not
necessarily large and heavy. Models
offering over 50 MP sensors can be
similar in size to other SLR cameras.
Some offer very high-quality video
capture at 4K (Ultra HD) resolution.

202
CHOOSING LENSES
BUYING GUIDE
Modern camera lenses benefit from the adoption
and merging of several technologies to deliver
high performance with good quality in compact form 
and at low prices. Nonetheless, it remains as true now
as ever that larger lenses with heavier construction,
modest specifications, and built from costlier 
materials will perform better and more reliably than 
small, lightweight lenses or those with ambitious
specifications. The most popular type of lenses are 
made to zoom—that is, to be able to vary their focal 
length (see opposite) while remaining focused on the 
image. Lenses are also designed with fixed focal 
length (prime lenses), wide aperture, extreme focal 
length, or with an emphasis on speciality use.
Fixed lenses
Compact cameras and many EVF (electronic view­
finder) cameras use a permanently mounted lens. 
This arrangement saves weight, allows a compact
design, and virtually eliminates problems from dust 
▶ 35mm lens
This lens is very fast and
offers top-class image 
quality in low light, but is
large and heavy.
▲ Ultra-fast telephoto
Fixed focal length lenses, such as
this 85mm optic offering an
ultra-fast f/1.4 full aperture, can
produce fine effects with superb
quality but at premium costs.
Front element
Lens aperture
Floating group
Rear 
element
Focus 
control
▲ Standard lens
A growing appreciation of the value of 
fixed focal length lenses has given rise
to exquisitely compact, high-quality
lenses for compact interchangeable 
lens camera systems.
▲Ultra wide-angle
An ultra wide-angle lens for APS-size 
sensors must offer very short focal
lengths, such as this 10–20mm optic,
but can be surprisingly bulky due to
complicated construction.
Extendible 
lens-hood

203
CHOOSING LENSES
on the sensor. While it is tempting to opt for a 
fixed lens with a very large zoom range, such as 
26–520mm, bear in mind that more modest ratios 
are likely to give higher overall image quality, with 
less vignetting at long focal lengths and less 
distortion at wide-angle settings.
Lens specifications
The main specification for a camera lens is its focal
length, or range of focal lengths if a zoom. 
Focal length measures the distance between the 
point from which the image is projected by the lens 
to the sharp image at the sensor, where the subject 
is very far away (at infinity). In practice, we use it to 
indicate the magnification and field of view of the
lens: longer focal length lenses magnify a small
portion of the view, whereas shorter focal lengths
reduce a larger portion of the view.
Zoom lenses shift elements within the optics to
change the focal length without changing the focus 
setting. From this we obtain the zoom range, or
ratio, measuring the longest to shortest focal length,
or vice versa. For example, a 70–210mm lens offers
a zoom ratio of 1:3.
A sensor smaller than the film
format for which a lens is
designed takes in a view smaller
than that projected by the lens.
▲High-quality standard zoom
For a standard lens—such as this zoom
covering the 35mm equivalent of 
24–120mm—you should buy the best
quality you can afford, because you will
use it extensively.
▲Telephoto zoom
A zoom limited to the telephoto
range, such as this 70–300mm
model, can produce results almost
equal to those of fixed focal length
lenses but with greater versatility.
▲ High-ratio zoom
A zoom lens that offers high ratios
between wide and telephoto settings,
such as the 15x of this model, is a
tempting option, but performance may
be compromised for convenience.
EQUIVALENT FOCAL LENGTH
The focal length of a photographic optic tells you
if a lens is wide-angle, normal, or telephoto. A
“normal” lens is one in which focal length is about
equal to the length of the diagonal of the format.
With the 24 x 36mm format, the diagonal is about
43mm, which is usually rounded up to 50mm.
Because the sizes of sensors, and therefore format,
of digital cameras vary so greatly, the accepted
approach is to quote the equivalent focal length for
the 35mm format (35efl). For example, on one 
camera the 35efl of a 5.1mm lens is 28mm, but it
may be 35mm on another. The equivalence is only
an approximation, because the proportions of 
picture rectangles also vary.

204
BUYING GUIDE
The other key measure is the maximum aperture.
Lenses with a large maximum aperture—such as
f/1.4—are said to be fast. They collect more light
than lenses with a small maximum aperture—for 
example, f/4—allowing for shorter exposure times.
Comparing focal lengths
As a result of the earlier dominance of the 35mm 
format, the focal length of a lens is usually related to
that of the equivalent 35mm format lens. For
example, the 35mm equivalent of a 10–22mm lens 
for APS format is 15–33mm. Note that the maximum 
aperture of the lens does not change; only the field
of view changes. Therefore, a 135mm f/1.8 lens for 
35mm is effectively a 200mm f/1.8 lens for APS-
format sensors. (See also the box on p. 203.)
Match to format
The growth of SLR cameras using APS-size sensors
(around 24 x 16mm) has resulted in the development
of two lines of interchangeable lenses. Generally, 
full-format (also called full-frame) lenses—that is,
those designed for the 35mm format—can be used 
on APS-sensor cameras, but not vice versa. Some
full-frame cameras automatically match the active
sensor to the type of lens in use. The Four Thirds
CHOOSING LENSES CONTINUED
▲Macro lens
Invaluable not only for close-up work
and copying flat originals, macro lenses
offer the very best image quality, with
high resolution, excellent contrast, and
freedom from distortion.
▲ Converter lens
The focal length range of permanently
attached lenses can be increased by
using a converter lens. The telephoto 
increases, and the wide type decreases,
the basic focal length settings.
▲ Fish-eye lens
An ultra wide-angle lens that distorts any
line not running through the center of 
the lens, the fish-eye is excellent for 
special effects. The most useful type fills
the frame with the image.
WHAT IS LENS APERTURE?
The terms lens aperture, f/number, and f/stop all
mean roughly the same thing: they measure the
size of the aperture sending light to the film or 
sensor. The actual size of the aperture depends on
a control called a diaphragm—a circle of blades
that open up to make a large hole (letting in lots
of light) or overlap each other to reduce the
aperture and restrict (stop down) the amount of 
incoming light. The maximum aperture is the
setting of the diaphragm that lets in the most
light. Lens aperture is measured as an f/number
and is a ratio to the focal length of the lens. For 
example, with a lens of 50mm focal length, an
aperture of 25mm gives f/2 and an aperture of 
3.125mm gives f/16.
▪Use a lens hood: stray non-image-forming
light within the many internal lens elements
can seriously degrade otherwise excellent
image quality.
▪Avoid using the maximum aperture or the
minimum aperture. With most zoom lenses, at
least one stop less than maximum is required
to obtain the best image quality.
▪Adjust focal length first and focus on the
subject just before releasing the shutter. Avoid
altering focal length after you have focused as
this can cause slight focusing errors to occur.
▪When using a wide-ranging zoom remember
that a shutter setting that will ensure sharp results
at the wide-angle setting may not be sufficiently
short for the telephoto end of the range.
POINTS TO CONSIDER

205
CHOOSING LENSES
format is a third line of interchangeable lenses, and 
it uses its own unique mount.
Lens accessories
The zoom ranges of permanently attached lenses
may be extended by using supplementary lenses. 
Those marked, for example, 1.7x will increase the
zoom-set focal length by 1.7x to improve telephoto 
reach. Those marked 0.6x will decrease it by 0.6x, 
with the effect of increasing wide-angle views.
Interchangeable lenses accept accessories such
as filters that mount on the front of the lens, as well
as accessories that mount between camera and 
lens. Converters, also called extenders, are rear-
mounted accessories that multiply the focal length
of a lens. A 2x extender doubles the focal length of 
the lens—from 135mm to 270mm, for example, or 
giving a 100–300mm zoom a 200–600mm 
capability. But light transmission is also reduced: a 
2x extender causes a 2-stop loss in aperture.
Extension rings are just like converters but without 
a lens: they increase the focusing extension of the 
lens so that it can focus on very close subjects.
Speciality lenses
Lenses can be designed for special photographic 
tasks such as close-up dental photography and 
architectural or photogrammetric (measuring) work.
Lenses offering shift and tilt movements are very 
useful tools. Shifting allows you to reduce or 
increase, say, foreground coverage without moving 
the camera. Tilting the lens allows you to position 
the plane of best focus, to give very deep or shallow
depth of field, without adjusting the aperture—ideal 
for architectural and landscape work, and invaluable 
for still lifes and portraiture.
The most popular speciality lens is the macro
lens, designed for high-performance close-ups. A
50mm macro lens is good for copying work; the
100mm focal length is useful for general macro 
photography. A long telephoto lens is essential for
photographing wildlife from a distance.
▲Moving views
With the camera held level, the use of lenses with tilt or
shift or swivel joints allows you to move the lens assembly
to point at and focus on different parts of the image.
▶Adjustable lens
The Lensbaby mounts a lens on a swivel joint allowing you
to point the lens freely to produce tilt and unusual blur
effects with a wide range of lens mounts.
Locking 
ring
Interchangeable 
lens mount
Aperture
ring
HIGH IQ
The three main ways to ensure high image quality
from your lens is steadiness during exposure,
accurate focus, and use of the optimum lens
aperture. Focus manually with SLRs, guided by
the focusing screen. Manual fine-tuning as a
supplement to auto-focus gives good results. All
but the best lenses perform only adequately at
full aperture and provide sharpest results two to
four aperture stops smaller. For example, if the full
aperture is f/4, best results are found between f/8 
and f/11. With smaller apertures, quality falls.
Shooting the same target at different apertures
will soon show you the best apertures to use.

206
PHOTOGRAPHIC ACCESSORIES
BUYING GUIDE
Carefully chosen accessories can make a big 
difference to the quality and enjoyment of your 
photography. It is very tempting to load up with 
numerous accessories, but too many items can 
slow you down more than they aid you.
Tripods
Tripods can make the biggest single contribution to 
improving the technical quality of your photography. 
The best are heavy, large, and rigid, while small,
lightweight ones can be next to useless. As a rough
guide, a tripod should weigh twice as much as the
heaviest item you put on it. 
Carbon-fiber tripods offer the best balance 
between weight and rigidity, while aluminium alloy 
models are heavier but less expensive. Models that 
telescope with four or more sections are very 
compact when folded but less rigid when extended
compared to those with fewer sections. Collars that 
twist to lock a section are compact, and do not snag
on clothes, but slower to
use than lever locks.
Very small tabletop 
tripods are handy for 
steadying the camera on flat surfaces. Where space
is limited, and you need to be able to move easily, 
the monopod is a popular compromise: the single 
leg helps steady the camera, reducing movement in
two axes, and it also helps take the weight of the 
equipment. Shoulder stocks, which enable you to 
brace the camera against your shoulder, can help
reduce camera shake and work well in combination
with a monopod.
Tripod head
The choice of tripod head is as important as the
choice of tripod itself. Choose one that is quick and 
easy to use but that holds the camera firmly.
Ball-and-socket heads are quick to adjust with
smaller cameras and lenses as you have to control 
just one locking knob. The most convenient also 
feature a panning lock, allowing you to turn the 
head about the vertical axis. 
3-D heads are easy to adjust with fair precision 
but are slow to operate, as you have three separate 
movements to control and lock down. However,
the handles improve leverage on the head when 
equipment is larger or heavier. The slowest heads to 
▲ Telescopic tripod
A bulky and heavy tripod is the best 
way to ensure that images are free
from camera shake. Carbon-fiber 
models are expensive but lighter
than metal types.
▲Travel tripod
A lightweight, compact tripod is 
useful for lighter equipment and to
supplement supports such as table
tops. Press the camera down on the 
tripod to improve stability.
▲Gorillapod
Unconventional supports, such as this
design with flexible legs or those using
clamps, are handy for compact 
cameras and quick set-ups that do
not call for long exposures.

207
PHOTOGRAPHIC ACCESSORIES
▲ Ball-and-socket head
Lightweight versions are ideal for
travel where long exposures are not
needed. For more serious work and
heavier equipment, use heavy-weight 
models that work very smoothly.
▲ 3-D head
Excellent for the flexible control of a
heavy camera and lens combination, a
3-D head is easy to control and easiest
to use with a quick-release plate. Some 
models are equipped with levels.
▲Gimbal head
An off-axis head balances extreme 
telephoto lenses and large cameras,
making it effortless to line up shots. But
the units themselves are large, heavy,
and almost as expensive as a tripod.
operate are those driven by gears, but the reward is
very precise adjustment. For extremely heavy lenses, 
use center-of-gravity pivots or gimbal heads such as
the Wimberley head. The camera and lens assembly 
is balanced so that only fingertip pressure is needed 
to adjust the aim and tilt of the camera. 
Quick change 
Attach your camera to the tripod head with a quick-
release mount: this is a plate locked to the camera 
that “mates” with a trap on the tripod. The result
is the swift and sturdy interchange or disassembly of 
cameras. While adding the plate adds a little to the 
weight and bulk of the camera, it can help improve
hold on the camera and also protects the base.
Ensure the plate is big enough for your largest 
equipment. For heavy lenses, affix the plate directly 
to the lens. There are many designs on the market; 
the Arca-Swiss is widely used, and excellent versions 
are available from Gitzo and Manfrotto.
LENS FILTERS
Filters that attach to the front of lenses are not
obsolete in the era of image manipulation. At their
simplest, a plain or UV filter protects the vulnerable
front element from dust and scratches. Plastic
molded filters with prismatic or diffraction lines can
give special effects that are very hard to recreate in 
post-processing. Graduated filters—with denser
color at the top fading to clear at the bottom—help
to capture landscape images that reduce the need
for highlight/shadow or tone-mapping
manipulations. Polarizing filters can reduce 
reflections and intensify sky colors. When you need
to reduce the light entering the lens to work at full
aperture, you can use a neutral density filter.

208
BUYING GUIDE
PHOTOGRAPHIC ACCESSORIES CONTINUED
▲ Neutral target
This ingenious target, from Datacolor, 
combines specular highlight (top) and
deep shadow (bottom) with five
neutral gray tones.
▲ Advanced exposure meter
Professional exposure meters can
measure flash as well as ambient light,
and some models also function as a
spot meter.
▲ Camera bag 
Backpack designs are best for 
comfort and carrying awkward 
loads, but are slower to use than 
shoulder-hung models.
Exposure control
Image previewing on digital cameras has not made 
separate light meters obsolete. The best practice is
to make exposures as accurately as possible, which 
reduces the time needed to make post-processing
corrections. Handheld meters are also the best way 
to make incident-light readings—that is, readings of 
the light falling on the subject. Some handheld 
meters also offer far greater accuracy, especially in 
low-light conditions. And spot meters, which read 
reflected light from a very narrow field of view—
commonly 1° or less—offer unsurpassed accuracy
in tricky lighting. 
Flash meters enable speedy work in the studio,
without the need to refer to previews again and 
again. Most modern handheld meters can measure
flash exposures as well as ambient light and, 
indeed, indicate the balance between the two. 
A flash meter is an essential accessory for serious
still life and portrait work. 
Another aspect of exposure control is the use of 
standard targets such as gray cards, standard color 
targets, and other aids. By including these in a test
shot under the same lighting as the subject, you
create an invaluable reference of guaranteed neutral 
tones and colors which improves the accuracy of 
any post-processing.
TIMER REMOTE RELEASE
The mechanical cable release to trip the shutter
without disturbing the camera has been replaced
by the electronic switch. These range from models
that simply trip the shutter to those that can open
the shutter for a preset time, which is useful for
making accurately timed exposures. More
sophisticated models also work as intervalometers:
you set a time interval—for example, 5 seconds—
and every 5 seconds the timer makes exposures
as the basis for creating time-lapse movies. Some
releases are corded and plugged into a camera;
more recent models use wireless connections,
such as Bluetooth or radio.
Timer and remote 
release with a 
connector 
dedicated to a 
camera model

209
PHOTOGRAPHIC ACCESSORIES
▲ Equipment case
Rigid cases can be waterproof and 
provide sturdy protection for rough 
conditions. Rolling models equipped
with wheels are easiest to transport.
▲ Waterproof housing
Extend the life of your camera by 
protecting it from the elements. Use
a waterproof housing specific to your
camera to ensure watertightness.
▲ Underwater housing
For serious diving, an underwater
housing keeps your camera safe and
offers the best image quality, as well 
as access to all necessary controls.
Bags 
Modern, padded soft bags combine high levels of 
protection with lightweight construction. Bags hung
over the shoulder are easiest to access but can be 
tiring to carry for long distances. Shoulder bags 
tend to be the lightest designs, so may be best for 
use as cabin luggage.
Backpack styles are easy to carry for long
distances, and comfortable even with quite heavy 
and awkward loads such as a tripod. However they 
tend to be slower to use as you have to take them 
off your back before getting into them. 
A working compromise is to use a shoulder bag 
with a waist-strap that is tightly strapped to your 
body. This displaces some mass onto the hips and 
relieves your shoulders.
For work in highly challenging conditions, or if 
you fear your precious lenses and laptop might 
have to travel in cargo holds or be slung into the 
backs of trucks, a hard case with a waterproof and 
dustproof seal is essential. However, even when 
empty they are heavy, so expect to have to pay
excess-baggage charges. 
Waterproofing 
A waterproof camera housing is not only needed if 
total immersion is likely, but also in situations such 
as shooting from a canoe or when sailing. Camera
housings are also ideal for particularly dusty
conditions, such as industrial sites and deserts.
Housings vary from flexible plastic cases for shallow
water, to sturdy cases for deep water. They are
available for compact cameras through to 
professional models, but they may cost at least as
much as the camera they are made to protect. The
key to their maintenance and longevity is to keep
the O-ring seals meticulously clean and lubricated 
with silicone grease.
CAMERA RAINCOAT
For sports and nature photographers, the
invention of camera raincoats has been a boon.
There are generic models and those made for
specific cameras, and they usually come in plain
gray or in camouflage patterns.

210
DIGITAL ACCESSORIES
BUYING GUIDE
The modern digital camera has to work with a 
retinue of digital accessories to ensure that it is 
powered and has the capacity to record images.
Memory cards
Memory cards use banks of memory registers that 
hold their state—on or off—without needing power. 
They can hold data indefinitely yet can easily write 
new or altered data. Their compact size, low power 
requirements, and large capacity make them ideal
for image data. When an image is written to them, 
the registers are flipped on or off according to the 
data. To read the memory, the registers are turned
into a stream of data. Modern cards can hold more 
than 100 GB of information and read or write 300x 
faster than a standard CD.
There are many card types in circulation: some 
are extra-compact for use in cell phones, others are 
optimized for speed or sturdiness. If you own more 
MEMORY CARD READERS
There are two ways of transferring images taken
on your digital camera to your computer. You can
connect the camera to your computer and
instruct the camera’s software to download
images, or you can take the memory card out of 
the camera and read it to the computer. To do
this, you need a memory card reader, a device
with circuitry to take the data and send it to the
computer, via a USB or FireWire cable. There are
many card readers on the market that can read
almost every type of memory card.
Multitype 
card reader
CompactFlash
card reader
▶ Using a reader
When slotted in, the reader 
opens the card as a volume
or disk. You can then copy
images straight into the 
computer.
▲ CompactFlash
Very widely used in dSLR
cameras and others, this is
a sturdy card in a range of 
capacities, up to at least
100 GB, and read/write 
speeds to suit different 
budgets and camera
requirements.
▲ Secure Digital
Very widely used in
compact and dSLR
cameras, SD (and SDHC)
cards are very small yet
offer capacities of 64 GB
and over with low draw on
current. They are also
sturdy and reliable.
▲Micro SD
These cards are widely used
in cell phone cameras but 
their small size restricts
capacities from reaching
over 64 GB. Via an adaptor,
they can also be used in
devices that take the larger
Mini SD and SD cards.
▲MemoryStick
Proprietary to Sony, this
family of cards is used in
a variety of digital
equipment, including Sony
video cameras, allowing
interchange with good
capacities and
performance.
▪Keep memory cards well away from magnetic
fields, like audio speakers.
▪Keep cards dry.
▪Keep cards away from extreme heat.
▪Keep cards dust-free.
▪Keep cards in protective cases when not in use.
▪Do not bend or flex cards.
▪Avoid touching the contacts with your fingers.
CARD CARE

211
DIGITAL ACCESSORIES
than one camera or want to use another device, try 
to ensure intercompatibility.
CompactFlash and SD
The most widely used memory cards for digital
photography are the CompactFlash (CF) and Secure 
Digital (SD) cards. SD cards are more compact and 
less prone to failure as the pins are flat and less 
numerous than those in CF cards. You can remove 
the card from the camera at any stage before it is 
full and slot it into a reader to transfer files to a
computer, but do not remove it while the camera is 
trying to read the card, usually indicated by a red 
light blinking. You can also erase images at any time 
to make room for more.
Digital image storage
When traveling with a digital camera it is often 
impractical, and always inconvenient, to carry a 
▲Photo frame
These devices display a single image or
a slide show of images downloaded 
from a memory card or picture store.
They are useful for personal use, such 
as in living rooms, or for store displays
and gallery exhibitions.
▲ Mobile storage
Freeing you from taking a computer
outdoors, these small hard disk drives
allow you to back up photos and so
continue using your memory cards.
They also allow you to review and
show images as you shoot.
▲ USB drive
As small as a key ring, a USB drive is
a most convenient way to transfer
quantities of files from one machine
to another. USB drives are solid-state
memory devices with storage
capacities of 64 GB and more.
Video viewfinder
Video viewfinders use a tiny
camera to capture the image
of the focusing screen to
display on a larger, outside
screen. They can also
be used for automatic
remote release: the 
system trips the shutter
when it detects movement 
in the image.
laptop computer for storing image files. One option
is what is essentially a portable hard disk equipped 
with an LCD screen and card-reading slots. The
screen may be color for reviewing images on the 
device, or it may simply show the copying status 
and basic file data. Some of these units can hold 
several terabytes (TB) of data and are equipped with 
slots for reading memory card devices. Data can be
copied straight from the card devices onto the 
drive, then the drive can be connected to your 
computer to transfer your images once you are 
back at home.
Viewing images
It is as important to view and show images as it is to
capture them. You can use tablets, such as the iPad, 
and photo frames to display your images, and use 
simple transitions such as fading between images
and even add a suitable soundtrack.

212
ELECTRONIC LIGHTING
BUYING GUIDE
The invention of portable flash had a tremendous 
impact on photography: it opened the night world
to the camera, with compact, easily carried 
equipment. Today, electronic flash is standard to all 
compact digital cameras, found on many cell phone 
cameras, and fitted to the majority of dSLRs. 
However, the position of the fitted flash is just about
the worst possible, in terms of the quality of lighting. 
Accessory lighting units are a necessity for versatile 
and attractive lighting.
Power and recycling
A further problem is that flash built into a camera
relies on the camera’s own batteries for power. To
curb their hunger for energy, built-in flashes are 
designed to be low-powered—usually sufficient to 
light to a distance of 3–7ft (1–2m) but little further.
In addition, the recycling rates—how quickly the
flash can be fired in sequence—is also limited.
Flash power 
Portable, or accessory, flash units overcome the
limitations of built-in flash by carrying their own 
power and circuitry; this makes the units much
larger than compact cameras. Accessory flash units 
also offer more control over flash power, direction 
of flash, and angle of coverage.
Accessory flashes fit onto the hot shoe, which
combines electrical contacts with a slot that “mates” 
with a corresponding, locking part on the bottom 
of the flash unit. While the majority of cameras use 
a standard hot-shoe design, the contacts may be 
specific to the camera producer, and some
manufacturers—such as Sony—use proprietary hot-
shoe designs.
Adjustable angle
Many portable flash units place the flash on a 
swiveling turret so that it can be directed to the 
sides, or even backward, according to the nearest
surface for bounce flash (see pp. 42–9). Some offer
a tilting head so that you can point the flash upward, 
or downward for close-up work. A fully adjustable 
head increases flexibility, so is a must for wedding 
and paparazzi photography.
Adjustable coverage
On many flash units you can also adjust the
coverage, or the angle over which light is spread. 
This ensures that when you use a wide-angle lens or
▲ Small supplementary flash
Units like this can augment the power
of built-in flash units. It is triggered by
the camera’s own flash, so it does not
need a hot shoe, and adds its output
to that of the camera’s unit. It is an
inexpensive solution to lighting
problems, but control is limited.
▲ Slave flash unit
Slave units can add to the power of 
built-in flash units. This unit synchs
with the on-camera flash for the 
most accurate exposure, after which
operation is fully automatic. Position
it to one side of the camera to
improve modeling effects.
▲Powerful on-camera flash
Accessory flash mounted on a
camera’s hot shoe can be sufficiently
powerful for all normal needs,
offering a tilt-and-swivel head for
bounce, multiple-exposure facilities,
and focusing aids for working in 
complete darkness.

213
ELECTRONIC LIGHTING
setting, the flash coverage is sufficient to light the
angle of view: this causes a lowering in the maximum 
power of the flash. When you make a telephoto 
setting or use a long focal length lens, the coverage 
is narrowed to match, approximately, the angle of 
view. This causes a gain in the maximum power of 
the flash, since the light is concentrated into a 
narrower beam. 
Adjustment may be carried out automatically, 
with the camera instructing the flash according to 
the zoom setting on the lens, or it can be manually 
set. Zoom-like optics in the flash tube alter 
coverage, and a diffuser may be used for ultra wide-
angle coverage.
Red-eye
The unsightly red dot in the middle of eyes lit by
flash—commonly known as red-eye—is caused by 
two factors: the flash being so close to the optical 
axis that the light reflects off the blood-rich retina of 
the eye, while, at the same time, the eye’s pupil is 
dilated in dark conditions. Accessory flash mounted
on the hot shoe or to one side moves the source of 
flash relatively far from the optical axis, with the 
result that red-eye is avoided.
▲Macro ring-flash
For shadowless flash photography of 
insects, flowers, and other small
objects, a ring-flash is ideal. The brief 
flash can stop inadvertent movement, 
and very small apertures can be set
for maximum depth of field.
▲Adjustable macro flash
For controlled lighting in macro 
work, units with two or more small
flash units that can be set to different 
positions around the lens give the
most flexibility. They can be set to
different power levels and point
in different directions.
▲LED unit
Lightweight LED lights produce a 
daylight-balanced, continuous beam
of light that is ideal for video
recording. But it also provides a
source of easy visible light that can
be used off-camera and precisely
positioned to control modeling.
GUIDE NUMBER
The light output of accessory flash units is usually
measured by the Guide Number (GN). The figure
is for a specific film/sensor speed—usually ISO
100—in either feet (ft) or meters (m), and for a
specified angle of coverage. The GN for a unit will 
be higher for narrow coverage—suitable for
medium-telephoto lenses—and lower for wide
coverage—suitable for wide-angle lenses. A Guide
Number may be quoted as, for example, GN45
(m), indicating the distance scale is meters. A
typical small camera GN is 5–10 (m); accessory
flash units offer 30–50 (m). The standard practice 
is that the GN figure is quoted for the coverage of 
a standard lens but may be inflated in
specifications by being quoted for a narrow 
coverage. The Guide Number scale is defined:
Guide Number = subject distance x f/number 
The f/number for a correct exposure is the result
of dividing the GN of your unit by the distance
between the flash/camera and the subject. Using
GN to set an f/number is generally more accurate
than relying on automatic systems.

214
CONTROLLING
REFLECTIONS
Sidelight reaching monitors can reflect into the 
user’s face, causing uncomfortable glare (left). The
use of a deep hood (right) reduces this problem.
COMPUTERS
BUYING GUIDE
The serious digital photographer spends at least as 
much time at the computer as he or she does taking 
pictures. Not only has the computer replaced the 
darkroom, it is now effectively the photographer’s 
library as well as their communication and media
center. The computer will also drive the scanner,
printer, and perhaps the camera, too.
What to look for
All modern computers can work with digital images. 
The differences lie in three main areas: the operating 
system, the system performance (which depends
on video graphics and memory), and the storage 
capacity. The latest operating system may offer the 
most features, but other software and hardware 
upgrades may need to be updated to work with
them, and they may need extra RAM to run digital
photography software. You should consider 2GB of 
RAM to be the minimum.
Mouse and keyboard
The quality of the mouse and keyboard can make a 
big difference to your enjoyment and comfort. If 
the keyboard is not to your liking or you find the 
mouse uncomfortable to use, change them. Such
replacements are inexpensive, and if made at the
time of purchase, they may even be cheaper.
Software packages
When budgeting, do not forget software costs. A full 
suite of software for image manipulation as well as 
desktop and web publishing can cost more than a 
computer, so use modest applications until your
skills develop. Professional software can be very 
hard to master, while simpler, cheaper packages still 
produce good results.
Connections
When buying a computer, ensure its interfaces 
match those of the equipment you wish to use.
Note that you may need to install some software to 
make a connector work.
▪Universal Serial Bus (USB) is widely used in its
various forms for data transfer between computers
and hard disk drives, card readers, and cameras.
Note that some peripherals, such as keyboards 
and screens, may offer USB connections. To 
be most useful, these should be powered but many 
are unpowered, which limits the accessories that 
can be used.
▪FireWire is a high-speed standard suitable for
professional work. It offers an excellent choice for
removable drives, extra hard disks, and digital
cameras. FW800 is comparable to USB 3.0 for 
speed of data transfer.
Monitor hood
LCD monitor
▲General-purpose LCD monitor
High-quality modern LCD screens offer the best balance of 
ergonomic features and image quality, as well as minimizing
eye-strain. Images are stable, geometry perfect, and color
rendition sufficient for most color-checking needs.

215
COMPUTERS
▪eSATA (External Serial Advanced Technology 
Attachment) connects external drives to computers
and is up to twice as fast as USB 2.0 or FW800. 
Cable length is limited to 7ft (2m).
Laptop or desktop?
Desktop machines may cost less than laptops, but
can offer more power in return for the loss of 
portability. However, modern laptops have more 
than enough power for digital photography. Some, 
like the Apple MacBook Pro, are not only more 
powerful than many desktop computers, their 
screens are also of sufficient quality and large
enough for serious work. The best Windows 
machines also make excellent workhorses for digital
photography. Against the premium cost of 
miniaturizing is the convenience of a computer that 
takes up no more desk space than an open 
magazine. Laptops are essential for the digital 
photographer on the move. At base, they can be 
supplemented by attaching a large monitor.
Monitors
Except for color specialists, LCD or LED monitors 
are universally used in photography. Modern LCD 
monitors are backlit (a panel of light shines 
through the LCD) to improve visibility and contrast. 
Screens using LEDs (Light Emitting Diodes) as the 
backlight are energy-efficient and provide excellent 
color reproduction. Both types of screen can 
be slim, consume little electricity, cause minimal 
eyestrain, and are suitable for all but the most color-
critical viewing.
For image manipulation, the minimum screen
size recommended is 12in (50cm). The screen
resolution should be 1,600 x 1000 pixels or better. 
All modern monitor screens can display millions of 
colors, but the accuracy and extent of the color 
gamut varies considerably. Broadly speaking, you 
need to spend more for color-critical work. The 
surface of LCD screens may be matte or glossy.
Matte screens are less prone to stray reflections and 
display images similar to print reproduction. Glossy 
screens give much better image quality but are
prone to stray reflections.
Monitor calibrator
▲ Laptop for photographers
Widescreen laptops with 17-in (43-cm) screens and
powerful graphics are ideal for digital photography. More
power may mean less compact, but they can easily replace 
a desktop machine.
MONITOR CALIBRATION
As viewers, we are tolerant of quite wide 
variations in color balance in an image. However,
to make the most of the superb images produced
by today’s digital cameras, you should work with
a calibrated monitor. 
Modern operating systems offer software
calibration as part of the setting up. For Apple
Mac, the calibration process is in the Displays
section of System Preferences: select Color and
click on the Calibrate button, then follow the
instructions. There are different approaches for 
Windows users, according to the version installed.
Windows Vista uses a new, powerful color-
management system that addresses limitations
of older systems. The best
solution is to use a hardware
calibrator. This instructs the 
monitor to display standard
colors, which are measured
and compared with the 
target values: the
differences between 
actual and target 
values enables a
monitor profile to be 
created. (See also 
pp. 114–5 on color 
management.)

216
COMPUTER ACCESSORIES
BUYING GUIDE
As your expertise in digital photography increases 
and the quantity of images you produce grows, you
will wish to invest in accessories that make life easier
and increase your enjoyment.
Mobile storage
Digital photography produces vast amounts of 
data, and removable media provide the essential 
storage space you need. In general, the greater the
capacity of the device, the cheaper the cost per 
gigabyte of available space. 
Portable hard disk drives are, all around, the best
solution for the digital photographer. Not only are
their capacities ample for most workers—offering 
up to 1 TB and more—they are also very cost 
effective and can transfer files rapidly. Models of 
about the size of electronic personal organizers are 
extremely portable and ideal for working on 
location with a laptop computer, since they can be 
powered from the laptop. 
There are two types of hard disk drives: those
specifically designed for transferring and storing
digital images, with their own card reader and 
controls (see also pp. 210–1); and drives that require 
the use of a computer. Drives use different interfaces,
such as USB 3.0 or FireWire, so make sure you select
the type that connects with and best suits your
computer. The most versatile offer two ports—for
example, one USB 2.0 and one FireWire; the second 
port enables you to connect another device while
the drive is hooked up.
Larger, desktop hard disk drives are the fastest
and can offer capacities over 3 TB (3 terabyte, or 
3,000 GB) yet, at the size and weight of this book,
are still relatively portable; however, this type does 
need a separate power supply.
For heavy-duty work and the highest reliability,
consider 
using 
RAID 
(Redundant 
Array 
of 
Inexpensive Disks), in which data is copied or
striped over two or more disks so that if one should
fail, data can be easily be recovered from the other
drives. NAS (Network Attached Storage) is also
invaluable when more than one person in a studio 
needs access to the image data.
Removable media
Optical disk media such as CD and DVD offer 
reliable storage that can be universally accessed.
The CD, with its 650 MB capacity, is still used for
small-scale transfer, while DVD, carrying up to
about 7.5 GB in dual-layer form, is the current 
standard for large amounts of data. In 2008, Blu-ray
▲Graphics tablet
Graphics tablets come in a range of sizes—starting with
models smaller than a mouse pad—to suit different ways of 
working. Large sizes can take up the entire desk area. The
pen and mouse tools also cover a range, from simple devices
to those sporting several buttons to access various functions.
▲ Hard disk drives
Portable hard disk drives are becoming smaller and lighter
with capacities of 1 TB or more, but their desktop cousins
offer even greater storage. Portable disks are powered from
your laptop via their USB or FireWire port but they do run
slower than corded desktop units.
Portable drive
Desktop back 
up drive

217
COMPUTER ACCESSORIES
Disk (BD) won the high-density format war with
HD-DVD. A BD carries up to about 48  GB in
dual-layer form and will increasingly be the standard 
for archiving data. However, in comparison with 
hard-disk drives, optical media are slow to write 
and slow to access. 
Graphics tablet
These input devices are an evolutionary step up
from the mouse. Comprising a flat tablet, like a solid 
mouse pad, and a penlike stylus, graphics tablets 
give you excellent control over hand-drawn lines 
because of their high spatial resolution—that is, they
can detect tiny changes in position. They also allow
you to increase the width of a line or the depth of a 
color by varying the pressure of the stroke—
something that is impossible to do with a mouse.
A tablet can be small, about the size of a mouse
pad, or large enough to need a desk to itself. It is
good practice to interchange the use of graphics 
tablet and mouse to help avoid repetitive strain 
injuries—for example, by using the graphics tablet 
for image manipulation and the mouse for the 
internet and word processing.
▲Adaptors
With the multiplicity of 
different standards, there 
is an accompanying
proliferation of adaptors 
that convert one to
another, such as
eSATA to USB.
▲ USB ports
USB (Universal Serial Bus) 
is a widespread protocol 
allowing devices to be
plugged straight into a
working computer and
be recognized and
connected.
▲ FireWire cables
Second to USB in 
popularity, FireWire is
equally easy to use and
carries power, but
connectors come in
many different shapes
and sizes.
▲ eSATA cable
SATA drives are designed for
high data throughput—up to
three times that of FireWire
400. eSATA connectors are 
used to connect SATA drives
to other devices but do not
carry power.
UPS, SURGE PROTECTORS, ADAPTORS, AND CABLES
Computer systems are highly susceptible to even
very small fluctuations in the amount of electrical
current powering them. Because of this, you may
want to consider protecting your equipment from
power surges and failures—something that is even
more worthwhile if you live in areas with uncertain
power supplies. Saving your work frequently as you
go ensures that, if the worst happens and your
machine does crash, then at least not too much of 
it will be lost. However, apart from the frustration
and wasted time involved in restarting your 
computer, an uncontrolled shut-down does carry
with it the risk of damage to your hard drive. To 
safeguard against this, an uninterruptible power
eSATA to USB
adaptor
USB peripheral port
and connector
USB computer port
and connector
FireWire 800
FireWire 400
supply (UPS) is essential, although they can be
expensive to buy. This is a battery that powers the
computer and monitor for a short period in case of 
a power loss, giving you time to quit the application
and shut the computer down safely.
Another useful piece of equipment is a surge 
protector, which prevents sudden rises in power
from damaging your delicate equipment. This is
well worth its relatively low cost. 
Other accessories that you will accumulate are 
cords to connect devices to your computer and 
to each other, and adaptors that allow older
equipment, such as those based on SCSI, to be used
with newer systems, such as FireWire.

218
PRINTERS AND OTHER DEVICES
BUYING GUIDE
With the demise of film and the attendant 
redundancy of the darkroom, photographers need 
few items to supplement their camera equipment. 
And with the growth of online services, from 
printing to file archiving, it is not obvious that 
equipment such as printers or even hard disks are 
necessary. While owning your own equipment 
allows you to work at your own convenience, it 
does mean that you have to maintain it, which can
be costly in the case of printers.
Printers
Desktop ink-jet printers are able to match the quality
of color prints of the past when used with high-
quality papers. There is a slight loss in subtlety of 
shading and delicacy of hues compared to a
laboratory color print, but that is fully compensated
for by the convenience of being able to print directly
from your computer. If you make prints for presents 
or to display, it is worth buying the best printer you
can afford that prints at the size you require. Printers 
for tabloid size (11 x 17 in) offer a good balance 
between being able to output usefully large prints,
purchase and running costs, and the amount of desk
area they take up. If you only occasionally make
poster-size prints, it is more economical to order 
these online.
Check that the printer takes separate ink cartridges
for each color and uses a minimum of six different
colors. If you intend to make black-and-white 
prints, look for printers using gray and black inks. A
paper path that is straight—feeding from the back to
the front of the machine—will be able to accept 
thick papers such as watercolor or hand-made
papers. If the printer can accept rolls of paper, you
can make banner or panoramic format prints easily. 
Before you purchase a printer, try to examine prints 
that it has made on papers that you like: choice of 
printer can be a matter of personal preference.
Other printers
The smallest, most compact printers—ideal for
making cards and small gifts when traveling or at 
a party—are dye-sublimation (dye-sub) printers.
These use a cartridge that contains colored ribbons
and special receiving paper, and are usually 
powered by battery for maximum portability. They
deliver excellent, lively results.
Desktop color laser printers are suitable for
producing multiple copies of color images quickly,
but image quality lags a long way behind 
that of ink-jet or dye-sublimation printers. 
Industrial-scale laser printers are widely used to
print photobooks.
▲Portable printer
Printers such as this model, hardly any larger than the prints
it produces, are ideal for use on location and at social
events, but need regular supplying with paper and charge.
▲All-in-one printer
A combined scanner, copier, and printer is capable of 
producing excellent prints for day-to-day use. Larger ink-jet
machines are best for exhibition-quality prints.

219
PRINTERS AND OTHER DEVICES
Scanners
Flatbed scanners look and work like small
photocopiers, but they output image files instead of 
printed copies. They are useful when you need to
turn many drawings, documents, or prints into 
digital form. The maximum size of the original is 
usually letter (A4), with well-regarded models made
by Epson, Canon, and Hewlett Packard. If you do 
not need the highest quality or need to make only a
few copies, you can photograph the original. Should 
you wish to turn text on documents into editable 
text, you can pass the images to optical character 
recognition (OCR) applications such as Omnipage.
Film scanners are the best way to digitize 35mm 
film such as legacy collections, or film from Holga 
cameras, giving resolutions up to 4,000 lines per 
inch. If you wish to scan medium-format film
(6 x 4.5cm and larger), a flatbed scanner may
provide acceptable quality. Within fewer than
fifteen years after the rise of digital photography, 
only a handful of film scanners remain in production.
Nikon and Imacon models provide the best quality
but are very costly. Less costly models and flatbed
scanners can fulfill less demanding standards.
Secondhand film scanners from Nikon, Minolta,
Canon, Microtek, and Kodak, can offer good buys, 
but spare parts and servicing are problematic.
▲Flatbed scanner
Modern flatbed scanners produce excellent results from
prints. With a transparency adaptor in place, good-quality
scans can be obtained from film.
▲Film scanner
A high-quality film scanner is necessary for turning legacy
film-based material into digital form. The majority of models
accept 35mm film, but some accept medium-format.
▶ Filling in cells
Each cell accepts up to 16 
dots—counting a cell with
no dot, 17 grayscale levels
are thus possible. Cells
should be randomly filled.
Here, they have a regular
pattern, so when cells are
combined a larger pattern
emerges. The device
resolution is used to place
more dots in each cell.
HALF-TONE CELLS
Printers can lay more than 2,000 dots of ink per
inch (dpi) but since no printer can change the
strength of the ink and not all can vary dot size,
not all dots are available for defining detail. Thus,
printers use groupings of dots—half-tone cells—to
simulate a grayscale. At least 200 gray levels are
needed to represent continuous tone. Therefore,
a printer must control a large number of ink dots 
just to represent gray levels, reducing the detail
that can be printed. In practice, detail resolution
above 100 dpi meets most requirements. Now, if 
a printer can lay 1,400 dpi, it has some 14 dots to 
use for creating the effect of continuous tone. If 
you multiply together the four or more inks used,
a good range of tones and colors are possible.
6% gray
(1 dot)
81% gray
(13 dots)
25% gray
(4 dots)
100% black
(all dots on)

220
INDEX
INDEX
A
abstract images  52–54
animal photography  88
close-up  52
contemporary architecture 
56
depth of field  52
focal length  52
shadows  56
animals  88–91
abstract images  88
in black and white  88, 89
cross-processing  88
focal length  90
portraits  89
props  88
subject knowledge  90
telephoto lens  205
viewpoint  89
in zoos  90–91
architectural images  55–57
abstract images  56
color composition and  
balance  32, 56
composition  56, 57
contemporary, and abstract 
images  56
distortion  28, 55–56, 113
focal length  56
foreground reduction  56
image manipulation  56
legal rights  55
lens choice  55, 56, 57
lighting  55–56
panoramas  56, 93
in RAW format  56
security concerns  55
straight and parallel lines  55,
116
tone-mapping  55
ultra-wide-angle lens  56
viewpoint  57
white balance  34–35, 56
see also cityscapes
artwork
legal restrictions  82
autofocus problems  20–21
B
black and white
animal photography  88, 89
cityscapes  82
color to  107, 148–55
duotones  162–63
four-color blacks  148
landscapes  78, 79
portraits  101, 154–55
blur
Blur filter  125, 130–31
in contrast  22–23
lens movement effect  133
movement  22–23, 113, 131,
132–33, 142
portraits  98, 100
radial  131
reverse tilt effect  133
selective  130, 135
street photography  63
wedding photography  71
zoom  131
brightness
color  30
high dynamic range  168–69
C
cameras
accessories  206–09
APS (Advanced Photo System)
cameras  204
camera bags  209
compact point-and-shoot 
196
Four Thirds (4/3) format 338,
339
ILC (interchangeable lens
compact) cameras 338, 339 
light meters  208
memory cards  210–11
Micro Four Thirds format  
198, 199, 204–05
mirrorless compacts 198–99
mobile image storage  211
resolution and quality  197
single-lens reflex  200–01
super-zoom  197
waterproof housing  209
see also lenses
camera phone  194–95
photography  102–03
children, photographing  72–75
composition  73, 74–75
fill-in flash  74
focal length  74
lighting  44
patience, need for  72, 73, 
74, 75
posing  72
professional cameras  74
travel photography  72
see also portraits
cityscapes  82–85
background removal  178
black and white  82
colors of city lights  82
composition  62, 82, 84–85
converging lines  85
depth of field  85
flash  84
focal length  83
framing  84, 85
legal restrictions  82
low-light photography  86–87
cityscapes (continued) 
RAW files and sharpness and 
saturation  158
reflections  83
silhouettes  85
skylines  83
street lights and tossing the
camera  23
street photography  62–63
telephoto lens  85
traffic  83
viewpoint  85
zoom lens  83
see also architectural images
cloning
Curves tool  186
distraction removal  134, 142
dust removal  124, 125
noise  186
techniques  186–87
tone  186
close-ups
abstract images  52
depth of field  19
flash  42, 213
macro lens  204, 205
perspective  25
portraits  29
color
against white  31
background, and portraits  
100
balance  122, 123
black and white, change to  
107, 148–55
brightness  30
of city lights  82
composition  30–31, 32, 33
contrast  30, 31, 32, 33
exposure control  49, 119
flash see flash
gamut  139, 183
harmony  136
high dynamic range  168–69
indexed color file  121
lighting  86
management  114–15
monitor calibration  114–15, 
215
monochromatic  32
neutral field  31
originals, tints from  166–67
output profile  114, 115
pastels  32
problems and lighting  119
saturation  140–41, 143
as subject  30
subject color problems  119
temperature  138, 160
unbalanced  113
vibrance  140, 141
wheel  30–32, 33
see also white balance
color and image manipulation
automatic color 
Color Balance control  
136–37, 189
Color blending modes  182, 
183, 184
Color Range tool  174, 175
color and image manipulation 
(continued)
Color Saturation tool  166, 
167
color adjustments  109, 119, 
138–39
color enhancement  107
control and Curves tool  145, 
146–47
Hue/Saturation control  119, 
137, 138, 139, 166, 189
Levels control  79, 120–21
negative film to transparencies 
effect  164–65
Replace Color tool  138, 139, 
166
RGB color mode  109, 111, 
151
Saturation blending mode 
184
saturation and vibrance 
140–41, 143
subject color problems  119
tints from color originals  
166–67
composition
architectural pictures  56, 57
children, photographing  73, 
74–75
cityscapes  62, 82, 84–85
color  30–31
diagonal lines  13
documentary photography  
60–61
framing  16
geometric patterns  16
landscapes  77–78, 80–81
letter-box  14–15
off-center subjects  21
overlapping subject elements
13
panoramas  92–93
patterns in  17
in portraits  100, 101
puzzles, creating  17
radial  12
Rule of Thirds (golden spiral) 
14–15
street photography  62
symmetry  12
tall crop  14
unusual/unlikely subjects  
10–11
computers  
accessories  216–17
choice of  214–15
graphics tablet  175, 216, 
217
printer  218–19
scanners  219
contrast
blur in  22–23
color  30, 31, 32, 33
dealing with low  118

221
INDEX
contrast (continued)
duotones  163
reduction  122
copyright  56
wedding photography  71
cropping
framing  29
scanning  116
Curves tool
banding  143
cloning  186
color adjustment  138
color to black and white
conversions  79, 151
cross-processing  164–65
highlights  145
use of  144–47
vintage effects  156
white balance  136
D
date and time setting  10
depth of field
abstract images  52
autofocus problems  20–21
background removal  178
cityscapes  85
close-ups  19
excessive  113
focusing  18–21
image distractions  134–35
landscapes  77, 78
lens aperture  18–19, 21
off-center subjects  21
perspective  25
portraits  99, 100
shift and tilt movement
lenses  205
travel photography  66
wedding photography  70
distortion
architectural images  28, 
55–56, 113
facial  29
focal length  29
panoramas  92
shift lens  28
wide-angle lens  28, 29
zoom lens  28, 29
documentary photography 
58–61
camera choice  58
caption writing  58
citizen reporting and rights  59
composition  60–61
legal issues and model 
release forms  61
preparation and background 
knowledge  58
RAW files and low vibrance 
158
reliability and honesty of 
content  58, 59
safety issues  58–59
ultra-wide-angle lens  59
documentary photography
(continued)
video images  58
see also street photography;
travel photography
dust spots  124–25, 126
E
exposure control
blur see blur
camera phones  102, 195
color  49, 119
flash see flash
gray cards  208
highlight clipping  112
landscapes  77, 78
Levels control  79, 120–21
low-key images  38, 39
low-light photography  86, 87
measuring systems  36
metering see metering
noise see noise
optimum exposure  36–37
pastel colors  32
sensitivity patterns  37
shadows  56, 112
tones  36–37
travel photography  66
unsharp subject detail  118
F
f/number see lens aperture
file
grayscale  162
hard-disk systems  110,
216
RAW see RAW, working with
saving and back-up  107,
216–17
tagging, metadata and notes  
106–07
file size
color control and Curves tool 
147
image manipulation  109
interpolation  130
filters
blurring  125, 130–31
choice of  207
flash  41
masking  176–77
noise reducing  87, 124
polarizing  80
sharpening  126–29
vintage effects  156–57
filters and image manipulation
Blur filter  130–33
filter effects  176–77
Gaussian Blur filter  125
Sharpness filters  126–29
see also image manipulation
fish-eye lens  81
see also ultra-wide-angle lens
flash
accessories  40–41, 212–13
adjustable angle  212
bounced  43, 47
built-in, limitations of  212
camera phones  102
children, photographing  74
cityscapes  84
close-ups  42, 213
control  40–41
coverage, adjustable 
212–13
diffuser  46, 49
distance  40, 42
effects without  41
electronic  42–43, 44–49, 
212–13
exposure process  41, 42
fill-in  45, 49, 74
filters  41
freezing movement  40, 41
Guide Number (GN)  213
halo effect  45
hot shoe design  212
inverse square law  46
LED unit  213
light diffuser  42
light fall-off problem  42, 43
limitations  40
low-light photography  86
meters  208
mixed light sources  49
modeling light  43
overexposure problems  42
portraits  46–47
red-eye  213
reflector, use of  40, 48
shadows  46–48
slave unit  40–41, 212
slow-synch mode  40
soft box  44
studio flash lighting  45, 
48–49
synchronization  41
telephoto lens  213
underexposure problems  42
wedding photography  70, 71
wide-angle lens  42
see also lighting
focal length
abstract images  52–53
animal photography  90
architectural pictures  56
camera phones  195
children, photographing  74
cityscapes  83
color composition  33
distortion  29
flash coverage  213
image distractions  134–35
landscapes  77
lens aperture  19
lens choice  203, 204, 205
perspective  24–25
portraits  99, 101
travel photography 
66, 67
focal length (continued)
unsharp subject detail  118
wedding photography  71
see also viewpoint
framing
cityscapes  84, 85
composition  16
cropping  29
H
highlights
burning-in and dodging  
122, 123
clipping  112
Curves tool  145
duotones  162
high dynamic range  168
RAW format  158
Hipstamatic app  38, 103
horizon tilt, correcting  113,
117
I
image assessment  10, 108–09
image distractions  134–35, 
142, 166
image management  110–11
see also record-keeping
image manipulation
architectural pictures  56
background removal  178–79
banding  143, 159
bit errors  108, 109
Brush tool  166, 186
burning-in process  122–23, 
167
capture defects  112, 113
Channel Mixer  137, 152, 
153
checklist  109
cloning see cloning
Cloud computing  108
color see color and image
manipulation
composite images  188–89
contrast, dealing with low  
118
cropping  116–17
cross-processing  88, 
164–65
Curves control see Curves tool
data loss and back-up  143
defects, avoiding  142–43
Desaturation tool  135, 143,
148–49, 166
dodging process  122–23
dropper tools  136, 138
duotones  162–63
dust removal  124–25, 126,
131
exposure correction  107, 109
feathering  173, 175
file formats  109

222
INDEX
image manipulation (continued)
grayscale files  162
haloes  142, 143
Healing tool  124, 125, 142
high dynamic range  168–69
image distractions, removal 
of  134–35
image rotation  116
image stitching  190–91
interpolation  130
LAB channel comparison  151
landscapes  78, 79
Lasso tool  173–74, 178
layer blend modes  169, 
180–85
Layers and Modes control 
107, 176
Levels control see Levels tool
low-key images  38
low-light photography  87
Magic Wand tool  174, 175, 
178
management software  111
Marquee tool  173–74, 187
masking  172, 173, 174, 
176–77, 179
memory card error and  
downloads  108
Merge to HDR  169
monitor screen size  215
multiplying filter effects  183
noise reduction  87, 107, 
109, 143, 186
panoramas  92, 93, 190–91
pixel selection  172–75
pixellation problems  142
Quick-mask mode  133, 176
RAW files see RAW, 
working with
Sabattier effect  146, 184
saving copies  117
shadows  122, 123, 143
Shadows/Highlights tool  
143
sharpening software  107,
126–29, 142
sharpness, dealing with
lack of  118
side effects, unwanted 
142–43
sky see sky
software packages  106, 111
tagging data and notes  
106–07, 110
transparencies to color 
negatives effect  165
transparent edges  174
Unsharp Mask (USM)  79,
118–19, 125–27, 142–43
vintage effects  156–57
watery effect and blur  131
white balance  106–07, 109,  
136–37, 142
working methods  106–07, 
142
see also filters and image
manipulation
L
landscapes  76–81
background removal  178
in black and white  78, 79
composition  77–78,
80–81
depth of field  77, 78
duotone effect  79
essential requirements  
77–78
exposure control  77, 78
fish-eye lens, use of  81
focal length  77
Golden Section  81
high dynamic range  168
horizons, sloping  113, 117
image manipulation  78, 79
lens aperture  77, 78
lighting  78
motion blur  78
opportunistic shots  80
panoramas see panoramas
pastel colors  32
perspective  81
photographer, including in 
shot  76
polarizing filters  80
RAW files and sharpness and
saturation  158, 159
shadows  79
telephoto lens  78
tonal control  77, 78, 79
viewpoint  78, 81
zoom lens  78
legal issues
architectural images  55
artwork  82
cityscapes  82
model release form  61, 62
viewpoint  27
see also safety issues
lens aperture
blur see blur
changes, effects of  19
children, photographing  74
color composition  32
definition  204
depth of field  18–19, 21
focal length  19
focusing  18
landscapes  77, 78
low-light photography  86
portraits  100, 101
wedding photography  70
lenses, choice of  202–05
accessories  204, 205
extenders  205
fixed lens  202–03
focal length  203, 204,
205
macro lens and close-ups 
204, 205
shift and tilt movements  205
SLRs and interchangeable 
lenses  204–05
lenses, choice of (continued)
specialist lenses  205
specifications  203–04
see also camera choice; 
ultra-wide-angle lens; 
wide-angle lens; zoom lens
Levels tool
banding  143
brightness  145
color adjustment  109, 119,
140, 149
color to black and white
conversions  79, 151
cropping  116
cross-processing  165
exposure control  79,
120–21
use of  120–21
vintage effects  156
white balance  136–37
light
polarizing filters  80
lighting
architectural interiors  87
architecture  55–56
camera phones  102
children, photographing  44
color  119
flash see flash
high-key, and pastel colors  
32
landscapes  78
low-key images  38, 39
metering see metering
portraits  39, 98, 100, 101
soft box  44
wedding photography  70, 
71
live events  94–97
background knowledge  96, 
97
blur and movement  96
environment, recording of  
95
opportunities and 
preparation  96
safety issues  94, 96
shutter lag  96
sports coverage  94, 96–97
two cameras, use of  97
viewpoint and location  94,
96
wide-angle lens  95, 97
zoom lens  96, 97
low-light photography 
86–87
M
metering
choice of meters  208
exposure control  37,
208–09
flash  208
gray card as control  136
spot  37
movement
autofocus  20–21
blur  22–23, 113, 131–33, 
142
tossing the camera  23
unsharp subject detail  118
N
nature photography
pastel colors  32, 33
see also animals
noise
causes of  112
cloning  186
control  124, 125
low-light photography  86, 
87
reduction, and image 
manipulation  87, 107, 109, 
143, 186
reduction, and RAW files  158
underexposure  38
P
panoramas  92–93
architectural pictures  
56, 93
composition  92–93
distortion  92
image manipulation  92, 93, 
190–91
landscapes  92–93
pseudo  92
viewpoint  92
wide-angle lens  92
perspective
close-ups  25
depth of field  25
facial distortion  29
influencing  24–25
landscapes  81
travel photography  66
wide-angle lens  24, 25
portraits  98–101
animals  89
background removal  179
black and white  101, 
154–55
blur  98, 100
close-ups  29
color background  100
composition  100, 101
depth of field  99, 100
environmental surroundings, 
significance of  100, 101
eyes  66
facial distortion  29
flash  46–47
focal length  99, 101
group  100
halo effect  45
high dynamic range  168, 
169

223
INDEX
portraits (continued)
lens aperture  100, 101
lighting  39, 98, 100, 101
low-key images  38, 39
non-facial  101
profiles  29
RAW files and soft contrast  
158
reflections  100
shadows  99
sidelighting  39
travel photography  66, 67, 
68, 69
trust  98–100
wide-angle lens  101
see also children,
photographing
posterized image  109, 120, 
147, 152, 163, 165
printers
choice of  218–19
half-tone cells  219
printing
with color management 
114–15
color saturation  138, 139
duotones  162
low-key images  38
sharpening of images  126
R
RAW, working with  
158–61
Adobe Digital Negative 
(DNG)  158
advantages  158
in architectural images  
56
batch conversion  158, 
160–61
color extraction  158
JPEG comparison  158
low vibrance in documentary 
photography  158
Merge to HDR  169
RAW flow  160–61
RAW styles  158–60
shadows  112, 158, 159, 
160–61
sharpness and saturation in  
cityscapes 158
white balance  142, 158,
160–61
record-keeping  105
see also image management
red-eye  213
 S
safety issues
documentary photography 
58–59
live events  94, 96
street photography  62
safety issues (continued)
viewpoint and trespass  27
see also legal issues
shadows
abstract images  56
burning-in and dodging 
techniques 122, 123
clipping  112
in composite images  189
Curves tool  145
duotones  162
exposure control  56, 112
flash  46–48
high dynamic range  168
image manipulation  122, 
123, 143
landscapes  79
low-key images  38
portraits  99
RAW format  112, 158, 159, 
160–61
sharpness
dealing with lack of  118
filters  126–29
silhouettes
cityscapes  85
low-key images  39
skies
skylines and cityscapes  83
sports coverage see
live events
street photography  62–63
see also cityscapes; 
documentary photography
sunlight
flare  113
T
tagging
data and notes, and image
manipulation  106–07
tone
burning-in and dodging 
techniques  122, 123
cloning  186
control and Curves tool  144,
145, 146–47
control and mood  38, 39
duotones  79, 162–63
exposure control  36–37
Hue/Saturation control tool 
139
image distractions  135
landscapes  77, 78, 79
Levels control  79, 120–21
low-key images  38–39, 
86
mapping  55, 168–71
noise see noise
RAW files  159, 160
separation and conversion to 
black and white  152–53
sharpening software  126–29
white balance see white 
balance
travel photography  64–69
children, photographing 
72
cultural considerations  68
depth of field  66
exposure control  66
focal length  66, 67
food and drink  64
opportunities and 
composition  65, 67,
68–69
perspective  66
photo-sharing  65
portraits  66, 67, 68, 69
recording relationships  66
subject choice  64
viewpoint  66
weather  65
see also documentary 
photography
tripods
choice of  206–07
U
ultra-wide-angle lens
architectural pictures  56
choice of  202, 204
documentary photography  
59
fish-eye lens  81
underexposure problems  38,
42
V
viewpoint
animal photography  89
architectural pictures  57
changing  26–27
cityscapes  85
distortion  29
high, effect of  26
image distractions  134–35
landscapes  78, 81
live events  94, 96
low, effect of  26, 28
panoramas  92
perspective  24
portraits  100
reflections  27
social and political awareness  
27
street photography  62, 63
travel photography  66
trespass  27
wedding photography  
70–71
see also focal length
vignetting  113
feathering  175
vintage effects  156–57
vintage effects
duotone  162–63
vignetting  156–57
W
water
effect  131
underwater photography, 
equipment choice  209
weather see rain; skies; sunlight
wedding photography  70–71
white balance  136–37
architectural pictures  32, 
34–35, 56
control and image 
manipulation  136–37, 142
image manipulation  
106–07, 109, 136–37, 142
RAW files  142, 158, 160–61
under-exposure  49
see also color
wide-angle lens
architectural pictures  55, 56
distortion  28, 29
flash  42
live events  95, 97
misalignment  113
panoramas  92
perspective  24, 25
portraits  101
wildlife photography see
animal photography
Z
zoom lens
architectural pictures  56, 57
blur effect  131
camera choice  197
camera phones  194, 195
choice of  202, 203, 205
cityscapes  83
color composition  33
distortion  28, 29
image distractions  134–35
landscapes  78
live events  96, 97
perspective  24–25

224
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
From the author
Five editions of this book have run concurrently with
almost the whole life of digital photography itself. That
the book has grown and developed to keep up with
changes in technology and photographic practice is 
entirely thanks to its readers. My first and biggest thanks
are to you: thank you for buying this book (especially
to those of you who—I know—purchase new editions
to replace their old ones).
I am also delighted to record my thanks to readers
from around the world who have written to me over the
years to encourage me, to suggest changes, to point out 
errors, and to share ideas. This book, and my other titles,
are much improved for your input. Do keep writing—
there is plenty of room for improvement! 
This book has steadily improved and adapted itself to
changing circumstances over its several editions, thanks
to the keen attention of my senior editor, Nicky Munro. 
Sadly for us, Nicky is now happily reading in a greater 
library in the sky, so this edition is the second not to
benefit from her razor-sharp editorial eye for style and
detail. But she continues to hover at my shoulder, and
I’m sure even this edition is all the better for that. 
Finally, as the original dedicatee of the first edition, 
my wife Wendy continues to deserve the dedication
and biggest acknowledgment, remaining a steadfast
source of inspiration, strength, and good sense.
Tom Ang
Auckland, 2018
info@tomang.com
From the publisher
Many thanks also to David Summers and Hugo
Wilkinson for editorial assistance, Simon Murrell for
design assistance, and Margaret McCormack for
compiling the index.
Picture credits
Dorling Kindersley would like to
thank the following for their kind
permission to reproduce their
photographs:
(Key: a-above; b-below/bottom; 
c-center; f-far; l-left; r-right; t-top)
70 Corbis: Disc Pictures / 
AsiaPix (br). 71 Corbis: (clb, crb). 
75 Joe Munro (br). 95 Getty 
Images: Naki Kouyioumtzis / 
Axiom Photographic Agency (br). 
98 Wendy Gray. 99 eva serrabassa 
(bl); DOF-PHOTO by Fulvio (br). 
100 Corbis: Gadd (bl). 101 Corbis: 
Ariel Skelley / Blend Images (br). 
104 Paul Self. 132 Getty Images: 
Heinrich van den Berg (cla). 
170–1 Paul Self. 193 Getty Images: 
Jessamyn Harris (bc); Photo 
Nadieshda (tc); weechia@ms11.
url.com.tw (ca).
All other images © Tom Ang.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

