


OXFORD BOSTON JOHANNESBURG MELBOURNE NEW DELHI SINGAPORE 

Focal Press 
An imprint of Butterworth-Heinemann 
Linacre House, Jordan Hill, Oxford O X 2  8DP 
225 Wildwood Avenue, Woburn, M A  01801-2041 
A division of Reed Educational and Professional Publishing Ltd 
-@A 
member of the Reed Elsevier plc group 
First published 1998 
0 
Ken Pender 1998 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced in 
any material form (including photocopying or storing in any medium by 
electronic means and whether or not transiently or incidentally to some 
other use of this publication) without the written permission of the 
copyright holder except in accordance with the provisions of the Copyright, 
Designs and Patents Act 1988 or under the terms of a licence issued by the 
Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, 90 Tottenham Court Road, London, 
England W1P 9HE. Applications for the copyright holder's written 
permission to reproduce any part of this publication should be addressed 
to the publishers 
TRADEMARKS/REGISTERED TRADEMARKS 
Computer hardware and software brand names mentioned in this book are 
protected by their respective trademarks and are acknowledged. 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
ISBN 0 240 51527 7 
Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the Library of Congress 
Printed and bound in Italy by Vincenzo Bona I Torino 
~~ 
~- 
FOR EVERY TLTLE THAT WE PUBLISH, BUTTERWORTH~HEINEMAN'N 
WILL PAY POR BTCY TO PLANT AND CARE FOR A TREE. 

Contents 
Part 1 Digital Cdour - The Theory and the Practice 
1 
Light, sight and colour 
2 Working with digital colour 
3 
Colour output 
Part 2 Workshop 
4 
Defying the paradigms 
5 
Virtual architecture and terrain 
6 
The portrait 
7 
Digital sculpture 
8 
The human figure 
9 
The bizarre and the macabre 
10 Images from nature and science 
11 Digital art 
Summary 
Bibliography 
Glossary 
The CD 
Index 

This page intentionally left blank

Introduction 
!&?-.*; 
; 
*2:< 
s::! ’, 
::’.;: *.:.: 
0 - 
?<;: .D 
&? 
&>.. 
p’: . .  
: . 
ike it or not, we live in an increasingly digi- 
tal world. Many of my generation can still 
remember, with some nostalgia, winding up 
the clockwork mechanism of a post-war ra- 
diogram housed in its polished mahogany 
case, then inserting a fresh needle into the 
pick-up arm, before placing Eddie Calvert’s 
78 rpm bakelite rendering of Oh Mein Papa 
carefully on the turntable. Who among us then, as we lis- 
tened to the crackly strains of Eddie’s golden trumpet, could 
have imagined today’s roller-blading teenager listening 
through micro-earphones to Oasis on a CD Walkman clipped 
to the waistband of their Levi’s, while en route to a cyber 
cafe for a session surfing the Internet! 
From the arrival in the shops of the first clunky dig- 
ital calculators, the pace at which digital technology has 
permeated every corner of our society has been astonish- 
ing. Hard on the heels of the calculator came the digital 
watch and then something which had a keyboard, like a 
typewriter, could plug into a TV set and came complete 
with plug-in cartridges featuring games like Paddle Ball an 
Brickin the Wall. From what small acorns do mighty oak trees 
grow! It is probably not putting it too strongly to say that 
what seemed then like little more than a novelty gadget sig- 
nalled the beginning of a new phase in mankind’s evolution 
- an Information Revolution which would be as far reaching 
in its social and economic consequences as the Industrial 
Revolution before it. From industry to the financial markets, 
from education to the media, from health care to military 
defence and space travel - the list of areas being fundamen- 
The power of today’s desktop computer is already awe- 
... :- 
W....? 
. .;.- 
.m :I 
*,.:.->; 
~*:~~;*~. 
6 
J # - *  
tally altered is endless. 
. 
some by comparison with the earliest IBM and Apple 
- -__ - 
.. :- 
.- 
vii 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
machines and the pace of development continues unabated. 
Steady growth of the market for hardware is attracting an 
increasing number of application developers able to offer ever 
more sophisticated programs, including CAD, 3D modelling, 
animation and videoediting which, until only a few years 
ago, would have required investment in an expensive 
workstation far beyond the means of the average user. 
We live in a highly visual world. Most of what we do is 
supplemented by graphics and images to help convey mean- 
ing. An earlier book by the author - Digital Graphic Design - 
was conceived as a DIY guide to the rich array of resources 
now available to the digital designer and to the use of these 
resources to create a wide range of graphic effects. Over 300 
black and white graphics created with the use of leading edge 
drawing, painting, photoediting and three-dimensional ap- 
plications were demonstrated and explained in a mono- 
chrome environment. Digital Colour in Graphic Design is a 
DIY guide to the creation of an even wider range of dra- 
matic graphic effects and introduces the additional dimen- 
sion of colour. 
From the earliest origins of graphic design, the impor- 
tance of colour in the effective communication of a message 
or an idea - to add emphasis or to clarify complexity - was 
intuitively recognised. More recently, research has shown 
that, as well as simply attracting more attention, the correct 
use of colour leads to higher viewer retention of the graphic 
message. 
The objective of Digital Colour in Graphic Design is to 
use a suite of complementary applications, both vector and 
bitmap, to demonstrate the evolving potential of digital de- 
sign. Part 1 deals with the basic principles underlying the 
use of colour on the desktop, including colour models and 
the ways in which devices like scanners, monitors and print- 
ers handle colour. System calibration methods are covered, 
leading desktop drawing, painting and 3D applications. The 
steps to be taken to ensure that an image created on the 
screen can be successfully converted to printed copy are also 
explained. Part 2 then expands on the techniques covered in 
Digital Graphic Design, showing how the use of colour greatly 
extends the range of opportunities for the graphic designer. 
Advanced techniques are explained using a wide range of 
examples. Any suggestions on how the contents could be 
Ken render 
further improved would be welcome f 
. 
--j. L . - 
as are the many fascinating colour processing features of the 
--\, 
... 
(kpender@vrv493k.demon.co.uk) 
Vlll 

Part I 
Digital Colour 
The Theory and the Practice 
Light, sight and colour 
Working with digital colour 
Colour output 

This page intentionally left blank


Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
The Earth is constantiybombarded 
by electromagnetic radiation, but 
much of thisradiation -including 
some visible light - is filtered out by 
the atmosphere before itreaches the 
Earth‘s surface 
&
,
+
 
#,,...:<.. F9 
.. .. 
q,?.,..: 
&:.’; 
2.; i 
I;: 2 
-;+- 
n the beginning, as the Earth formed 4.5 billion 
years ago from the condensation of a cloud of pri- 
mordial cosmic dust and gas, its surface was ini- 
tially bitterly cold and dark. As the dust slowly 
settled and swirling gases began to form a primi- 
tive atmosphere, the first glimmer of light broke 
through the gloom to illuminate a landscape torn 
by earthquakes and volcanoes and ravaged by 
:. .- 
,*:;;: 1 ’.. 
* 
fierce electrical storms. And then there was light, 
as the Bible says. Since then, the Earth has 
been illuminated by light from the Sun by 
day, when it reaches the Earth’s surface di- 
rectly, and by night when it arrives cour- 
tesy of reflection from the surface of the 
I 
. 
Moon. According to scientists, we can expect 
to continue to enjoy the Sun’s generous bounty for several 
billions of years to come, or untG we render the planet unin- 
habitable - whichever comes sooner! 
Light 
Visible light is only a small part of the electromagnetic 
radiation which originates from the Sun, from our own gal- 
axy and from more distant galaxies, subjecting the Earth to 
continuous bombardment. The electromagnetic spectrum ex- 
tends from gamma and X-rays through ultraviolet radiation, 
visible light, infrared radiation, microwaves, and radio waves. 
Radio longwave 
AM 
FM Microwaves IWisiblelUV X-rays 
Gamma rays 
lo8 lo6 lo4 lo2 1.0 
I O - ~  
lo4 lo6 loa 1 0 - l ~  d2 
1 0 - l ~  1 0 - l ~  
Wavelength (metres) 
4 

'Light, sight and colour 
While the Sun appears yellow to us on Earth, a simple 
rainbow demonstrates, by refracting sunshine through rain 
water droplets, that the light emitted consists of a continu- 
ous spectrum of colours ranging from violet to red. Closer 
scientific investigation, using a prism instead of water drop- 
lets and a spectrophotometer instead of the human eye, shows 
that the spectrum actually extends con- 
tinuously beyond the visible colours into 
the ultraviolet at one extreme and blends 
into the infrared at the other extreme. 
Such measurements show that the col- 
ours to which our eyes are sensitive have 
wavelengths in the range of about 300 nm 
to 750 nm (1 nanometre, or nm, equals 
one billionth of a metre). Like other forms 
'
?
of electromagnetic radiation, visible light 
can be characterised in terms of its wave- 
length and amplitude. The wavelength determines its hue - 
what the human eye perceives as its colour, e.g. 
as op- 
posed to 
, while the amplitude denotes the brightness of 
the colour. 
As its spectral distribution curve shows, the reason that 
the Sun appears yellow is that the intensity of light radiated 
by its surface gases is a maximum at wavelengths near 500 
nm, in the yellow part of the spectrum. The Earth's atmos- 
phere -the gaseous envelope which surrounds the solid body 
of the planet - acts as a filter to the Sun's radiation, the ozone 
layer fortunately absorbing much of the harmful ultraviolet 
radiation, while water vapour absorbs some radiation in the 
infrared region and at several parts of the visible region. High 
levels of atmospheric pollution in the vicinity of industrial 
areas can also reduce the quality of light reaching the Earth's 
surface. 
fievisib'espech-um 
Wavelength 
Light passing through a uniform medium, like space 
or the Earths atmosphere, travels in straight lines. This 
is not the case, however, when it passes, at an a 
from one medium to another with a different 
refractive index, as in the air to prism example 
mentioned alread$ or in the common case of 
light passing from water to air - an example well 
known to the spear fishermen of ancient civili- 
sations who went hungry until they learned to 
ficiently distant from the Earth - 149 591 000 km - 
aim their spears 'off target'. The Sun is also suf- 
-- 
5 
? 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
that its rays can be considered to be parallel on arrival and of 
equal intensity over short, terrestrial distances. The same, of 
course, is not true of room lights - an example of a class of 
lights called ’omnilights’ - which emit light radially in all 
directions, with an intensity which falls off with the square 
of the distance between light source and object illuminated. 
Dramatic effects can be created in graphics using light from 
simulated spotlights, which are directional and of variable 
intensity. 
When light strikes the surface of an object, part of the 
light is turned back from the surface by reflection. The re- 
mainder of the light is transmitted into (absorption) or 
through the material (transmission). If the surface of the ob- 
ject is smooth, then the angle of reflection equals the angle of 
incidence (specular reflection). If the surface is rough, the 
reflected light goes off in all directions (diffuse reflection). 
Shade and shadow can be thought of as the inverse of 
light. The surface of an object which is turned away from 
direct light, receiving only light reflected from other surfaces, 
is said tobe shaded. A shadow occurs when an 
opaque object prevents light from reaching a sur- 
face which would otherwise be illuminated. In the 
real world, objects are illuminated by direct sun- 
light, by light reflected from neighbouring objects 
and by light scattered from dust and other parti- 
cles present in the atmosphere, producing complex 
results which are not easy to predict. The summa- 
tion of all these sources of background lighting is 
commonly called ’ambient’ light. Before creating 
graphics which attempt to simulate real life lighted 
scenes, a careful study of photographs can be a 
source of useful guidance. 
Examples of the use of diredionallighting 
Light’s electromagnetic waves can ’interfere’ 
with each other in the same way as do the ripples from two 
stones thrown into a pond. When two ripples are in phase 
they interfere additively, reinforcing each other; when they 
are out of phase, they interfere destructively, cancelling each 
other out- It is this phenomenon which is responsible for the 
colours seen in soap bubbles. The light waves which reflect 
off the inner surface of the bubble’s soap film interfere with 
light waves of the same wavelength which reflect off the outer 
surface of the film. Some of the wavelengths interfere con- 
structively, so that their colours appear bright, while others 
interfere destructively, so that their colours are not seen. The 
6 

Light, sight and colour 
same effect causes the colours seen in films of oil on the sur- 
face of water. In graphic design, incorrect alignment of the 
halftone screens used for printing the four process colours 
can cause undesirable interference between the reflected col- 
ours - the moire effect - but the interference principle can 
also be exploited positively by overlaying coloured grids to 
produce interesting effects. 
Light sources and the artist 
Moire' effect 
As life took hold and evolved on Earth, our earliest cave- 
dwelling ancestors apparently discovered that fire, as well as 
offering some deterrent to passing predators, provided 
enough light to paint by, albeit a flickering reddish light, as 
the spectral output from the relatively low temperature of a 
wood fire peaks in the red part of the spectrum. Centuries 
later, artists and sculptors worked by the light of torches made 
from dried rushes or resinous wood, oil lamps and then can- 
dles (beeswax candles were used in Egypt and Crete as early 
as 3000 BC). The term 'candlepower' was coined to provide a 
benchmark against which to measure the ability of other 
sources to give off light and was based on the light emitted 
by a standard candle. It was not until the early nineteenth 
century that gas was used to provide street, factory and then 
domestic lighting, with its characteristic blue glow. The first 
gas burners were simple iron or brass pipes with perforated 
tips, but development of the gas mantle, impregnated with 
cerium and thorium compounds, which became incandescent 
when heated by the gas flame, produced a much whiter light. 
In 1879, Thomas Edison developed a successful carbon 
filament lamp which evolved into the ubiquitous light bulb, 
employing a tungsten alloy filament heated to an incandes- 
cent 3000 "C. Although operating at a lower temperature than 
the Sun (the wavelengths emitted by the Sun are close to those 
of the radiation emitted by a heated source - called a black 
body source - at a temperature of 5500 "C), the light bulb emits 
wavelengths across the whole visible spectrum. Today, of 
course, the common light bulb is being replaced more and 
more by lighting based on gas discharge technology. Many 
football matches are now watched in the blue/white light cast 
by clusters of high intensity arc lights, while motorway inter- 
changes are illuminated by the rather sickly yellow/orange 
glow of sodium lights. As well as its lower running costs, 
\i/ 
7 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
The measurement of temperature is 
based on a theoretical substance 
called a black body which, when 
heated, radiates colour from red at 
low 
to violet at high 
temperature. The measurement 
scale is in degrees Kelvin (K) A 60- 
watt 
light bulb Is 
measured at about 2800 K, a white 
fluorescent lamp at 4400 K, and 
midday sunlight is about 5500 K. - 
fluorescent lighting is generally whiter than that of ordinary 
light bulbs, as its equivalent black body temperature of 
4100 "c is closer to that of the Sun. The interiors of fluores- 
cent lamps are coated with phosphors which glow when ex- 
cited by cathode rays. The phosphors absorb the invisible but 
intense ultraviolet components of the primary light source 
and emit visible light. In fact, if the chemicals in the interior 
phosphor coating are varied, different light tones - such as 
the 'plant light' which mimics sunlight - can be produced. 
Best known to the public through spectacular 'light 
light and atmosphere. For Claude Monet, 
i' t 
.%.- 
~ 
remarkable works depicting the effects of 
the prime exponent of Impressionism, the 
f world was composed not of objects but of a 
dazzling display of light reflected from those 
objects, while Georges Seurat even attempted to 
render scientifically the impressionist perception of light 
with the use of small dabs or dots of paint in the style 
f 
y& - p y 1  '+r 
&& 
v ,  
I 
1 
which became known as Pointillism. Those who have 
visited Provence, in the south of France, will also un- 
derstand why the extraordinary interaction between 
light and landscape in that region had a compelling at- 
traction for the Impressionists. 
The discovery of the photographic process was to 
prove an important milestone in the understanding and 
application of light in the design process, directly influ- 
encing the work of artists like Degas, who painted sub- 
jects in movement, as though captured by a camera lens. 
8 
-
-
 
shows’, the relatively receAtly discovered laser (light ampli- 
fication by stimulated emission of radiation) is a device which 
amplifies light and produces coherent light beams 
(beams with a single wavelength), ranging from 
infrared to ultraviolet. Laser light can be made 
tremely intense and highly directional. 
The interior lighting conditions expe- 
enced (endured is perhaps a more accu- 
ate description) by artists over the centu- 
ries is reflected in the sombre, even 
gloomy, nature of much of their work, but 
heir appreciation of the nature and im- 
portance of light is also evident in exam- 
ples such as Gustave Dor6’s Opium Smok- 
ing and, of course, in the work of artists 
like Constable and Turner who produced 

Light, sight and colour 
Photographers quickly discovered how the manipulation of 
the lights used to illuminate a scene could dramatically alter 
the appearance of the final image. As the technology evolved, 
the mobility of the camera also allowed the photographer to 
explore and capture conditions of light and shade which were 
denied to his fellow artists. 
Sight 
The eye 
Eyes are as varied as the animals which possess them. 
The eyes of the myriad species which inhabit the planet vary 
from simple structures capable only of differentiating between 
light and dark, to complex organs, such as those of humans 
and other mammals, which can distinguish minute variations 
of shape, colour, brightness, and distance. 
Pointillism 
Human vision has the widest colour gamut, that is the 
widest range of visible colour. It also has the widest dynamic 
range, capable of discerning gradation in shadow that is one 
millionth the brightness of the highlights in the field of view. 
The psychology of visualperception 
in fact takes place in the brain, not in the eye. The amount 
Sight - perhaps the most miraculous of the senses, 
- 
__ -7 
which we sadly tend to take for granted -is a process which 
of light entering the eye is controlled by the pupil, which 
P( <&.,
*’‘‘-m
has the ability to dilate and contract. The cornea and lens, 
the shape of which is adjusted by the ciliary body, focus ‘ 
~ 
the light on to the retina, where receptors convert it into 
eye, therefore, is to translate the electromagnetic vibrations 
of light into packets of nerve impulses which are transmitted 
to the brain for interpretation. The retina consists of approxi- 
-.p+w 
.,rY - 
, --?, 
< 
%h*, 
‘I 
nerve signals which pass to the brain. The function of the i:;.... 
9 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
mately 130 million light-sensitive cells, which are 
either cone shaped or rod shaped. The cone-shaped cells re- 
spond to colour, and it is believed that the cones are distrib- 
uted evenly to react to one of the red, green, or blue light 
primaries. As a sensation experienced by humans and some 
animals, perception of the colour of the light wavelengths so 
received is a complex neurophysiological process. Among 
mammals, only humans, primates, and a few other species 
can recognise colours. 
Perceptual psychologists believe that, once the nerve 
impulses have been received and an object has been perceived 
as an identifiable entity, it tends to be seen as a stable object 
having permanent characteristics, despite variations in its il- 
lumination, the position from which it is viewed, or the dis- 
tance at which it appears. Thus, an individual viewing a new 
scene interprets it by synthesising past experience with sen- 
sory cues present in the new scene - using depth cues such 
as linear perspective, partial concealment of a far object by a 
near one or the presence of aerial perspective ’haze’. Fortu- 
nately for the graphic designer, how- 
ever, the brain can be deceived! Indeed, 
this deception is the very basis of much 
graphic design. For example, it is be- 
cause the brain is conditioned to asso- 
ciate the converging lines and shaded faces of a building with 
its three-dimensional depth, that, by drawing the building 
using converging lines and shaded surfaces on a two-dimen- 
sional surface, we trick the brain into seeing the drawing as 
having three dimensions. 
Such illusions are of great practical importance in envi- 
ronmental and architectural design and in the theatre, as a 
means of creating a sense of depth and space in a confined 
area. The concept has also been carried over to the design of 
the desktop PC GUI (Graphic User Interface) where subtle 
shading of buttons on a flat computer screen creates a pow- 
erful 3D illusion - which is further reinforced when we click 
the button and the shading alters in the way that our brain is 
conditioned to expect. To learn more about graphic illusion, 
the reader is advised to study the work of the Dutch graphic 
artist Maurits Corneille Escher (1898-1972) who devoted his 
life to the creation of an intriguing world of impossible per- 
spectives, optical paradoxes and visual puns. 
Illusions are believed to result from the erroneous ap- 
plication of learned depth or colour cues and can occur in 
10 

I Light, sight and colour 
nature. I remember well, during a cycling holiday in Ayrshire 
in Scotland, coming across a famous (but unknown to me) 
stretch of road called the Heely Brae. As all my senses told me 
that the road was on a downward incline, I sat back in the 
saddle, expecting to freewheel down the slope. Instead, I 
found that I quickly came to a stop and had to resume pedal- 
ling in order to reach the bottom! The illusion was created by 
an unusual relationship between the contours of the adjoin- 
ing hills and hedgerows. 
Illusions are also common in colour perception, nota- 
bly in the phenomenon called 'simultaneous contrast', in 
which the appearance of a particular area of colour is greatly 
altered by changes in its surroundings. This effect is of prac- 
tical importance in fashion and textile design as well as in 
graphic design. The relationship of text colour to background 
colour is also important to ensure legibility. The colour of 
ambient lighting can also have a significant effect on the way 
we perceive colour; many readers will have experienced the 
mysterious change in colour undergone by a sweater wrapped 
under the fluorescent lights of a store and later unwrapped 
in daylight! 
As individuals, not only do we vary in our description 
of colour, but our perception of colour is influenced by expe- 
riences, memory, and even, research tells us, by the use of 
hallucinogenic drugs. Research has also shown that certain 
colours and types of lighting can effect us subliminally. We 
describe some colours as 'slimming' and some lighting as 'flat- 
tering'. We are apparently soothed by a green environment 
and excited by red, but feel welcomed by a combination of 
red and yellow, as patrons of MacDonald's will know. 
For average members of the population, differences in 
how we perceive colours don't seriously affect our lives. In 
some members of the population, however, defects in the 
retina or in other nerve portions of the eye can cause colour 
blindness. Dichromatism - partial colour blindness - is mani- 
fested by the inability to differentiate between the reds and 
the greens or to perceive either reds or greens. Dichroma- 
tism is a hereditary condition which affects as many as seven 
percent of the male population, but a much lower per- 
centage of females. In the realm of commercial printing, dif- 
ferences in colour perception may determine the success or 
failure of a print job. Being aware of how different factors 
influence colour perception and determine the appearance 
of printed colours will maximise the probability of success. 
Thelegibility of textdepends auadyon 
the relative colours of text and 
backpzmd 
11 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Stereoscopy and the cone of vision 
The fact that nature endowed us with two eyes, which 
are separated by a few centimetres, means that the objects 
we view appear slightly different to each eye; this effect pro- 
vides a sense of depth and can be used, in graphic design, to 
produce stereoscopic three-dimensional images on a two- 
dimensional surface. 
Experimentation has shown that, if we view a scene with 
the eyes at rest, then our field of view is defined by a cone - 
our 'cone of vision' - of angle approximately 60". This field of 
view can be thought of as analogous to that seen through the 
viewfinder of a camera. A camera's angle of view - the 
amount of the field that the lens will 'see' - depends 
on the lens's focal length. The field of a camera lens 
may be as small as 15" or as large as 140". A standard 
lens covers around 60", a wide-angle lens 90" and a 
telephoto lens 30". A wide-angle lens forms an im- 
age with a wide field of view, but causes the scene 
to appear smaller and more distant than it actu- 
ally is. Such a lens could be used, for example, to 
take a close-up of a tall building, but would intro- 
duce considerable distortion, especially at the 
edges of the picture. A wide-angle photograph of 
a person with hands reaching out would make the hands 
appear disproportionately large. Therefore, when creating 
graphics depicting objects or scenes as they would normally 
appear in perspective in the real world, it is important to en- 
sure that the objects or scenes fall within the 60" cone unless 
the objective of the graphic is to create effects similar to those 
Cone of vision 
produced by special camera lenses such as the wide-angle or 
fisheye lenses. 
Perspective 
As children grow up, observing and interacting with 
their surroundings, the rules of perspective are learned in- 
tuitively, helping the children to understand the world 
around them. Those of them who choose to become graphic 
designers, however, need to learn how to translate these 
three-dimensional rules on to a two-dimensional surface, if 
convincing results are to be achieved. 
12 

I Light, sight and colour 
Rule 1 Convergence 
As parallel lines recede into the distance, they appear to 
converge at a constant rate. 
Rule 2 Foreshortening 
Equally spaced objects appear to become closer together, 
at a constant rate, as the distance from the observer 
increases. 
Rule 3 Diminution 
Equal sized objects appear to become smaller, at a 
constant rate, as the distance from the observer increases. 
In addition to being 
aware of these three rules, 
the designer of three-dimen- 
sional scenes must allow for 
aerial perspective -whereby 
atmospheric effects cause 
distant objects to appear 
fainter than objects close to 
the viewer. 
13 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Colour 
Colour is, of course, simply the way we describe light 
of different wavelengths. When we see colour, we are really 
seeing light. When we look around us, the light which enters 
our eyes does so in three ways - directly, e.g. from a light 
source such as the Sun or a light bulb, indirectly, by reflec- 
tion from any smooth reflective surface, or by transmission 
through a transparent material, such as coloured glass. When 
we look at an object, the colour it appears to have depends 
on which wavelengths of the light falling on it are absorbed, 
reflected or transmitted. A yellow flower is yellow because it 
reflects yellow light and absorbs other wavelengths. The red 
glass of a stained glass window is red because it transmits 
red light and absorbs other wavelengths. The process by 
which we perceive the colours of natural objects around us 
can therefore be described as a ’subtractive’ process. 
Subtractive, because the objects ’subtract’ certain wavelengths 
from the white light falling upon them before reflecting and/ 
or transmitting the wavelengths which determine their col- 
our. The colours we see when we look at an original old mas- 
ter depend on the optical properties of the pigments used to 
produce the original paint employed by the artist and on how 
these properties may have altered over the centuries since 
the work was created. 
Some of the earliest cave drawings were created using 
charcoal from burnt sticks mixed with a natural binder such 
as animal fat, fish glue or the sap from plants, or using natu- 
ral chalks - white calcium carbonate, red iron oxide or black 
carboniferous shale. The first ’paint’ used by the earliest cave 
painters was a crude rust-coloured paste made from ground- 
up iron oxide mixed with a binder. 
Colour was introduced to early three-dimensional works 
of art by applying coloured pieces of glass, stone, ceramics, 
marble, terracotta, mother-of-pearl, and enamels. Although 
mosaic decoration was mainly confined to floors, walls and 
ceilings, its use extended to sculptures, panels, and other 
objects. Tesserae - shaped pieces in the form of small cubes - 
were embedded in plaster, cement, or putty to hold them in 
place. 
By the time of the Ancient Egyptians, the artist’s pal- 
ette of colours had expanded to include pigments predomi- 
14 

Light, sight and colour 
nantly made from mineral ores - azurite (blue), malachite 
(green), orpiment and realgar (yellow), cinnabar (red), blue 
frit and white lead. Additional pearly or pastel-like colours 
offered by gouache - a form of watercolour which uses 
opaque pigments rather than the usual transparent water- 
colour pigments - were also developed by the Egyptians. The 
wall paintings of ancient Egypt and the Mycenaean period 
in Greece are believed to have been executed in tempera - a 
method of painting in which the pigments were carried in a 
blue-purple organic pigment indigo, extracted from the In- 
.dig0 plant, as well as Tyrian purple and the green copper ox- 
ide, verdigris. Many years later, the thirteenth century saw 
the introduction of lead tin yellow, madder (red), ultra- 
marine (blue green) and vermilion (red). 
In contrast to the older water-based media, such as 
fresco, tempera and watercolour, oil paints, developed in 
Europe in the late Middle Ages, consist of pigments ground 
up in an oil which dries on exposure to air. The oil is usually 
linseed but may be poppy or walnut. In the late eighteenth 
century the Industrial Revolution boosted the palette with 
chromes, cadmiums and cobalts, but it was not until the fol- 
lowing century that paint consisting of prepared mixtures of 
pigments and binders became commercially available on a 
wide scale. 
In parallel with the gradual evolution of the types and 
colours of paint available to the artist, inks used for printing 
also evolved. Lampblack - a black pigment produced by the 
incomplete burning of hydrocarbons - was in use in /4..7 
China as early as AD 400. 
colour for woodblock printing, with decorative colour '! 
being added by quill pen. Early letterpress printing ,:, 
used inks composed of varnish, linseed oil, and car- 
bon black. In the eighteenth century the first coloured 
inks were developed and in the nineteenth century a 
wide variety of pigments were developed for use in the manu- 
facture of these inks. Manufacture of modern printing inks is 
a complicated process often using chemically produced rather 
than natural pigments and containing as many as fifteen sepa- 
rate ingredients, including modifiers or additives and dryers 
which control appearance, durability and drying time. 
medium of egg yolk. The Romans added to the palette the 
/ 
For many centuries, black was the accepted 
! 
I 
15 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Simple colourmodels 
Although the spectrum contains a continuous range of 
visible colours, it can be broken down into three colour 're- 
gions' - red (and its neighbouring colours), green and its 
neighbours, and blue and its neighbours - each region repre- 
senting one-third of the visible spectrum. Conversely, when 
colours within these same three regions are projected on top 
of one another, white light is recreated. Early optical experi- 
ments also showed that if only two of the three regions over- 
lapped, a totally different colour was created - red and green 
producing yellow; red and blue producing magenta; green 
and blue producing cyan. Because the red, green and blue 
combine to produce white light, they became known as ad- 
ditive primaries. Because the yellow, magenta and cyan were 
formed by taking away, or subtracting, one of the three addi- 
tive primaries, they were called subtractive primaries. The 
figure below right summarises the interaction of the 
subtractive primaries. The two figures are crude colour 'mod- 
els' - methods of representing the relationship of primary 
colours within the spectrum. 
Subtractive colourmodel 
Addtive colourmodel 
16 

Light, sight and colour 
The colour wheel is a more helpful model, displaying 
the compositional relationships between the spectral colours. 
Mixing any two of the primaries produces a 'secondary' 
colour which appears midway between them on the wheel. 
Further subdivisions can be created by continuing to mix 
adjacent colours. Opposite colours on the wheel are comple- 
mentary; placed side to side, they produce a harmonious re- 
sult, but mixed together, they effectively cancel out. A number 
of pairs of pure complementary spectral colours also exist; if 
mixed additively, these will produce the same sensation as 
white light. Among these pairs are certain yellows and blues, 
greens and blues, reds and greens, and greens and violets. 
As well as describing colour in terms of the visible spec- 
trum, it can be described in terms of three characteristics - 
hue, lightness, and saturation. Hue is the name of the colour, 
such as red or orange; lightness (sometimes called value) in- 
dicates the darkness or lightness of a hue - in other words, 
how close it is to black or white; saturation (also called 
chroma) refers to the spectral purity of the hue, described 
using terms like vividness or dullness. The figure on the right 
shows a representation of the three variables. Hue is repre- 
sented by angular position around the circle; saturation 
increases radially from the centre of the circle outwards; light- 
ness, or value, is represented by positions along the vertical 
scroll bar. 
Tints, shades and tones 
Colour wheel 
I
I
 I 
H 
L 
- 
r
g
 
p-3 
HLSmodel 
O O d J J J  
The relationship between tints, shades and tones is best 
explained by reference to the HLS model. The hue values 
- where 0" is the same as 360". The hue values for primary 
colours are red (O"), yellow (60"), green (120"), cyan (ISO"), 
range from 1" to 360" - equivalent to settings on a colour wheel 
Tints 
(addingwhitewithHand5constant) 
OO.*.* 
blue (240"), and magenta (300"). The standard setting for a 
hue is 50% lightness and 100% saturation. If, for example, 
pure red (R255, GO, BO) is highlighted in the palette, the HLS 
values display hue 0", lightness SO%, and saturation 100%. 
The hue setting selects a starting colour value. Varying 
hue. Increasing lightness adds white, producing a 'tint' of 
ing a 'shade' of the selected colour. 
Shades 
(addingblack with HandSconstant) 
the lightness value adds a percentage of white or black to the (--c,,--c>;3
the selected colour; decreasing lightness adds black, produc- 
ToneS 
(addinggrey by decreasing5 while keeping 
Hand L constant) 
17 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
A pure colour has a saturation value of 100%. Decreas- 
ing saturation, while keeping lightness constant, adds grey 
to the colour, reducing its purity and producing a 'tone' of 
the colour. A continuous tone image - e.g. a colour photo- 
graph - is one in which colours and shades flow continu- 
ously from one to another. 
The relationship between tints, shades and tones can 
be summarised in a colour triangle. Tints offer the designer a 
range of subtly different variations around a single colour in 
one pass though an offset press, while two colour printing 
extends the possible variations to shades and tones. Varying 
the brightness and saturation of object surfaces within a 
graphic design also provides a simple means of creating the 
illusion of depth or distance fl 
Hue 
w 
shade., 
J Tint 
*% 
@ 3  J 
Colour hiangle 
18 


Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
nderstanding light and colour is at least 
as important to the serious digital de- 
signer as it was to his traditional coun- 
terpart. It could even be considered 
more important, in the sense that the 
digital designer is virtually ’painting 
with the colours of light’. The diagram 
. .  
below summarises the process by 
which the digital designer captures the image of an object 
for inclusion in a composition, works on the composition 
while viewing it on a monitor screen and then outputs the 
result to a printer. Understanding this colour reproduction 
process, with all its limitations and conversions, is important 
if unexpected and disappointing results are to be avoided. 
Camcorder or 
digital still camera 
A typical desktop system 
\ 
Flatbed scanner 
Laser printer 
Colour reproduction 
Camera 
A key element of many graphic projects is a photo- 
graphic image captured with a conventional optical camera. 
Light reflected from the object or scene passes through the 
camera’s aperture and lens system and impinges on the 
2 0  

Wor.king with digital colour 
surface of the light-sensitive film placed in the camera's focal 
plane. Colour film has three layers of emulsion on a cellulose 
acetate base. Each of the three layers is sensitive to only one 
of the primary colours red, green or blue. The emulsions are 
thin, gelatinous coatings containing light-sensitive silver 
halide crystals in suspension. When exposed to light, each 
emulsion reacts chemically, recording areas where its particu- 
lar colour appears in the scene and forming a latent image on 
the film. When the film is developed, particles of metallic sil- 
ver form in areas which were exposed to light and each emul- 
sion releases a dye which is the complementary colour of the 
light recorded - blue light releases yellow dye, green light 
releases magenta dye and red light releases cyan dye. Com- 
plementary colours are used because they reproduce the origi- 
nal colour of the scene when the film negative is processed 
to produce the final colour print or transparency. Because the 
sizes of the silver halide particles in the film emulsion and 
the silver particles formed during the development process 
are very small, the resolution of detail in the final image is 
very high. To the unaided eye, the image appears to have 
continuous tone, with colours blending smoothly from one 
to another. Only when the image is considerably enlarged 
does the 'graininess' of the particles become visible. 
Scanner 
The principles underlying the operation of drum, 
flatbed, sheet feed or hand-held scanners are essentially the 
same. To use a typical flatbed scanner, the photograph or 
transparency to be scanned is placed face down on the scan- 
ner bed or transparency attachment and the cover is lowered 
on top of it. A light source inside the scanner, running the 
full width of the bed, then traverses the image. Light reflected 
from the image passes via a lens and a series of mirrors on to 
an array of CCD (Charge Coupled Capacitor) devices which 
also span the full width of the bed. A CCD is a semiconduc- 
tor chip - usually silicon - the surface of which has been 
doped to make it light sensitive. The light reflected from the 
source image impinges on the surface of the chips and is con- 
verted into electrons in numbers proportional to the inten- 
sity of the light beam. The resulting changes in voltage across 
the chip are then amplified and converted to an analogue 
'picture' of the image. In order to detect the colour informa- 
tion in the image, rather than just the intensity variations, 
A conventional optical camera 
A flatbed scanner 
21 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Image being scanned 
Scanner operation 
the reflected light is sampled, in turn, via red, green and blue filters, so that intensity varia- 
tions are recorded separately for each of the three primary colours. After RGB separation, an 
analogue to digital converter converts the analogue picture of the image to a digital one 
before passing it to the PC. A black and white scanned image is considered to be only '1 bit' 
deep because all the information (on or off, black or white, 0 or 1) to describe each of the dots 
in the image can be stored in a 1-bit number (2l). A greyscale image is considered to be 8 bits 
deep because to store the information to describe 256 (28) levels of grey, 8 bits of information 
must be stored for each dot. A full colour scan requires 8 bits for each of the three primary 
colours red, green and blue and is therefore 24 bits deep, i.e. the scanner records 24 bits of infor- 
mation for each dot (ZZ4). 
The role of the conventional scanner is likely to be taken 
Digitalcamera 
over increasingly by the fast evolving digital camera which 
operates using the same CCD technology as the scanner, but 
receives and digitises light from a scene via a conventional 
optical camera 'front end'. Digitised images are saved to an 
internal disk and can be downloaded directly to a PC for 
processing. Prices are still high for cameras capable of 
producing high resolution images, but will undoubtedly fall 
rapidly as the technology is applied to the consumer market. 
Monitor 
A colour monitor has a screen coated internally with three phosphors capable of emit- 
ting red, green or blue light when excited by an electron beam. The phosphors are laid down 
in bands (trinitron tubes) or patterns (shadow mask tubes). To illuminate the phosphors and 
produce spots of colour, the cathode ray tube contains three electron guns - one for each of 
the three phosphors. As the three electron beams track across the screen (from left to right 
and top to bottom, as in a normal TV tube, they cause red, green and blue light to be emitted 
22 

Working with digital colour 
-. 
' D  
Heating filament 
,ii- 
', \ 
,y 
',,': 
Cathode 
Deflection coils 
\,,I\ 
ray 
\,,: 
tube 
\ :  
. . ~ ~ . ~  
.-, 
*) 
_. - - 
/ I  
i ;  
' I  
i 
I: 
/ ,  Phosphor 
Electron gun 
i ,' 
Tube conshction 
from phosphor dots so close together and so small that the colour seen on the screen is the 
addition of light from all three dots. Instead of seeing this moving dot of coloured light, 
persistence of vision deceives the viewer's eye into seeing the coloured screen image built 
up by the moving spot. To create colours such as orange or yellow, the three 'primary' col- 
ours are mixed together in varying degrees by independently controlling the intensities of 
the electron beams and, therefore, the intensity of the light emitted by the phosphors. As the 
intensity of each beam can be varied in steps from 0 to 255, the number of possible colour 
combinations for the combined spot = 256 256 256 = 16.7 million - a palette which our 
artistic predecessors would have killed for! 
For serious graphics work, at least a 17" - and preferably a 21" - non-interlaced monitor 
is recommended. The ability of a monitor to display colours depends critically on the graph- 
ics adapter card which drives it. To display graphics at an ideal working resolution of 1024 768 
in 24-bit 'photorealistic' colour on a 21" monitor requires a card with 4 Mb of on-board video 
memory and appropriate software drivers. For many graphic design tasks, however, an 
acceptable compromise is a 17" screen operated at a resolution of 800 600 in 16-bit colour . 
Desktop printers and the offsetpress 
Colour printing systems are based on the subtractive colour model, mixing the 
subtractive primaries, cyan, yellow and magenta, to produce other colours. Unfortunately, 
the reflective properties of printing inks are affected by impurities and experience showed 
that printing black, which should theoretically be possible by combining cyan, yellow and 
magenta, produced instead a muddy brown. To overcome this, most colour printers include 
black ink as a fourth 'colour' in the print process. As well as allowing correct printing of 
black, this results in improved shadow density and overall contrast. The nineteenth-century 
discovery of the halftone process showed how the juxtaposition of small enough dots of 
cyan, yellow, magenta and black inks could produce an image which, to the naked eye, would 
appear to produce continuous tones, colours being produced not by the physical mixing of 
the inks, but in the optical mixing of primary colours by the viewer's eye. The majority of 
23 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
modern low resolution desktop printers use this principle, 
laying down dots in various 'dither' patterns to produce col- 
our output ranging from crude - with the dot pattern clearly 
visible - to a quality verging on photorealistic. 
In the offset process, the dot pattern is created by pho- 
tographing the original artwork through a halftone screen. 
To separate a full colour image into yellow, magenta and cyan, 
it is necessary to photograph the copy three times, through 
filters which are the same colour as the additive primaries - 
red, green and blue. When the copy is photographed through 
the red filter, green and blue are absorbed and the red passes 
P 
* 
through, producing a negative with a record of the red. By 
making a positive of this negative we will obtain a record of 
everything that is not red, or more specifically, a record of 
the green and blue. The green and blue, as we have seen ear- 
\ 
Halftone dotpattem 
lier,iombine to producecyan; therefore, we have a record of 
cyan. The process is repeated, using a green filter to produce 
a record of magenta and using a blue filter to produce a record 
of yellow. As each filter covers one-third of the spectrum a 
record of all the colours in the original copy has been cre- 
ated. Finally, to improve shadow density and overall contrast, 
a black separation is made by using a yellow filter. When 
printed with the subtractive colours - cyan, yellow and ma- 
genta - plus black, all the colours and tones of the original 
are reproduced. 
Please see Chapter 3 for a more detailed description of 
printer types and techniques. 
I 
Yellow 
Black 
Separation ofimageinto CMM(c0mponents 
24 

Working with digital colour 
As the above summary shows, scanners and colour 
monitors use a different colour model to describe colour from 
that used by cameras, desktop printers and offset presses As 
colours move from the original image through the camera 
and transparency via the scanner to the computer screen and 
then on to the desktop proofing printer and, finally, to the 
printing press, they are converted from one colour model to 
another several times. 
Colour depth and colour modes 
Colour depth, sometimes called bit depth, refers to the 
maximum number of colours which can be stored in an im- 
.age file. A 1-bit file stores two colours (usually black and white) 
and can be described as 1-bit deep since all the information 
required to specify each of the dots making up the image can 
be stored in a 1-bit number (0 for black or 1 for white). A 2-bit 
file stores four colours, a 4-bit file stores 16 colours, an 8-bit 
file stores 256 colours and a 24-bit file stores 16 million col- 
ours. A greyscale image is an 8-bit file, with 254 shades of 
grey plus black and white. The greater the colour depth of an 
image, the more space it takes up on disk. A number of appli- 
cations now use 32 bits to specify the colour of each pixel in 
an image. The extra 8 bits are used to describe the transpar- 
ency of the pixel in 256 steps from completely transparent to 
completely opaque. 
A colour mode determines the colour model (see be- 
low) used to display and print compositions. The most com- 
monly used modes are Greyscale, for displaying black-and- 
white documents, RGB, for displaying colour documents on 
the screen and for printing slides, transparencies, and RGB 
colour prints, CMYK, for printing four-colour separations and 
L*a"b for working with Photo CD images. Other modes are 
Bitmap, and Indexed colour. 
Colour mode is specified when a new painting or photo 
editing process is started, but can be altered midway through 
the task or when saving or exporting the finished work. If 
the original image has many colours, and it is converted to a 
lower colour depth (e.g. 24-bit RGB colour to 256 colours), 
the file will create a palette of colours and use combinations 
of these to simulate the original colour of each pixel. The col- 
ours in the palette will be derived from the colours in the 
original image. Indexed colour files are much smaller and 
easier to manipulate than 24-bit files and can provide a very 
25 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
SHADES VERSUS BIT DEPTH 
1 bit 
2' 
2 shades (B or W) 
2 bit 
2L 
4 shades 
4 bit 
Z4 
16 shades 
8 bit 
28 
256shades 
16 bit 216 
65 536 shades 
24 bit 214 
16 777 21 6 shades 
good colour approximation if the number of colours in the 
original is limited. Indexed colour images are widely used 
for multimedia animation applications. Another common rea- 
son for changing the mode of an image - from RGB to 
Greyscale - would be to preview the work before printing to 
a monochrome printer. 
Monitors and graphic display cards vary widely in their 
I 
capacity to display colour. At the most basic level, a mono- 
chrome display and its card can only vary the moving spot on the screen between black or 
white, displaying a 1-bit image. A low-end colour monitor/card combination can display im- 
ages 8 bits deep, i.e. made up of 2* or 256 colours. Moving up the range, an image which 
approaches 'photorealistic' colour requires 8 bits of information for each of the three primary 
colours, red, green and blue, making it 24 bits deep. If converted to CMYK format, the same 
image becomes 32 bits deep, as 8 bits are required now for each of four colour channels. 
Colour models 
Each device type is associated with a specific colour space - an imaginary three-dimen- 
sional space enclosing all the colours which the device is capable of reproducing and defined 
by means of a coordinate system. There are several digital colour models which can be used 
to define these colour spaces. Such models, which, like colour matching systems, are sup- 
plied with most drawing and painting applications, provide an interactive means for the 
designer to explore colour space and to specify colours for a project with great accuracy. Two 
of them (the RGB and CMYK models) also describe the means by which mechanical devices 
reproduce colour. 
The RGBmodel 
An additive colour model in which three primary colours of light (red, green and blue) 
are combined in varying intensities to produce all other colours. An additive colour model is 
used for any colour system which mixes light to generate colours, including monitors, desk- 
top scanners and film recorders. 
t 
RGBmodel 
CMYKmodel 
26 

Working with digital colour 
The CM2Kmodel 
A subtractive colour model producing colour when light is reflected off an object or 
surface. The reflected light determines what colour we see when we look at that object. A 
perfectly white surface reflects all wavelengths of light. A black surface absorbs all wave- 
lengths. The three primary colours in the subtractive colour model are cyan, magenta and 
yellow. In theory, combining all three primaries produces black. In practice, impurities in the 
ink pigments degrade the black to a muddy brown, as mentioned earlier. To resolve this, 
black is added to the model. The K designation represents the black component of the CMYK 
model. This is the model used for colour systems which use reflected light to generate col- 
ours, including desktop printers and the printing presses. 
The HSBmodel 
This mode approximates the way in which the human eye perceives colour. Colour is 
defined by three components - hue, saturation and brightness. Hue refers to the name of the 
colour, for example red. Saturation defines the intensity of the colour, i.e. how vibrant the 
colour is. Brightness defines the lightness or darkness of the colour. 
TheHLSmodel 
Similar to the HSB model, the HLS model contains three components - hue, lightness 
and saturation. The lightness component is similar to the brightness component in the HSB 
model. Hue and saturation are the same as in the HSB model. 
L “a “bmodel 
Based on the original CIE (Commission Internationale de YEclairage) model, the L*a*b 
model is based on the way the human eye perceives colour. It contains a luminance (or light- 
ness) component (L) and two chromatic components - the ‘a’ component (green to red) and 
the ’b’ component (blue to yellow). 
I 
:
I
 
HSB model 
HLSmodeJ 
27 
L*a*bmodeJ 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
The digital palette 
r
r
r
r
 - 
2 
- 
m - - r - r - r  'r- 
r 
-- - r r r I 
- 
rrrr- 
- - - 
. r-rr--rrr-- 
Custom Palette 
Colour blenahgdialogbox 
Colowmixingpalette 
For many centuries, a tedious but essential part of the 
preparation of the traditional artist before beginning a new 
project was the mixing of paints, from the limited number of 
pigments available. Once mixed, the colours could be applied 
directly to the canvas or other medium selected for the work 
in hand, or could be first blended, lightened or darkened on 
the surface of the artist's palette. Testing how a colour, OF blend 
of colours, would appear on canvas was a simple matter of 
applying paint to a test sample. 
By comparison, the digital artist is spared the tedium of 
mixing colours and enjoys the advantage of having literally 
millions of choices, selectable from any of the colour models 
described above. Specific colours selected from any of these 
models can also be stored on a custom palette which can be 
saved with the project in which the selected colours have been 
used; this ensures ready availability of the correct colours if 
further work on the project is necessary, or if the same colour 
set is required for use on a related project. Such palettes can 
also include selected spot or process colours dragged from 
any of the colour matching systems described below, as well 
as colours mixed using either a colour blender or mixed by 
hand. While the colour blend is limited to a maximum of any 
four colours in the blend, the mixing area is unlimited in the 
number of colours used. The mixing area emulates an artist's 
palette on which colours can be blended using a brush tool. 
By varying the blend setting in the mixing area, extremely 
subtle variations in colour can be achieved. Any bitmap can 
be loaded into the mixing area, permitting further choice of 
colours from photographs or drawings. 
For projects being composed for the screen - for exam- 
ple, those to be transmitted via the Internet for viewing on 
the screens of other users - the designer can be reasonably 
confident that the colours seen on the screens of the other 
viewers will closely approximate those used to create the origi- 
nal (such variations that do occur will be caused by slight 
variations in phosphors used by different screen manufac- 
turers, variations in brightness and contrast adjustments from 
screen to screen, variations in background lighting conditions 
and so on). 
For projects being composed for printing to a desktop 
printer, or for separating and printing on a four colour offset 
28 

Working with digital colour 
press, the situation is very different. As we have seen, within 
i.e. the output colour at each stage of the process depends on 
Human eye 
the digital publishing process, colour is device-dependent, 
, 
Photographic film 
the device (scanner, monitor, printer, or press) which produces 
it, and device colour output is based on different models 
(scanner and monitor colour output being additive, while 
printer and press colour output are subtractive). To make 
matters worse, the devices involved have progressively di- 
minishing colour-reproduction capabilities. The human eye 
discerns a wide colour spectrum, while a colour monitor dis- 
plays only a fraction of those colours, and a desktop printer 
‘or printing press reproduces even fewer. The colour gamut - 
the range of colours which can be reproduced - of each 
device is provided by the manufacturer in a file called a de- 
vice profile. Colour publishing, therefore, presents the 
designer with something of a challenge! 
Fortunately, help is at hand and the challenge can be 
met in different ways, depending on the nature of the design 
project, by using colour matching systems and/or colour man- 
agement systems, which are explained below. 
Colour matching systems 
spot colours 
The principle behind colour matching systems is most 
easily explained by using a simple example like spot colour. 
Spot colours are opaque printing inks created by ink manu- 
facturers like Pantone in an assortment of hundreds of pre- 
defined, pre-mixed hues. The designer (and client, where ap- 
propriate), can select spot colours to be used in a project from 
a swatch book of samples provided by Pantone. The designer 
then simply selects the agreed colours on screen from a pro- 
prietary Pantone Spot Colour Matching System (supplied 
with most drawing or painting applications). By selecting and 
assigning a spot colour (e.g. Pantone 507 CV) to elements of a 
composition and by specifying the corresponding Pantone 
507 CV ink for colour printing the same elements in the final 
work, the designer can be assured that the colour will print 
as it appears on the swatch, regardless of how it appears on 
screen or on the output of a proofing desktop printer. (Note 
that the palette dialog box displays the CMYK values corre- 
sponding to the spot colour selected, which implies that the 
same result could be achieved by four colour printing, but 
Pan tonespotcolourdalogbox 
rrr-rrrr 
r-rirrrr 
rirrr-rr 
r r r r r - r-- r 
rrrir-rr 
I= 
r-3 
I
3
 
r-Il 
. $  
Focoltone spot colourpalette 
2 9  

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
overlaying opaque spot colours can produce unpredictable 
results and is not recommended.) Once a spot colour is se- 
lected in the palette dialog box, a tint of the colour can be 
selected by choosing a percentage in the Tint window. The 
range of spot colours includes some - e.g. gold or silver - 
which could not be reproduced by combining the four basic 
CMYK inks. 
FOCOLTONE is an alternative spot colour system which 
provides a range of spot colours built from the process col- 
ours, cyan, magenta, yellow and black. The colours in the 
palette are organised so that the user can easily choose pairs 
of colours with at least 10% of a process colour in common, 
minimising the need for trapping and making it an ideal sys- 
tem to use for colour separation. 
'I 
I_. 
1 
' i '  
I 
'$* 
.+ 
e 
e '  
#! 
i 
Swatchbook 
Process colours 
E m r r r r r r r  
m m m r r r  r rr 3 
Process colour is the collective name given to those col- 
ours which can be created by combining the four standard 
printing inks - cyan, magenta, yellow and black. Process col- 
our inks are largely transparent, incident light passing 
through them and then reflecting back off the paper into the 
eye of the viewer. This transparency is what makes four col- 
our printing possible and predictable. Like spot colours, pro- 
cess colours can be pre-selected from a paper swatch and then 
specified by the designer, using a process colour matching 
system. When a colour is selected from the Pantone System 
palette - e.g. Pantone S146-2 - the CMYK percentages which 
will be used to print the colour are displayed below the col- 
our name. Other proprietary colour matching systems based 
on process inks include the following. 
TRUMATCH (the palette of which organises colours ac- 
cording to the principles of the Hue, Saturation, Bright- 
ness model) 
DuPont's SpectraMaster, with colours based on the L*a*b 
colour space, printed by means of colours available through 
the DuPont solid colour library 
Toyo, which consists of colours available through the Toyo 
Colour Finder system. These colours are defined using the 
L*a*b colour space and are shown as CMYK for display. 
The colours offered include those created using TOY0 
process inks 
Pantoneprocess colour dialog box 
3 0  

Working with digital colour 
Dainippon's DIC palette, which is arranged into catego- 
ries - gay and brilliant, quiet and dark, greys and metallics, 
basic - available through the DIC Colour Guide and cre- 
ated by mixing DIC brand inks 
So, when the designer is preparing a four colour print- 
ing job, specifying colours from a process colour matching 
system will ensure that these colours print as expected dur- 
ing the subsequent print run. The use of specified process 
colours ensures that a chosen colour is never out of gamut 
and helps to ensure consistency of colour reproduction within 
a publication and from one publication to another. 
Colour management 
While a colour matching system gives the assurance that 
selected colours will print correctly on an offset press, it does 
nothing to help with the problem of those colours appearing 
quite differently on screen or when printed from a desktop 
proofing device. Neither does it do anything for the accurate 
colour reproduction of bitmapped images - e.g. scanned pho- 
tographs or images created in a painting program - to be in- 
cluded within a project. A desktop system typically includes 
a scanner, a monitor and one or more printers. As stated ear- 
lier, these devices do not reproduce colour consistently from 
one to the next, each device reproducing or displaying a lim- 
ited set of colours called its colour gamut. Also devices from 
different manufacturers will display different colours for the 
same digital colour data; even two devices of the same model 
may display subtle colour differences using the same colour 
data. 
Colour managemen t systems 
COLOUR GAMUT 
The gamut of a colour 
system is the range of 
colours which it can display 
or print. 
I 
DEVICE PROFILE 
A device profile is a file which 
contains a description of the . 
colour gamut of the device. 
Profiles may be provided on 
software accompanying the 
device or may be downloaded 
from the manufacturer's 
j 
bulletin board. Alternatively, 4 
~ 
colour management systems . 
I 
Colour management systems are designed to address 
the Problem of device variabilitv, adiusting: the colour rela- 
~ 
usually provide profiles for a 
wide range of devices from ' 
,' 
I 
" 
tionihips between devices to ensure consistent colour 
throughout the publishing process. A CMS translates colours 
~ which the 
can select. 
from the colour-gamut, or colour space, of one device into a 
'neutral' device-independent colour space, and then fits that 
colour information to another device's colour gamut by a pro- 
cess called colour mapping. The CMS obtains the colour char- 
acteristics of each device from its device profile. In one 
31 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
A loupe - useful for close inspection of 
printedcolour 
Scanner target sheet 
method, the relationship between colours is preserved as they 
are shifted into the device’s colour gamut. In another method, 
only the out-of-gamut colours are replaced by colours that 
the device can produce, without preserving the relationships 
between the colours. 
Profiles for the most popular devices are usually sup- 
plied with the CMS software and those matching the devices 
on the user’s system are installed at the same time as the CMS 
software. Profiles for other devices are usually supplied with 
the device installation software. Manufacturer’s device pro- 
files are based on a particular set of calibration settings for a 
given device. To use a colour management system effectively, 
devices first have to be calibrated to match the expected 
performance defined in the device profile. The quality of the 
final result depends on how well the devices match their 
profiles. 
Calibra tion 
There are various methods and techniques used for 
calibration of devices, the necessary instructions and software 
often being bundled with a CMS or with individual applica- 
tion programs. The following provides an overview of the 
calibration process. 
Since a scanner’s light detectors are affected by 
prolonged use, the RGB output signals will vary over time, 
affecting colour balance and linearity. This means that up- 
dating the scanner’s profile is needed, from time to time, by 
recalibration of the scanner. Scanner calibration requires a 
target sheet of colour swatches and a data reference file, both 
- 
supplied by a vendor. The target sheet is 
I first scanned to produce a TIFF file of the 
I.Vl111, 
lI1.16111f1131 
I 
+ 
I 
i 
T‘ 
I 
~ F erl 
r 
scanner’s output, and software then com- 
pares the values in the TIFF file with the 
values in the data reference file. Any dif- 
ferences which are detected are then used 
to update the profile for the scanner. 
Like the output of CCDs in a scanner, 
the output characteristics of a monitor’s 
phosphors can change with time. Monitor 
output is also subject to a second set of vari- 
I 
I 
ables related to environmental conditions, 
like the characteristics of ambient lighting. 
Calibration of a monitor involves adjust- 
- 
I ,  
I 
Monitor calibration dialog box 
32 

Working with digital colour 
ment of the gamma values for red, green and blue, and the 
white point value. The chromaticity may also need to be ad- 
justed, but this is generally not required. Adjustments can be 
made by sight, comparing output to a target photograph, or 
can be made with the use of measurement devices such as a 
colorimeter or a spectrophotometer. 
During normal use, the output of a printer will vary as 
colorants - for example, inks or toners - are consumed. Col- 
orants also vary slightly in their purity from batch to batch. 
To compensate for these factors, occasional recalibration of 
the printer is needed to keep its profile up to date. The sim- 
plest calibration method involves printing a target file and 
scanning it through a calibrated scanner, providing the infor- 
mation needed to update the printer profile. A more accu- 
rate method involves printing a target sheet and then meas- 
uring each colour swatch on the sheet with a spectropho- 
tometer. The results, which are typed into a measurements 
file, are used to adjust the TAC (Total Area Coverage) and K- 
curve (black Keyline curve). Software controls adjust the 
amount of ink transferred to the paper (TAC) and the amount 
of grey component replacement or undercolour removal (K- 
curve shape). 
SpectronicGenesysspectrophotorneter 
The workenvironment 
The way colour appears on a monitor or on the output 
from a proofing printer is influenced by factors in the work 
environment. For average, day-to-day colour projects, these 
factors are not critical, but if high quality, accurate and con- 
sistent colour reproduction is to be assured, then certain pre- 
cautions need to be taken. 
The walls and ceiling of the work area should be painted 
in a matt, neutral coloured emulsion such as pale grey to 
minimise any interference by the background with the 
perception of either monitor colour or printed colour. 
Am b i en t I ig h ti n g s ho u Id be control I ed . C h angi ng su n I ig h t 
through windows will change the way colours appear on 
screen. Artificial lighting - ideally 5000 K lighting - pro- 
vides a more consistent ambient, eliminating the yellow 
cast from normal fluorescent lighting. The light intensity 
should be comparable with that of the monitor. 
Operating systems for the PC or the Mac permit the use of 
patterns and bright colours on the virtual desktop. Use of 
workstation environment is 
irnportan t in ensuring consistency of 
33 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
c 
CorelDRA W s  CMS Wizard provides 
help with the calibration process 
Printer calibration 
Monitor calibration 
1 
these should be avoided as they may interfere with accu- 
rate perception of the colours in a working project. 
Installing a colourmanagement system 
The simplest procedure for installing a CMS involves 
simple step-by-step guidance such as that provided by Corel's 
CMS 'Wizard'. Prompted by a series of Wizard screens, the 
user has only to respond to step-by-step guidance: 
Choose one from three alternative colour mapping meth- 
ods. ( i )  Photographic mapping which maintains the 
relationship between colours and is recommended for 
printing photographs and illustrations with continuous 
tone, ( i i )  Saturation mapping which expands or contracts 
the source gamut to fit the destination gamut and is rec- 
ommended for printing business graphics, ( i i i )  Automatch, 
which automatically detects the type of image to be printed 
and selects Photographic or Saturation mapping accord- 
ingly. 
Choose a scanner profile from a dropdown list to match 
the scanner in use. The scanner profile is needed so that 
the CMS can measure the variance between the scanner's 
output and a set of fixed reference values. This is essen- 
tially software calibration of the device to a standard. 
Choose the appropriate monitor manufacturer and model 
number from the lists displayed in order to select the cor- 
respond i ng monitor profile. 
Finally, choose the appropriate output printing device from 
a list displayed to set up the correct printing profile. After 
this final choice is made, the CMS proceeds to set up a 
system profile based on the choices made. 
In circumstances where more than one scanner or more 
than one output device is being used, different system pro- 
files can be created for each combination. The appropriate 
profile is then selected at the start of each new project. After 
creating a publication using a CMS, original photographs, 
proofs and the final printed publication can be used as refer- 
ences to assess how well the process has worked and to indi- 
cate the need for any further fine tuning. (At each stage of 
the process described above, the CMS provides interactive 
means of making adjustments to the individual device 
profiles.) 
3 4  

Working with digital colour 
CMSand Kodak Photo CD 
One of the most important sources of 
high quality photographs for use by the 
graphic designer is the Photo CD, which is 
based on a process developed by Eastman 
Kodak. The process converts 35 mm film nega- 
tive or slides into digital format and stores 
them, in the Photo CD Master format, on a 
CD in a range of five different resolutions (the 
Photo CD Master Pro format has six) ranging 
from Poster size - 2048 3072 pix els - through 
Large (1024 1536 pix els), Standard (512 768 
A 
cancel 
i 
pixels), Snapshot (256 384 pix els) to Wallet (128 192 pix els). 
Using a utility such as Corel's Photo CD Lab, once an image 
has been loaded into a viewing area, it can be 'pre-processed 
by making selections from a menu covering rotation angle, 
resolution, number of colours and format, e.g. BMP, EPS, PCX 
or TIE 
Because of the popularity of the format, many applica- 
tions now include a CD reader which can access Photo CD 
files directly. In the Picture Publisher reader, for example, a 
dialog box allows specification of parameters for the image 
to be opened. The Core1 reader provides two alternative 
colour correction methods - Gamut CD and Kodak - to per- 
mit colour correction to a Photo CD ROM image before im- 
porting it into PHOTO-PAINT or CorelDRAW. GamutCD uses 
gamut mapping to enhance the colour fidelity and tonal 
ranges of the image which ensures that the colours in the 
image can be reproduced by a printer. Kodak Colour Correc- 
tion allows adjustment of brightness, contrast, colour tints 
and colour saturation. 
Before importing a CD, most readers provide the 
option of applying colour management to the image to en- 
sure that it will print correctly to the specified output device. 
Many Photo CDs come with a device profile for the scanning 
device used to create the bitmap images on the Photo CD. 
This profile should be specified as the CMS source when 
importing. 
Kodak Photo CD dialog box 
Corers Photo CD Lab dialogbox 
Picture Publishefs Photo CD dialog box 
35 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Applying colour 
As we have seen, digital designers and artists have at their disposal a vastly greater 
choice of colours than were available to their traditional counterparts. As the earliest digital 
applications emerged, the objective of the developers was to provide tools and techniques 
which allowed application of colour in ways which mimicked the traditional pencil or pen, 
the only variation possible being the thickness of the stroke. From these early beginnings, 
the ingenuity of developers - and the healthy competition which exists between them - has 
extended the range of tools and techniques dramatically in the matter of only a few years, as 
the following summary shows. 
Applying colourin drawing applica tions 
Lines 
After using a line tool to create a straight, freehand or Bezier line and setting its width, 
colour can be selected from any of the spot or process colour matching systems described 
earlier or indeed from any of the colour models or mixers. Using the HLS model, tints, 
shades or tones can then be applied. Macromedia Freehand makes the job of selecting tints 
even easier by providing a convenient tint option within its colour mixer box; the tint re- 
quired can be applied by simply be dragging and dropping the required tint swatch on to 
the line to be tinted. As well as providing means for colouring and tinting lines (a specific 
tinting dialog box is provided for Pantone spot colours), Micrografx Designer also allows the 
application of vector hatching, gradient, bitmap textures or object line fills to any line. 
I 
I 
0 
- -  
J 
I 
Freehand’s ColorMiver 
Fills 
Freehands Spot Color picker 
Designefs Line Fill dialog box 
As with lines, any closed shape can be filled with solid colour selected from a matching 
system, model or mixer; tints, shades or tones can be applied if required. In addition, 
36 

Working with digital colour 
CorelDRAW provides fill options in the form of two col- 
our bitmap patterns, full colour bitmap patterns, vector 
patterns, textures, gradients or Postscript fills, but the de- 
signer has to be aware that these fills do not rotate with 
the object filled. Micrografx fills - as described for lines 
above - do rotate when the object filled is rotated. Free- 
hand provides a selection of patterned, graduated and 
Postscript fills, but only the graduated fills rotate with the 
object; additionally, Freehand provides a tiled fill using 
any object copied to the clipboard as the basis of the tile. 
Blends 
Colour blends can be created between open or closed 
paths, using the same fill and stroke type for each path. 
For example, a path using a graduated fill will not blend 
with a path using a radial fill. It is important to use a valid 
- 
Fgl 
l-, 
/ ' :.,; 
-- 
w 
-i 
~ X J b I i i i i ,  
l p l - l . +  
I 
I 
p~~ 
-
p
 ~p 
L 
a , ,  
I 
I 
1 
- F L l  
Applying colourin pain ting applica tions 
Lines 
Before a line is created in a photoediting or painting ap- 
plication, using any one of a variety of line tools, colour is 
first selected from any of the spot or process colour match- 
ing systems or colour models described earlier. Alterna- 
tively, a scratchpad - such as the one provided with 
Photoshop - can be used for mixing a custom colour be- 
fore application. Using the HLS model, tints, shades or 
tones of a hue can be can selected before application. 
The opacity of a stroke can also be defined by adjusting 
an opacity slider. Using a pressure sensitive stylus, pres- 
sure can be set to control stroke width, colour or transpar- 
ency, or a combination of these, creating strokes with 
smoothly changing properties. 
Using Blend to create highlights 
Photoshop's Sa-atchpad 
37 
colour combination; if two spot colours or a spot colour 
and a process colour are blended, intermediate colours 
will print successfully on process colour separations. Choice 
of the number of steps used in a blend depends on the 
printer resolution (higher resolution, more steps) and on 
the colour change between the two selected paths. As well 
as being useful as a technique for transforming one object 
into another, blending is a very effective way of creating 
'spot' highlights and shadows to give objects depth. 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
I 
Brush Stvle 
Picture Publisher’s Brush Style 
aIialogbox 
I Bmsh 
Ltrriant 
Control 
Nozzle Stroke 1 
- 
1 
Charcoal 
I 
Clefauk 
Painter‘s Brushes 
S e t b l o r s l  Save I 
Done I 
Eqerimentingwith 
brushlooksin Painter 
Applications like PHOTO-PAINT and Picture Publisher 
offer a wider range of stroke types for applying colour than 
does Photoshop. Picture Publisher, for example, includes 
styles Ii ke Brushed Oils, Chalk, Colorizer, Crayon, Distort, 
Dots, Marker, Oil Pastels, Oil Paint, Scatter, Smudgy Marker 
and Watercolour, but the application offering the graphic 
artist the widest range of colour application styles is still 
Fractal Painter. As well as emulating the widest range of 
drawing and painting tools, Painter makes it possible to 
apply colour and texture simultaneously to the working 
surface. A range of variables can be applied to the tools to 
produce a wide range of different effects. A dialog box 
contains sliders for control of brush size, opacity and per- 
centage ‘graininess’ of each stroke. Another Painter dialog 
box provides the means of creating and saving special 
brushes. Using Painter’s Nozzles feature, it is even possi- 
ble to paint with images! 
Adjustingbrushparameters in Painter 
Painting with images -in this case, the image of a leaf 
Fills 
A standard Fill tool provides the means of flooding a 
bounded area with any of the range of colours, tints, tones 
or shades selected, in the same way as for lines. The bound- 
ary of the enclosed area can be created with a pencil or 
brush tool, or defined by a mask. Reducing the opacity 
38 

Working with digital colour 
setting before applying a fill to an object allows underly- 
ing objects to show through. Gradient fills are also offered 
by most painting applications. Photoshop provides several 
options - linear or radial fills from foreground to back- 
ground colour, with controls to adjust the gradient mid- 
&hmd 
50’, 
?&I 
Oll PI 
rl’ 
:,lyb E;L:,:,,->-y;:t;,;, 
point (linear fill) or offset (radial fill) as well as clockwise or 
counterclockwise gradients between two points on the 
colour wheel. 
photoshop 
Adjustinggradien t options in 
More complex gradients can be created in Photoshop, of 
course, by joining two or more two colour gradients back 
to back; -but some applications, like 
MetaCreations’ KPT Gradient Designer or 
Painter, provide a library of more complex 
gradients which can be used as they are, or 
edited, using tools provided. Using an inter- 
esting feature provided by Painter, an image 
can be filled with a gradient in such a way 
that the image’s luminance values are re- 
placed by the gradient’s luminance values. 
Painter also allows the user to create new gra- 
dients by capturing colours from an existing 
image - e.g. a photograph of a sunset - or by 
using a range of colours produced with Paint- 
er’s tools and colour sets. 
C
d
 
c
,
 c 
Q
r
 
6 -
KrT Gradient Designer dialog box 
‘ %- 
Painter’s Gradient fills 
Linearsepiagradientapplied usingimageluminancein Painter 
3 9  

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Selecting Weaves in Painter 
I 
I 
I 
1 
' -" 
' II 
F ,  I 
8 ,  
I 
Painter's Patterns 
Medical research shows that 
creative brain activity occurs 
in the righ t hemisphere of the 
brain 
In addition to colour fills or gradient fills, some applica- 
tions provide the facility to fill specified areas with pat- 
terns or textures. Preset patterns may be provided via a 
menu, like that of Painter's Weaves or Picture Publisher's 
Textures, but more often the user selects an image or part 
of an image, using a mask to create a pattern 'tile', and 
then fills a specified area with tiles. 
1. Defininga filein Photoshop 
.
-
.
 
2. Painting with the tile 
Colour combination techniques 
The effects which can be produced by the various line 
and fill tools described so far in this section on applying col- 
our have parallels in the realm of traditional graphic design 
and are largely intended to allow the digital designer to mimic 
the traditional style of working. The use of colour combina- 
tion techniques, on the other hand, represents a crossing of a 
boundary into the domain of digital manipulation, in which 
the intrinsic properties of digital colour are exploited to pro- 
duce effects which would be difficult or even impossible to 
achieve by traditional methods. While the design process pre- 
dominantly takes place on the right side of the brain - the 
creative side - certain aspects of digital design, such as the 
use of colour combination techniques, requires also the use 
of the left, or logical, side. Each pixel in a composite RGB col- 
our image is defined by the values assigned to each of its three 
channels, with these values varying between 0 (black) and 
255 (white). It is the ability to alter the values in these chan- 
nels in a precisely controlled way which opens the door to a 
range of new possibilities. 
By applying mathematical 'operations' to the channels 
in an image, the way in which the applied colour interacts 
4 0  

Working with digital colour 
with the underlying colour can be controlled. In Picture Pub- 
lisher, for example, these operations - called Merge Modes - 
allow the user to combine, or mix, colours using additive or 
subtractive colour theory. An image can also be changed se- 
lectively according to hue, saturation, or lightness, while other 
modes make modifications to the red, green, or blue channel 
of an image. 
Using the Additive mode, the applied colour is mixed with 
the underlying colour according to the additive colour 
model. Painting a green image - R(O), C(lOO), B(0) - with 
a blue brush - R(O), C(O), B(100) - produces cyan in the 
image - R(O), C(IOO), B(100) - as a result of the additive 
mixing of green and blue. 
Using the Subtractive mode, painting on a cyan image with 
a magenta brush produces blue, according to the 
subtractive colour model. 
The If Lighter mode is used to edit an image based on the 
lightness values of the image and the lightness value of the 
applied colour. Lightness refers to the 'L', or lightness value, 
in the HSL colour model. If the applied colour has a light- 
ness value equal to or higher than that of the image, the 
applied colour is transferred to the image. If the lightness 
value is less than that of the image, no change occurs. 
The If Darker mode is used to edit an image based on the 
lightness values of the image and the lightness value of the 
applied colour. If the applied colour has a lightness value 
lower than that of the image, the applied colour is trans- 
ferred to the image. If the lightness value is not lower than 
the image, no change occurs. 
The Multiply mode multiplies the value of the image by 
that of the applied colour. The resulting colour is always 
darker. The effect is analogous to placing a coloured trans- 
parent film over the underlying image. 
The Filter mode uses a combination of Additive and Multi- 
ply to create a filtered effect. 
The Difference mode subtracts the value of the applied 
colour from the value of the underlying colour to produce 
a new colour. 
AN EXAMPLE OF ADDlTIVE 
MIxmTG USING GREENAND 
BLUE 
Green 
R(0) 
C(100) B(0) 
Blue 
R(0) 
C(0) B(100) 
Cyan 
R(0) 
G(100) B(100) 
Multiplymode applied to 
therightsideof theimage 
4 1  

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Creating texture on the right side of 
thisimage using Texturizemode 
Replacing the saturation value on the 
right side of thisimage usingmagenta 
as the applied colourin Saturation mode 
Lnvertmodehas been used toinvert the 
right side of this image 
The Texturize mode converts the paint colour to greyscale, 
then multiplies the greyscale value by the image colour. 
The Colour mode is used to replace the colour of an 
image with the hue and saturation values of the applied 
colour, leaving the lightness value unchanged. 
The Hue mode is used to replace the hue value of an 
image with the hue value of the applied colour, leaving 
saturation and lightness values unchanged. 
The Saturation mode is used to replace the saturation value 
of an image with the saturation value of the applied col- 
our. Using this mode, painting with white or black (which 
have zero saturation) alters the underlying colours to their 
equivalent greyscale values. 
The Luminance mode is used to replace the lightness value 
of an image with the lightness value of the applied colour. 
The Red mode is used to replace the red channel (using 
the RCB colour model) of an image with the red value of 
the applied colour. Only the red channel is affected. 
The Green mode is used to replace the green channel of 
an image with the green value of the applied colour. Only 
the green channel is affected. 
The Blue mode is used to replace the blue channel of an 
image with the blue value of the applied colour. Only the 
blue channel is affected. 
The lnvert mode is used to reverse the colours of an im- 
age. A black-and-white image reverses to look like a photo 
negative. A colour image reverses using additive colours. 
PHOTO-PAINT provides a set of Merge modes, similar 
to those of Picture Publisher, while Photoshop provides a set 
of Mode Options, some of which are similar to Picture Pub- 
lisher’s, while others differ, offering results sometimes diffi- 
cult to predict, so that experimentation is recommended: 
The Screen mode multiplies the inverse brightness values 
of the pixels in both channels. The resulting colour is al- 
ways a lighter colour. 
The Overlay mode performs a combination of multiplying 
and screening. Applied colours are overlaid on the exist- 
ing pixels but the highlights and shadows are maintained. 
4 2  

Working with digital colour 
2 
Layer p k g r o u n d  
- -. - 
Channel 
Red 
3 r invert 
The two channel pixels are mixed to reflect the lightness 
or darkness of the original colour. 
The Soft Light mode multiplies or screens the pixels in the 
two channels. It produces the effect of shining a diffused 
spotlight on the image. 
The Hard Light mode multiplies or screens the pixels in 
the two channels. It produces the effect of shining a harsh 
spotlight on the image. 
Cancel I 
IJ preview 
Any of the above modes can be applied, by means of 
editing tools such as a paintbrush or fill tool, to modify an 
underlying image. Alternatively, they can be used when com- 
bining two images to produce a third image. This is achieved 
in Photoshop by selecting Calculations from the Image menu. 
The effects produced by Photoshop’s Calculations can be sum- 
marised as follows: When working with composite images, 
Adobe Photoshop calculates the pixel values in each set of 
colour channels and then combines them into a single chan- 
nel in a third, composite, image. The combining process can 
be applied while using any of the merge modes described 
above. 
I 
- Bknding 
Hard loght 
- 
Result 
New 
Channel 1 New 
Photoshop’s Calculations dialogbx 
Applying SofiLigh t mode 
linage 1 
linage2 
l3eimages combined using 
Photoshop’s Hard Lightmode 
43 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Colour editing 
I 
I 41 
I 
CorelDRA W s  Lens dialog box 
Appl@g thehvertlens 
Colour editing techniques are found mainly in bitmap 
painting applications, as these applications give the user ac- 
cess to individual pixels within an image. The same is not 
true of vector images, which are defined in terms of lines and 
shapes; however, thanks to the ingenuity of software devel- 
opers, even vector applications are beginning to offer colour 
editing techniques, some of which are described below. 
Colour editingin vector drawing applica tions 
Lenses 
CoreIDRAW provides a number of 'lenses' which can be 
used to create interesting colour effects. 
Applying the Transparency lens to an object effectively fills 
the object with a tint of the colour selected in the Lens 
dialog box, while at the same time making the object par- 
tially transparent (transparency increases with the Rate 
percentage selected in the dialog box). 
When the Brighten lens is applied to an object and the 
object is placed on top of another object or bitmap 
image, it brightens the underlying object to an extent de- 
termined by the Rate percentage. Because of the accu- 
racy with which vector objects can be drawn and posi- 
tioned, this can be an effective method for moderating 
the brightness of targeted parts of a bitmap. 
The Invert lens works like the Brightness lens, but in this 
case the colours in the underlying objects are inverted, 
red becoming cyan, green becoming magenta etc. This 
lens simulates the effect of a colour filter on a camera. 
The Colour Limit lens filters out all colours under the lens 
except black and the colour specified in the Colourdialog 
box. For example, if a blue lens is placed over an object, it 
filters out all colours except blue and black within the lens 
area. The strength of the filter is set by the value specified 
in the Rate box. A rate of 100% would only allow blue and 
black to show through. A lower setting would allow tints 
of the other colours to show through. 
44 

Wofking with digital colour 
The Colour Add lens mixes the colours of the lens and 
objects underlying it. 
The Tinted Greyscale lens causes the colours of objects 
under the lens to be mapped from the lens colour to an 
equivalent tonal colour of that lens. For example, a green 
lens over a light-coloured object creates light green, while 
the same lens over a dark-coloured object creates dark 
green. 
The Custom Colour Map lens maps underlying object col- 
ours to colours using a colour range specified in the dialog 
box. The Heatmap lens maps underlying object colours to 
colours in a pre-defined Heatmap palette, creating a (rather 
garish) heatmap or infrared look. 
'\. 
ApplJ+ngthe ColourAddlens 
Freehand's Eyedropper tool 
Freehand provides a tool which is very useful when a 
project requires matching colours from different sources, 
e.g. matching the colour in line art created in Freehand 
with colours in an imported bitmap. Using the tool simply 
involves dragging the required colour from the source to 
the destination. 
* 
I3 - 
13 - 171 
- 
Using the Eyedropper tool to draga colour 
from a bitmap in to a vectors tar object 
Colour editingin bitmappainting applications 
Colour masking 
Detailed and sophisticated editing of colour images is made 
possible by tools which enable the user to select portions 
of an image based on the colour similarities of adjacent 
pixels. The Magic Wandtool, found in most bitmap appli- 
cations, provides a simple way of achieving this. Using it 
Freehands Xtia Tools 
simply involves clickingthe tool in the toolbox, entering a 
tolerance value in the Magic Wand Options palette (a low 
The ubiquitous Magic Wandicon 
45 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
6 Sqlection 
(- image 
tolerance value to select colours very similar in colour value 
to the pixel clicked and a higher tolerance value to select 
a broader range of colours) and clicking the target colour 
in the image. 
- 
SettingtheMagic Wand tolerance 
Photoshop's Color Range command selects a specified 
colour within a selection or within an entire image. A col- 
Photoshop's ColorRange dialog box 
rolor Sek 
LJ 
LJ 
LJ 4 
LJ 
LJ 
LJ 
LJ 
P i h e  Publishefs Color Shields 
- 
our can be chosen from a preset range of colours, or a 
selection can be built by sampling colours from the im- 
age using the eyedropper tool in the dialog box. Alter- 
natively, highlights, midtones or shadows can be. se- 
lected. An initial selection can be modified by clicking 
OK and then reopening the Color Range dialog box. In 
the central window of the dialog box, Greyscale dis- 
plays the selection as it would appear in a greyscale 
channel, Black Matte displays the selection in colour 
against a black background, White Matte displays the 
selection in colour against a white background, while 
Quick Mask displays the selection using the current 
Quick Mask settings. The range of colours selected can 
be adjusted by using the Fuzziness slider or by entering 
a value in the Fuzziness text box. Increasing fuzziness 
increases the range of colours selected. Plus or minus 
eyedroppers in the Color Range dialog box can be used to 
add or delete colours from the selection. 
Picture Publisher's Color Shield operates in a similar way 
to Photoshop's Color Range. Clicking the Color Shield 
dialog button opens the dialog box shown, containing eight 
'shields', each with its own colour range. Clicking the Color 
Select button alongside the first shield activates it and dis- 
plays an Eyedropper tool which is used to click the first 
image colour to be shielded. Further colour ranges can be 
added by sequentially clicking additional shields and se- 
lecting additional image colours. 
Once a colour range has been selected, it can be colour- 
edited using a brush tool or fill tool and any of the colour 
application methods described above. 
In any masking operation, a challenge for the designer is 
to produce changes which appear natural, without sharp 
edges when the mask is removed. This can be accom- 
plished by feathering the edges of the mask and Picture 
Publisher's Chroma Mask provides the facility to combine 
colour masking and feathering operations. Using the 
46 

Working with digital colour 
Chroma Maskdialog box, areas of an image can be masked 
as described for the Color Shield, while the Fade setting at 
the bottom of the dialog box determines the smoothness 
of the edges of the mask, creating a natural blending be- 
tween the masked object and the background. 
Corrective colour editing 
The most common corrective editing task is the removal 
of a colour cast from an image. A colour cast - an imbalance 
between the red, green and blue components of an image - 
can result from several causes such as photographing a sub- 
ject under coloured lights or due to the fading of colours in 
an old photograph by the effects of sunlight. An alternative 
cast removal method provided by Photoshop is called Varia- 
tions, which may be selected from the Image/Adjust menu. 
Colour adjustments can be applied sequentially to a thumb- 
nail preview of the image and assessed visually until an ac- 
ceptable result is obtained. A cast can be removed by select- 
ing the appropriate red, green or blue channel in the Levels 
dialog box and adjusting the gamma setting. If a set of 
images with similar casts is to be corrected, the dialog box 
settings can be saved and reapplied to the other images. 
Another common colour editing task is the removal of 
'red eye' - the red colour which appears in the eyes of a pho- 
tographed subject, caused by red light from the camera's flash 
being reflected from the eye back through the 
camera lens. Usually, the part of the eye that 
reflects red should be black and can easily be 
corrected by choosing a high image magnifi- 
cation and using single pixel sized editing 
brush to paint the appropriate pixels black. 
output levels 
12551 
-
2
 
I 
Picture Publisher's Chroma Mask 
dialogbox 
c 
Photoshop's Levels dialogbox 
4 7  
Using Variations toremove colour casts 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
C 
I 
I 
Hue Shiftin Picture Publisher 
Picture Publisher's Hue Map 
Creative coIour editing 
As well as methods for correcting colour defects in im- 
ages, bitmap applications provide a range of techniques for 
more creative colour editing. Picture Publisher's Hue Shift 
command, based on the Hue, Saturation and Lightness (HSL) 
colour model, allows all the hues in an image to be manipu- 
lated. Hue is specified by a angular value ranging between 0" 
and 360", corresponding to the colours on the colour wheel. 
When an angle is specified in the Hue Shift dialog box, all 
hues in the image are rotated by the same amount, effectively 
changing all the colours in an image. The dialog box also in- 
cludes sliders for adjustment of the saturation and lightness 
of the image. 
Also using the Hue, Saturation and Lightness (HSL) 
colour model, Picture Publisher's Hue Map command allows 
selected ranges of hues in an image to be changed. For this 
purpose, the HSL colour wheel is divided into twelve ranges, 
each range representing 30 of the 360 hues. A range is shifted 
by moving its corresponding slider. Hue Shift is useful for 
changing a single colour in an image without affecting other 
colours. Hue Map can also be used to colorise a greyscale im- 
age; after converting the greyscale image to RGB mode, the 
skin area was masked (leaving out the eyes and mouth) and 
the Hue Map was opened. On the top and bottom of the sliders 
are colour swatches. The lower swatch is the original hue, 
while the upper swatch is the new hue. Setting the satura- 
tion level to +20%, the first hue slider was dragged down 
until the masked area became flesh coloured. The dialog box's 
Saturation and Brightness sliders were then used to make fine 
adjustments. 
The Colorize option in Photoshop's Hue/Safuration dialog 
box can be used to convert all the colours in the image to 
the 0" point on the colour wheel (red), with a saturation of 
48 

Woiking with digital colour 
Using Hue Map to colorise a greyscale image 
r: 
4 9  
loo%, while preserving the lightness value of 
each pixel. Dragging the hue slider then cycles 
the hue around the colour wheel. For example, if 
the hue slider is dragged to 120" then the image 
takes on a green cast since green is the colour lo- 
cated 120" degrees in the clockwise direction from 
red. 
Monotones, duotones, tritones and 
quadtones can be created in Photoshop. 
Photos 
Monotones are greyscale images printed with a 
single, non-black ink, while, duotones, tritones and quadtones 
are greyscale images printed with two, three and four inks, 
respectively. In these types of image, different coloured inks 
are used to reproduce different levels of grey rather than to 
reproduce different colours. 
A typical offset printing press can reproduce only about 
50 levels of grey per ink, therefore duotones are often used 
to increase the tonal range of a greyscale image, using a black 
ink for shadow detail and a grey ink for the midtone and 
highlight areas. Duotones may also be printed using a col- 
oured ink for the highlight colour, producing an image with 
a slight tint and significantly increased dynamic range. 
Duotones can be used to extend the range of graphic possi- 
bilities for inclusion within a two-colour print job. Tritones 
and quadtones may be used to introduce even greater tonal 
range of a greyscale image or to add even more subtle 
coloured tints. For the designer in a hurry, Photoshop also 
includes an extensive library of presets which can be applied 
to any greyscale image. 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
\. 
t 
Converting the monotone 
image on theleft to the tritone 
imageon theright usingthe 
settingsin Photoshop’s dialog 
I 
boxshown below 
:. 
,, 
c 
8 
Both Photoshop and Painter provide the means of adding the effect of coloured light- 
ing to a composition. Photoshop provides sixteen different lighting presets, selectable from 
the Style menu at the top of the Lighting Effects dialog box. Sliders are provided for adjust- 
ment of the light intensity and spread, and clicking on the swatch to the right opens a colour 
dialog box for selection of a colour for the light. Clicking the Preview button (bottom left of 
the dialog box) shows the effect of the chosen light parameters on the image. An ellipse 
shows the spread of the light and handles on the ellipse can be dragged to alter the light’s 
spread and position. Using the four lower sliders, the ’properties’ of the light can also be 
adjusted to relate correctly to the nature of the object or scene being illuminated. 
The Gloss property determines the reflectance of the surface on which the light is shining, 
varying from Matte to Glossy. 
The Material property determines whether the light or the object colour has more reflect- 
ance. Plastic reflects the colour of the light, while Metallic reflects the object colour. 
50 

Working with digital colour 
Applwg Lightingmects 
in Photoshop 
The Exposure property lightens or darkens the light, positive values adding light, negative 
values subtracting light. 
The Ambience property diffuses the light as if it were combined with other light in the 
room, such as sunlight or fluorescent light. The slider varies the ambience from Positive 
(increasing the effect of the light source) to Negative (diminishing the effect of the light 
source). 
The colour of the ambient light appears in the 
colour swatch and can be altered by clicking on the 
swatch. An additional light or lights can be added to 
the scene by dragging the small lightbulb icon at the 
bottom of the dialog box into the preview area. Once 
positioned, the parameters of the additional light can 
be adjusted as required. Quite complex effects can 
be built up by using a combination of lights and by 
using masks to control the areas of the image 
affected. 
Painter offers thirteen lighting presets, 
selectable from its Apply Lighting dialog box. Each 
light is represented in the preview window as a line, 
indicating the direction of the light, with circles at 
each end. Dragging the large circle moves the light 
source; dragging the small circle changes its direc- 
tion. An additional light can be created by clicking 
in the preview area. Sliders provide control over 
Painter's Apply Lighting dialog box 
51 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
TABLE OF FlLE SIZE VS DPI 
(5 cm 5 a n  image) 
RGB 
CMYK 
72dpi 
60 k 
79 k 
150dpi 
255 k 
340k 
300dpi 
1 Mb 
1.33 Mb 
600dpi 
4 M b  
5.32 Mb 
1200dpi 
16Mb 21.3Mb 
Openingan imagein Picture Publisher 
in LowResolutionmode 
brightness, distance, elevation, spread and exposure of the 
selected light. (Photographic principles apply to editing light- 
ing. For example, if light intensity is increased then exposure 
may need adjustment.) The Ambient slider controls the sur- 
rounding light in an image. As in Photoshop, light or colours 
may be changed by clicking on the appropriate colour swatch. 
Working with high resolution colour 
images 
A standard feature found in both drawing and paint- 
ing applications allows the designer to specify the size of the 
'page' or 'canvas' before work begins and even to increase 
the size while work proceeds. A very important difference 
between the two types of application emerges, however, when 
such a size increase takes place. The file size of a drawing 
created at, say, standard A4 remains the same when the draw- 
ing is scaled up to a new page size of, say, A2, since the math- 
ematical information needed to describe the components of 
the drawing are independent of size, and - even more sig- 
nificantly - the resolution or sharpness of the drawing re- 
mains the same when it is scaled. By contrast, the file size of 
a colour A4 painting scaled to A2 size would increase by a 
factor of four - in proportion to the area increase - as the 
new size would require four times as many pixels to describe 
it. Also, when a drawing image prints, it does so at the reso- 
lution of the printing device, while the printed resolution of 
a painted image depends on the resolution at which it is cre- 
ated - the usual rule of thumb being to create the painting at 
a resolution equal to double the line screen to be used for 
printing, e.g. at 300 dpi for a line screen of 150 lpi. This differ- 
ence in behaviour creates a major challenge for the designer 
working with large colour bitmapped images such as scanned 
photographs or paintings. Even an A4 sized RGB image 
scanned at 300 dpi equates to a file size of 29.7 Mb. Manipu- 
lating such an image on the screen and applying effects to it 
- such as filters - is beyond the capabilities of the average 
desktop system. Fortunately, however, help is at hand! 
Even importing a multimegabyte colour image into a 
painting program is a highly RAM-intensive process. To al- 
low users with limited RAM to open large files, Picture Pub- 
lisher offers a Low Resolution mode which allows the user to 
open a TIFF image at a lower resolution than it was saved at. 
52 

Working with digital colour 
For example, an image to be used only as part of a screen 
presentation can be opened at the resolution of the monitor 
screen. Choosing the Low Resolution option opens a dialog 
box for choosing the lower resolution. This dialog box dis- 
plays the file size for each resolution chosen. Even when the 
system is powerful enough to work with the full resolution 
image, a low resolution version of the file can be used to test 
general changes such as adjustments to hue and saturation. 
Because the file resolution is low, processing such changes is 
faster. When the required changes have been established, a 
macro (a script file containing details of the change) can be 
recorded and then applied to the larger original file. Low reso- 
lution files also speed up the printing of a proof on a low 
resolution printer, as a printer wastes processing time dis- 
carding data above its resolution. 
Applications which use the above Low Resolu tion option, 
in which a 72 dpi file is used to represent the larger, high 
resolution file, are often described as ’proxy’ systems. The 
disadvantage of working with a proxy is that it is not possi- 
ble to zoom in and examine effects at pixel level. In addition, 
it is difficult to carry out precise masking work as the proxy 
file lacks the detail of the actual file. 
An alternative trick offered by Picture Publisher - called 
FastBits mode - displays a preview representation of a TIFF 
image from which the designer can choose a segment to open 
for editing. The mouse pointer is first dragged to superim- 
pose a variable size grid on top of a preview of the image 
displayed in the FastBits dialog box. Clicking on a segment of 
the grid opens just that part of the image corresponding to 
that segment. When the image is saved, the segment - in- 
cluding any edits - is recombined with the rest of the image. 
Using this method, a large image can be edited step by step 
on a system with limited memory. A macro can be used to 
apply the same edits sequentially to different parts of the 
image. The FastBits technique can also be used as an efficient 
way to apply different effects to different segments of an 
image. 
While modes like those described above offer a way of 
working around the problems of manipulating large colour 
files, recent innovative applications like Live Picture and 
Macromedia’s xRes take a more radical approach to the prob- 
lem. Macromedia xRes, for example, offers two quite distinct 
modes of working; in Direct Mode, which is used for images 
up to about 10 Mb in size, operation is similar to that of 
Picture Publishefs FastBits dialog box 
Using FastBits to apply different effect.. 
to differentareas ofan image 
53 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
I 
Macromedia'sxResallows the user to workonlargeimagesatlowresolution andlaterrender the changesathigh resolution 
conventional bitmap applications like Photoshop; in xRes Mode, which is used for images 
greater than 10 Mb in size, the way in which images are created, modified and saved is quite 
different, the processing principle used being analogous to that found in 3D applications, in 
the sense that the time-consuming final rendering of an image is delayed until the design 
operations have been completed. 
To illustrate the principle involved, let us suppose that a Motion Blurfilter is applied to 
an image which is 4000 3000 pix els in size. In Direct Mode, the filter is applied immediately 
to all pixels in the 12 million pixel image. In order for the processor to manipulate 12 million 
pixels, it needs about 100 Mb of RAM. Even with sufficient RAM and a powerful processor, 
the operation could take many minutes to complete (and in many cases would simply cause 
the designer's system to crash!). In xRes Mode, the filter is only applied to the pixels currently 
visible on screen at the selected zoom level. For example, if the image is being viewed at the 
1:8 zoom level and an area of 400 300 pix els is being viewed, the Motion Blur filter would be 
applied only to 400 300 pix els, or 120 000 pixels in total - only 1% of the full 12 million pixels 
in the image. Even with a small amount of RAM, the filter can be applied in just a few sec- 
onds. If the image is now exported as, say, a TIFF file, xRes performs the processing it has 
5 4  

Working with digital colour 
delayed in order to produce the final file, applying the filter effect to all pixels 
(a process described - somewhat misleadingly - as rendering). 
In general, operations which would take many minutes to apply in Direct Mode take 
only seconds to apply in xRes Mode, as the speed of the operation in xRes Mode is not depend- 
ent on the size of the file. The selective processing used in xRes Mode achieves this rapid 
speed of operation by requiring the system processor to do only the work necessary at the 
selected zoom level and processing only the area of the image visible on screen. Use of xRes 
Mode does not involve the compromising of a proxy system, as it is possible to zoom in to the 
actual pixel data in order to evaluate the result of an applied effect. Editing, painting and 
masking are all possible at single pixel level. 
xRes’s LRG document format is designed specifically to address the problems of saving 
very large files (larger than 10 Mb). The data within an LRG document is stored in a series of 
tiles, making it easy to access the image data rapidly. When a file is converted into the LRG 
format, up to seven different zoom levels of document are made at varying resolutions. Each 
level is composed of several tiles of data. 
By way of illustration, imagine a 4000 4000 pix el document converted to the LRG for- 
mat. The lowest level of the LRG file is 4000 4000 pix els, the same size as the original docu- 
ment and representing the 1:l zoom level (although it is not an exact copy of the image as it 
is arranged in rectangular tiles, as opposed to lines of pixel data). The second level in the 
LRG file is 2000 2000 pix els, representing the 1:2 zoom level. This level is one-quarter of the 
size of the original document. The third level is 1000 1000 pix els - the 1:4 zoom level - now 
only one-sixteenth of the size of the original document, and so on up to seven zoom levels 
ranging from 1:l to 1:64. Organising data in this manner allows it to be processed selectively. 
When an operation is performed, it is applied to only one of the seven zoom levels. 
In the years ahead, we can expect to see further developments in methods of handling 
large colour files efficiently. A consortium of companies, including Kodak, Hewlett-Packard, 
Microsoft and Live Picture are working on a revolutionary technology called FlashPix, which 
has already been demonstrated at computer shows. FlashPix is a highly optimised way of 
handling graphics which allows the designer to load several 50 Mb-plus image files into an 
ordinary Macintosh or Windows PC with standard disk and RAM, and manipulate them 
rapidly and safely. The technology works by including in the file a number of versions of the 
image, all at different resolutions, from a full photographic quality version with 16.7 million 
colours down to a thumbnail used for previewing. The format is said to be capable of han- 
dling the staggering number of 232 pixels, managed in tiles of 64 pixels each. The file also 
accumulates all the edits made since the image was first created, allowing multiple levels of 
undo and, because the changes made don’t affect the original, screen updates can be made 
quickly, as only a small part of the image needs to be recreated. When imported, only the 
appropriate part of the file is loaded, so for display on screen only the 72 dpi image will be 
used, while printing on a standard office laser printer would use the 300 dpi image, with all 
edits applied. 
55 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Summary 
As we have seen in this chapter, working with digital colour presents disadvantages, 
but also offers advantages, when compared with working in traditional media. Some of these 
are listed below. 
Disadvantages 
Problems of maintaining consistency of colour from device to device (camera to scanner to 
monitor to printer or press) 
Limited colour gamuts of digital devices 
Problems of manipulating large images 
Advantages 
Precision and consistency in specifying and replicating colours, shades, tints and tones 
Range of colours to choose from 
Ability to experiment on screen with different colours before committing to a final choice 
Range of application methods - stroke types emulating oils, pastels, charcoals etc. and fill 
types such as gradients, blends and patterns 
Ability to combine colour and texture 
Special effects such as use of lenses, modes, lighting effects, duotones etc. 
Range of editing methods - colour masking, colorising, H/S adjustment etc. 
Ease of importing and combining coloured objects and images 
Only a few years ago, the hardware and software available to the digital designer could 
produce only the crudest simulation of work done by traditional techniques, which had been 
developed and fine-tuned over the centuries. Now, as we have seen, work is going on con- 
tinuously to find ways of reducing or eliminating the remaining areas of disadvantage, while 
the advantages multiply as the cost/performance of hardware continues unabated and the 
ingenuity of software developers not only provides closer and closer emulation of traditional 
methods, but also offers an increasing range of exciting colour techniques which are purely 
digital in concept f 
56 


Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
A removable Z p  cartridge stores up to 
ZOOMbofdata 
An overhead trmparencyprojector 
A slideprojector 
pW:*..,, 
*...-.' 
@ 
*'&..# 
:;;;> 
-:...I 
,*::.; . 
.a::.. *.'=;..'- 
*.:,* -. 
nce a digital design has been completed 
r:: 
+;X+ 
on screen, many output 'routes' are 
is one of a number of alternatives be- 
# ? 
ing prepared for review by a client, 
then the file containing the design may 
simply be copied to a recordable me- 
dium such as a diskette, a Zip cartridge 
or a CD and mailed to the client for viewing. Alternatively, 
the file may be attached to an e-mail message and be sent to 
the client via the Internet. If the design is to be shown to an 
audience at another location, the file may be output to an 
image recorder, creating a 35 mm colour slide which can be 
viewed using a conventional slide projector or it can be 
copied to a laptop linked to an LCD overhead projector and 
projected on to a simple projection screen or a convenient 
office wall. 
By far the most common output method is via one of a 
number of different types of desktop printer, either to paper 
or to transparency for use on a conventional overhead pro- 
jector. Desktop printers come in a wide variety of technolo- 
gies and prices, producing results ranging from crude to 
photorealistic. 
( 
..y- 
$3 
available to the designer. If the design 
. ... 
p 
&?I.- .: 
., ... 
,!;.' 
*<a' 
.'.. I 
*::$>L&!; 
( 6  
Desktop printing 
As discussed earlier, printers use the subtractive colour 
model to reproduce colour, mixing the subtractive primaries, 
cyan, yellow and magenta, to produce other colours. Even 
when a printer has been carefully calibrated and a colour 
management system is used to optimise the match between 
screen colours and printed colours, the results obtained de- 
pend on the printer's colour gamut - the range of colours 
which it can reproduce, as defined in its device profile. 
The ideal printing technology would be one able to emu- 
late the traditional mixing of liquid paints in the proportions 
necessary to produce the desired colour at every point on the 
paper. Most available technologies are unable to do this. Cer- 
tainly not the colour dot matrix printer, as the 'ink is not in a 
liquid form and is deposited on the paper by firing pins to 
impress coloured ribbons against the paper. Similarly, colour 
laser printers, which use dry coloured toners, have no means 
of mixing the toners. Even inkjet printers, which use real 
liquid inks, can either expel a minute droplet of ink at each 
58 

Colour output 
position on the paper, or not, have no capability of mixing 
the individual droplets. The same limitation holds true for 
solid ink and thermal wax technologies, although recent 
advances have produced a thermal wax printer which will 
produce over 4000 colours by varying the amount of ink de- 
livered to a given location, hence altering the size of the dot 
produced. Only dye sublimation can genuinely produce a full 
spectrum of ’real’ colours by applying differing amounts of 
each ink to the same point on the paper. 
Most desktop printer technologies produce colours 
within their gamuts by interspersing dots of cyan, yellow, 
magenta and black in one of a variety of dither patterns. An 
even mix of cyan and magenta dots, for example, will be per- 
ceived (if the dots are small enough and the viewing distance 
is great enough) as the colour blue in the eye of the viewer. 
Reproducing subtle differences in tone using only a limited 
number of colours can be achieved by using groups of dots to 
represent different shades, but the limited number of dots 
made available by the printer’s resolution (dots per inch or 
dpi) makes this process imperfect. Low resolution results in 
visible ’banding’ as the printer driver switches from one whole 
number of dots to the next, fractional numbers of dots being 
impossible to produce. 
In conventional colour printing, it is important to 
understand that, in the process of simulating a particular 
colour, the final resolution of the printed image is not the 
nominal resolution of the printer (e.g. 360 360 dpi). This reso - 
lution must be divided by the size of the dot groups used; 
even a 3 3 grouping reduces the resolution down to a coarse 
and ugly looking 120 dpi. Recent developments, however, in 
this fast-growing market have pushed resolutions up to 
1440 720 dpi. When combined with the development of new 
printer drivers capable of more sophisticated configuration 
of dot positioning, the result has been a significant increase 
in quality. 
result 
Lowresolutionprintingproducesa 
visible banding effect 
I-ligherresolutio~producesasmoother 
Piin ter driver software 
Printer driver software is becoming increasingly ’intel- 
ligent’, as vendors strive to make it easier for users to optimise 
colour output. Intelligent driver technology is marketed un- 
der a variety of names - Xerox’s Intelligent Color, Hewlett 
Packards Colorsmart, Tektronix’s TekColor and QMS’s QColor, 
for example. The basic principle behind these technologies is 
that the contents of a page are analysed by the driver as it is 
5 9  

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
/’ 
OK 1 , 
;< 
Cancpl 
j 
Restore 
Epson’sprinterdriverprovides the user 
with a high degree of control overhow 
an image will beprinted 
Hplp 
91 
I 
tialHoning 
I 
About 
I 
- 
PapPr 
Ink I &solution 
Media I Options 
Image Settings 
Image . 
I 
Brightness 
Contrast 
2 
.
.
1
 
’ 1  
- 
YX Enable Ink Density Correction 
Color 
EPSON 
J 
I 
i 
0% 
I d  
Saturation 
- 
li 
{ / \  / / I f  
0% 
4 
.!I 
2 
 red^ Strenqth 
Green Strength 
0% 
I 
A 
--> 
0% 
.A Bile Strength 
YX Enable Ink Color Correction 
being rasterised and the halftoning method and colour mode 
are customised to the contents of the page. The most advanced 
solutions can resolve individual text, graphics and bitmap 
objects within the page and apply different optimised set- 
tings to each. For example, a page containing text, a coloured 
pie chart and a scanned photograph would have the text ren- 
dered in solid black, the pie chart using amplitude modu- 
lated screening and ‘vivid’ colour mode, and the photograph 
using frequency modulated screening and ’photographic’ 
colour mode. Fully featured driver software such as that pro- 
vided with the Epson Stylus Colour inkjet printer also pro- 
vides direct access to basic image editing controls and allows 
selection from different colour management options. 
Page desmption languages 
Desktop printers print by depositing dots on paper, but 
those dots can be configured in different ways within the 
computer/printer subsystem. This is where page description 
languages (PDLs) play an important role. The minimal type 
of printer architecture is a nonintelligent device which sim- 
ply outputs a bitmap that has been created by the host com- 
puter. Such are the so-called GDI (Graphics Device Interface) 
printers which are designed to work with Windows; the GDI 
6 0  

Colour output 
commands used to display the screen image are directly con- 
verted to bitmap form by the host PC, stored in the PC’s 
memory and then sent to the printer for output. GDI print- 
ers are relatively cheap, since they do not require processing 
power or large amounts of internal memory, instead relying 
on the power and memory of the host PC. 
Page description languages (PDLs) such as Hewlett- 
Packard’s PCL and Adobe’s Postscript use a completely dif- 
ferent printing architecture. These high-level PDLs require 
special drivers installed on the host PC to convert GDI com- 
mands into PCL or Postscript code, which is then sent to the 
printer, where an on-board processor decodes the data, 
rasterises it (turns it into a bitmap which the printer can out- 
put) and stores it in memory until the print engine is ready 
to print the dots. This need for processing power and mem- 
ory makes PCL and Postscript printers more expensive, the 
trade-off being their ability to render complex pages contain- 
ing graphics and multiple fonts more efficiently and - in the 
case of Postscript - have much greater control over how the 
output device renders pages. As ever, the best choice of print- 
ing architecture depends on the kind of output being pro- 
cessed. If output is mainly text and simple charts, then a GDI 
printer is an acceptable choice, as it shouldn’t impose exces- 
sive demands on the host PC. For general business documents 
which contain some graphics, a PCL printer is perfectly ad- 
equate, while for complex graphics and desktop publishing 
work, Postscript is the preferred solution. PCL, the native 
language of Hewlett Packard’s LaserJet family, has become 
the industry standard for general office printers and is sup- 
ported by virtually all PC and printer vendors, application 
vendors and operating system vendors. Postscript is often 
available as a firmware upgrade to mid-range PCL printers. 
The mode of operation of the main desktop printer 
classes is described below. 
w e t  
An inkjet’s printing head holds a central reservoir of 
liquid ink connected via a tube to a matrix of microscopic 
nozzles set in a square or rectangular array. These draw ink 
from the reservoir by capillary action. Each nozzle is equipped 
with an electric element which is controlled by the printer’s 
central circuitry. When a current passes through the element, 
it heats up, causing tiny bubbles to form in the surrounding 
Stage 1 
Nozzle 
r==-
I 
I 
I 
1-1 
Heating element 
Stage 2 
-- 
Activated heating element vaporises 
ink which is expelled through nozzle 
Stage 3 
,--- - 
I 
I 
___ 
~ 
~ 
Ihr\s\l 
L-- 
- - 2  
2 -~~ 
~~ 
Heating element deactivated 
Lnkjetprinting 
61 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Wax-coated 
ribbon 
Heating element 
Thermal waxprinting 
liquid. As the bubbles merge, a droplet of ink is expelled on 
to the paper's surface. Expulsion of the droplet causes the 
bubble to contract, drawing more ink from the nozzle. Graph- 
ics or text characters are constructed by selectively activating 
the nozzles as the head moves horizontally back and forth 
across a forward-moving printing surface. Budget colour 
printers use three such heads for cyan, yellow and magenta, 
while more expensive products use an extra head for black. 
The type of paper used makes a significant difference to the 
quality of inkjet output. If the paper is too absorbent or 
fibrous, the ink will be absorbed and will spread out. Most 
manufacturers offer a coated paper which prevents this. 
The two principal components of a thermal printer are 
its printing head, which stretches the entire width of the page 
and its paper transport mechanism. Although employing an 
application technique which is similar in principle to that of 
a typewriter using a single strike typewriter ribbon, the ther- 
mal wax printer is much more expensive; each wax-coated 
ribbon can be used only once, regardless of how much of each 
colour is applied. The ribbon, which has an area equal to that 
of the printed page, is coated with alternate panels of cyan, 
magenta, yellow and black, running parallel to the paper, and 
passes from an input to an output cassette. The result is good- 
quality dithered output, producing vivid, slightly glossy col- 
ours. 
Thermal wax printing requires a bright white, clay- 
coated paper to reflect the maximum amount of light back 
through the translucent dyes. As the paper passes through 
the printer four times - once for each colour - registration 
problems can occur over time as the transport mechanism 
wears. In a thermal wax printer, the printing head, which 
stretches the entire width of the paper, is made up of hun- 
dreds of tiny heating elements. As an element heats up, it 
melts an identically sized dot of wax from the film backing 
on to the moving paper below. Wax beneath the unheated 
elements stays in place, leaving the underlying paper sur- 
face clear. Once a page-sized colour layer of, say, cyan pig- 
ment dots has been applied, the ribbon moves to the next 
colour while the paper returns to its starting position ready 
for the second coloured layer of dots to be added, and so on. 
6 2  

Colour output 
Waxphase change 
Another version of thermal wax technology is used by 
the ’phase change’ printer. Sticks of wax are heated to 140°C 
and melted wax is fired at the paper from a head scanning 
across the page, solidifying on contact with the paper, with 
little spread. This is caused by the wax‘s abrupt phase change 
curve, the wax melting sharply above 140°C and solidifying 
almost instantly below it. Colour density is good as the col- 
our is dye based, rather than a pigment based. Printing takes 
place in a single pass, minimising registration problems, and 
running cost is relatively low as only the wax deposited on 
paper is consumed. 
Dyesublimation 
Dye sublimation printers can vary the volume of dye 
transferred to paper in 256 steps as well as the intensity of 
the individual colour printed. The amount of dye released 
from the film substrate is temperature dependent. The higher 
the temperature of the head, the more dye is deposited. With 
three or more dyes, the result is a true continuous tone im- 
age of up to 16.7 million possible colours for each CMYK dot 
deposited on a photographic paper which contains a quan- 
tity of chemical fixer to complete the print process. The near- 
photographic result is achieved in spite of a relatively low 
resolution - usually 300 dpi. The down side to the excellent 
results produced is that the dye sublimation printing process 
is slow compared with other technologies and is also the most 
expensive. It also costs the most to run - up to €4 per page. 
Colo ur laser 
Laser printing - a form of electrostatic printing - uses 
the same imaging technology as the original photocopier, 
although the optics involved in colour work are more com- 
plex. Colour laser printing multiplies the original black and 
white electrostatic process by a factor of four, with different 
manufacturers using different techniques to implement the 
imaging process. Canon’s photosensitive drum, for example, 
is imaged four times, while Xerox exposes a long photosensi- 
tive belt with all four colours exposed on the belt end to end. 
The latent images then pass under the corresponding toner 
hoppers attracting toner on to the paper. Laser printer 
Wax-coated 
ribbon 
Heating element 
Qesublimationprinting 
Paper 
path 
t’ 
0 
f ’  
CMYK 
,,, 
W V  
toners 
photosensitive 
t3: ’ - 
1
;
 
fuser unit 
transfer belt 
Colourlaserprin ting 
6 3  

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
- 
'J 
I
.
 
.. 
Photoshop'slayers show thumbnail5 of 
the four CMYK images of which the 
composite image (below) is composed 
resolutions are typically 300 or 600 dpi. As the development 
of toner technology continues, higher resolutions can be 
expected . 
Desktop proofing of colour separa tions 
Proofs of colour separations can be printed on a black- 
and-white desktop printer to verify that objects appear on 
the correct separations and that colours overprint or knock 
out as expected (see explanation of overprinting and knock- 
out later). Colour separations should be proofed on a 
Postscript printer, as non-Postscript printers cannot accurately 
show how separations will image on a Postscript output 
device. 
To proof separations from DTP applications such as 
Pagemaker on a Postscript desktop printer, the PPD for the 
printer is first selected in the printer dialog box, Colour/Sepa- 
rations is clicked and the inks to be used in the final separa- 
tions are selected. Clicking Print causes the printer to output 
a page for each colour selected. 
-1 
.
.
 
II 
Commercial printing 
Photographiccolour separation 
As we have seen earlier, the subtractive primaries cyan, yellow and magenta can be 
combined to recreate all the colours of the spectrum. Therefore, in theory, it should be possi- 
ble to print a full colour image just using cyan, yellow and magenta inks. To do this, it is first 
necessary to separate the original image into its cyan, yellow and magenta components. This 
can be done by photographing the image - e.g. a colour photograph - three times, through 
filters which are the same colour as the additive primaries - red, green and blue. When the 
image is photographed through the red filter, green and blue are absorbed and the red passes 
through, producing a negative with a record of the red. By making a positive of this negative 
we will obtain a record of everything that is not red, or more specifically, a record of the 
6 4  

Colou r output 
Cyan 
Magenta 
Yell0 w 
Black 
The qan, magenta,yellowand blackseparations of theapplesimage (opposite) used to createplatesfor CMYKprinting 
green and blue. The green and blue, as we have seen earlier, combine to produce cyan; there- 
fore, we have a record of cyan. The same process is repeated for magenta, using a green filter, 
and for yellow, using a blue filter. As each filter covers one-third of the spectrum we now 
have a record, on three sheets of film, of all the colours in the original image. When the sheet 
of film containing the cyan content of the image is placed in contact with a printing plate and 
then exposed, it transfers the cyan content of the image to the plate; printing on to paper 
with the plate, using cyan ink, then produces a print of just the cyan content of the original 
image. Repeating the process with the yellow and magenta film and printing two further 
passes using yellow and then magenta inks should, in theory, reproduce the original full 
colour image. Unfortunately printing inks are not pure, absorbing colours that they would 
not absorb if they were pure. For this reason, the printed image will appear 'muddy' unless 
colour corrections are made on the separations to compensate for these ink deficiencies. An- 
other problem with using just the three separations is a lack of density in the shadow areas. 
To overcome these problems, a fourth, black, separation is made by using a yellow filter or a 
combination of all three filters. The addition of black improves shadow density and overall 
contrast. 
When the printing plates are made, the four separations are screened at different an- 
gles so that the halftone dots for each ink print in a symmetrical rosette pattern. Tradition- 
ally, the cyan screen is printed at 105", the magenta screen at 75", the yellow screen at 90" and 
the black screen at 45". If one or more of the process inks are set to print at different angles, or 
if the paper rotates slightly as it moves through the press, then the rosette pattern does not 
Cyan 
Yellow 
0 
0
.
 
0
.
.
 
0
.
0
.
 
0
.
0
.
.
 
0
0
.
0
.
.
 
0
.
0
.
.
 
0
.
0
.
 
0
.
.
 
0
.
 
0 
Magenta 
Black 
The four colour separations are screened atpre-defined angles 
65 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Conventionalprinting angles for the four colour screens 
Resultingrosette pa ttern 
print correctly and a moire pattern appears, disrupting the 
smoothness of the colour gradation. 
When printed, the image is reproduced as thousands 
of tiny dots laid down in thin layers of colour. The colour 
perceived by the eye is determined by the size of the dots, 
the manner in which they overlap, and their relation to one 
another, i.e. the colours are produced not in the physical 
mixing of the inks, but in the optical mixing of individual 
colours by the viewer’s eye. 
Most photographic colour separations are now made 
using high precision colour scanners. The original image, or 
a positive transparency of it, is placed on a drum, and a laser 
light beam scans rapidly back and forth over it. The reflected 
(or, in the case of a transparency, transmitted) light is divided 
into three separate beams which pass through red, green and 
blue filters, activating extremely sensitive photocells. Depend- 
ing on how much light the photocells detect, signals of 
varying strength are sent to laser light generators, which auto- 
matically expose a set of separation negatives by emitting pre- 
cisely controlled bursts of light. 
HowtekScanmaster& 
Digital colour separa tion 
Many desktop applications now provide facilities for 
colour separation. Using PageMaker, for example, spot and 
process colour separations of a publication can be imaged 
directly to a Postscript imagesetter using paper or film. When 
Separations are selected in the Pagemaker’s Print Colourprint- 
ing dialog box, the information found in the PPD file for the 
optimised screen option, and the angle and frequency fields 
are displayed. One sheet of paper or film is produced for each 
spot or process ink to be printed. A commercial printer then 
I 
1 
v’ 
Linotype imagesetter 
66 

Colour output 
uses these separations to prepare plates for the printing press. Spot colours normally print at 
the angle specified in the PPD (Postscript Printer Description file) for Custom Color, which is 
usually 45". Process colours normally print at the same angles as those evolved for the tradi- 
tional separation process as described above - cyan 105", magenta 75", yellow 90" and black 
45" 
Due to the fact that imagesetters simulate halftone dots by grouping printer dots to- 
gether in halftone cells, producing consistent angles at 75" and 105" can pose problems. A 
number of vendors offer screening solutions to address this problem, notable among them 
being Agfa's Balanced Screen Technology and Linotype-Hell's HQS Screening and Rational Tan- 
gent Screening systems. While these systems offer improved colour results, they are still based 
on the traditional screen ruling and angle combinations. 
White 
2% Grey 
3% Grey 
6% Grey 
19% Grey 
25% Grey 
38% Grey 
50% Grey 
62% Grey 
75% Grey 
87% Grey 
Black 
Creatingshades ofgrey bymeans ofgrouping do bin halftone cells 
Even better results may be offered by recent developments in the use of frequency 
modulated (FM) or stochastic screening, also from Agfa and Linotype-Hell. While the tradi- 
tional halftone screening uses the size of the halftone dots to convey shading, FM screening 
does not arrange dots into halftone cells, but simulates the different shades of an image by 
controlling the number of dots in each area - more dots producing a darker shade and fewer 
dots producing a lighter shade. Because there is no regular dot pattern in FM screening, the 
problem of Moir4 patterns is avoided; also, since FM screening uses smaller dots, more detail 
and subtle changes in colour may be reproduced. 
Pnn ter's marks 
Part of the process of preparing separations for printing is ensuring that the prepress 
bureau and/or print shop are provided with all the information necessary to produce film 
and plates and to monitor the consistency of print quality during the print run. Many digital 
applications provide the means of adding information to the individual separations covering 
the following requirements. 
Crop marks - marks indicating where the printed pages will be trimmed 
Register marks - normally in the form of cross hairs or star targets. After a file is 
separated and printed, the print shop uses the register marks which 
6 7  

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
appear on the negatives to align the separations to create proofs and plates. 
Star targets are harder to align than cross hair register marks but they are ex- 
tremely accurate. Each image should have at least four registration marks 
Bleed area -area which falls outside the cropping area. Bleed is included in an 
artwork to compensate for shifts of the image on the printing press, or to allow 
for a slight margin of error for images which ,will be stripped into a keyline in a 
document. A press bleed - one which bleeds off the edge of the printed page - 
should be at least 18 points 
Text labels -specifying, for example, file name, page number, line screen used 
and screen angle and colour of each plate 
Colour calibration bar - used by the print shop to check colour consistency 
[ml during the print run. There are two types of colour bar, called progressive and 
black overprint. The progressive colour bar consists of a solid colour square of 
cyan, magenta and yellow as well as various combinations of these three col- 
ours. The black overprint colour bar prints the various combinations of cyan, 
magenta and yellow with a solid swatch of black over the colour combinations 
to check for show-through of underlying inks 
9 Gradient tint bar - used to check for consistent tint values in separations. Tints 
usually range from 10 % to 100 % in 10 % intervals 
CorelDRA W s  Print Preview dialog box 
6 8  

Colour output 
Offsetprin ting 
Still used today to reproduce full colour 
output, halftone colour printing was intro- 
duced in the 1890s, although many years 
passed before its full potential was realised. 
Although colour reproduction theory was 
fairly well understood, the lack of colour film 
restricted colour work to studios where the 
necessary separation negatives had to be 
made directly from the subject, under the 
most exacting conditions. As reliable colour 
film became available in the 1930s, colour re- 
production became both more common and 
more accurate. The offset plate is made of a 
base material - such as aluminium, stainless 
steel, or, for very short runs, paper - coated 
with a photoreactive substance. After expo- 
sure, the plate is developed and then treated 
to enhance its ink-attracting or water-repel- 
Inking rollers 
Dampening 
Plate 
rollers 
cylinder 
rapt 
J 
Ic4--+ 
PaDer out 
Impression 
cylinder 
The offsetlithographicprinfingprocess 
ling properties. For very long print runs, bimetal plates are sometimes used; typically, cop- 
per forms the image area, while aluminium or chromium is used for non-image areas. Recent 
developments which have seen dramatic increases in the light sensitivity of photopolymer 
coatings offer the possibility of producing plates in future which will no longer require film 
exposure, but will instead be digitally imaged by a scanning laser. 
When printing process colours, two factors must be controlled to ensure the quality of 
the finished work, namely the number of halftone dots which print per inch (called the screen 
frequency or screen ruling) measured in lines per inch (lpi) and the angle at which they print 
(called the screen angle). If these factors are not correctly specified, the process inks may not 
print correctly in relation to one another, and distracting moire patterns may appear in the 
final printed colours. The default screen settings in the selected printer’s PPD are based on 
specifications from the printer manufacturer and are optimised for the printer. A prepress 
service provider may, however, suggest different settings in some circumstances. 
Trapping 
When printing overlapping coloured objects in a composition 
on an offset press, conventionally the top object is printed and the 
equivalent area of the bottom object is not printed or is ‘knocked out’ 
in printing terminology. As mentioned earlier, colour misregistration 
can occur if the paper rotates slightly as it travels through the press. 
The same effect can occur if a plate is misaligned or if the plate or 
paper stretches slightly during printing. Because of the knocking- 
out convention, such misregistrations can cause unsightly white sliv- Effectofmiwegistration when 
ers between adjoining colours. To compensate for this problem in theboltomobjedishdout 
6 9  

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
*,It,:# lr?,:lfl,l, 3 
r - I ~ . * ~ : ~ ~  
n./erlrl.lIlt 
k ~ i i t , ~ , ~ ~ , ~ t ~ ~ , : j i r , ~  
- 
hr19> I I ~ I I  
, V l  
p83lfitZ 
- 
TednLir~,.e 1-3 
poirlti. 
the traditional separation process, the platemaker used pho- 
tographic techniques to ’spread’ or ’choke’ adjoining objects 
on the separate plates to allow for misregistration, using a 
process called trapping. Spreading involved enlarging the size 
of an overlapping object, while choking involves reducing 
the size of an underlying object. 
Using digital separation methods, trapping is applied 
to a publication, either manually or automatically, before film 
separations are created. Trapping is required mainly for over- 
lapping objects created in a vector drawing application and 
printed using distinct spot colours applied from separate 
plates. Trapping is less important if the objects use process 
colours which share a sufficient quantity of common inks and 
normally no trapping is necessary for artwork consisting of 
continuous tone images, as the colours blend naturally to- 
gether. Trapping of complex objects such as those involving 
blends or graduated fills is a skilled and exacting process as 
the trap colour and shape must change as the colour on the 
perimeter of the object changes. Assistance is available in the 
form of software such as Adobe’s Trapwise, which provides 
more sophisticated trapping than that found in illustration 
or page makeup applications. 
Spread-overlappigobj~e*~ed 
~oke-under~gobjectreduced 
7 0  
Trapping in a drawing application 
CorelDRAW provides a comprehensive set of trapping 
options: 
Trapping by always overprinting black. Any object con- 
taining 95% black or more overprints any underlying ob- 
jects - a useful option for artwork containing a lot of black 
text. 
Trapping by auto-spreading. Auto-spreading creates col- 
our trapping by assigning an outline to the object that is 
the same colour as its fill and having it overprint underly- 
ing objects. Colour trapping will occur for all objects in 
the artwork which meet three conditions - (i) they do not 
already have an outline, (ii) they are filled with a uniform 
fill, and (iii) they have not already been designated to over- 
print. The amount of spread assigned to an object depends 
on the maximum trap value and the object’s colour. The 
lighter the colour, the greater the percentage of the maxi- 
mum trap value. The darker the colour, the smaller the 
percentage of the maximum trap value. 

Colour output 
following guidelines: 
Trapping by overprinting selected colour separations. Us- 
ing Corel’s Advanced Separations Settings, one or more of 
the CMYK separations can be set to overprint graphics, 
text, or both. 
To trap by overprinting selected objects. Overprint Fill 
causes the top object to print over the underlying object 
(instead of the underlying object being knocked out), which 
makes ’white gaps’ impossible. This option is best used 
when the top colour is much darker than the underlying 
colour, otherwise an undesirable third colour might result 
(e.g. red over yellow would result in an orange object). 
Overprint Outline causes the top object’s outline to print 
over the underlying object. The safest choice is to assign 
the colour of the top object’s fill to the outline. When set- 
ting the outline thickness, it has to be remembered that 
the outline straddles the path which defines the object’s 
shape. Therefore, an outline of, for example, 0.20 points 
actually creates a trap of 0.10 points. 
To create a trap in Photoshop 
CoreIDRAW allows saving of both artwork 
and colour separation instructions in a .PRN 
file for sending directly to an output device 
by a service bureau, where the file will be 
processed through a Raster Image Processor 
(RIP) in order to rasterise its Postscript instruc- 
tions. The rasterised file will then be loaded 
to an imagesetter to produce the film sepa- 
rations which in turn will be developed in a 
film processor. 
Procedure forprinting to file 
1. Click File, Print. 
2. Enable Print to File. 
3. Enable For Mac if the print file 
is being sent to a service bureau 
with Macintosh equipment. 
4. Click OK. 
5. Type a file name and choose a 
destination. The appropriate 
extension (.PRN) will be 
appended to the file name. 
Printer 
Stntus 
Re& 
Type 
\Vhete 
LPTl 
P Frtnt to tile 
HF Lnser!et Ill PS Cattridqe 
!:a inn) e nt 
r F
~
~
M
~
Creatinga PostScript .PRNfile usingtheprint to file option 
All colours spread under black 
Lighter colours spread under darker colours 
Yellow spreads under cyan, magenta and black 
Pure cyan and pure magenta spread under each other 
equally 
Generally speaking, four colour images need only be 
trapped when solid tints are being used in CMYK mode. 
Excessive trapping may generate a keyline effect (crosshair 
1. Choose CMYKColorfrom the 
Mode menu to convert the 
image to the CMYK mode. 
2. Choose Trap from the Image 
menu. The Trap dialog box 
appears. 
3. Select a unit of measurement 
from the Size Units menu. 
4. In the Width box, enter the 
trapping value provided by the 
print shop. 
7 1  

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Speafylnga trapping value 
To trap a publication in PageMaker 
1. Open the publication. 
2 .  Choose Utilitiesflrapping 
3. Click Enable Trapping for 
4. Set the trapping options 
5. Choose File/Print. 
6. Complete the Print dialog box 
Options. 
Publication. 
required. 
settings and click Print. 
lines) in the C, M and Y plates. This problem is not visible 
in the composite channel, showing up only when output 
is made to film. 
The procedure for creating a trap is as follows: 
1. The image is first converted to CMYK mode 
2. Trap is then selected from the lrnage menu, causing the 
3. A unit of measurement is selected from the Size Units 
4. In the Width box, the required trapping value, as agreed 
Trap dialog box to appear 
menu 
with printer, is entered 
Trapping in a page makeup application 
PageMaker traps text to underlying PageMaker-drawn ob- 
jects (rectangles, polygons, lines and ellipses), and traps 
PageMaker-drawn objects to each other, but it ignores im- 
ported graphics. Imported graphics must first be trapped 
in the illustration or image-editing program used to create 
them. PageMaker applies the correct trapping techniques 
on different parts of the object even if text or a PageMaker- 
drawn object overlaps several different background col- 
ours. The trapping adjustments are made automatically 
throughout the publication, although the application al- 
lows the user to vary settings from the default in particular 
situations. 
PageIvWer Trapping Options dialog box 
PageMaker decides whether to trap based 
on ink density values, and places the traps 
based on the neutral densities (relative light- 
ness or darkness) of adjoining colours, in 
most cases spreading lighter colours into 
adjacent darker colours. In all cases, the 
overprint trapping technique is used - the 
trap colour prints over the darker of two 
adjoining colours. The trap colour used de- 
pends on the component inks of the two 
adjoining colours. For adjacent process col- 
ours which require a trap, PageMaker cre- 
ates the trap colour using only the CMYK 
values in the lighter colour which are higher 
than those in the adjoining colour. For a 
72 

Colour output 
process or spot colour next to a spot colour, the lighter colour is used as the trap 
colou r. 
When colours have similar neutral densities, neither colour defines the edge. To trap these 
colours, PageMaker adjusts the trap position from spreading the lighter colour into the 
darker one to straddling the centreline between them, creating a more elegant result. 
PageMaker traps text characters to underlying PageMaker-drawn graphics. A text character 
overlapping different background colours traps accurately to all colours it overlaps (this 
applies only to Postscript or TrueType outline fonts as bitmap fonts do not trap). 
The value entered for Black Limit in the Trapping Options dialog box determines what 
PageMaker considers a solid black and a rich black (a process colour consisting of solid 
black with one or more layers of C, M or Y inks). The default value of 100% specifies that 
only colours containing 100% black will be considered solid or rich blacks by PageMaker. 
The Black Limit setting is useful when it is necessary to compensate for extreme dot gain, 
e.g. when using low-grade paper stock which could cause black percentages lower than 
100% to print as solid areas. By decreasing the Black Limitsetting from its default of loo%, 
it is possible to compensate for dot gain and ensure that PageMaker will apply the proper 
trap width and placement to black-coloured objects. 
If the Fill and Line options are checked in the Black Attributes section of the Trapping 
Options dialog box, PageMaker overprints the lines or fills, and does not trap them. 
Pagemaker, like CorelDRAW, allows saving of a publication and its colour separation 
instructions in a .PRN file for sending directly to an output device by a service bureau. 
Dotgain 
Many variables - from the photomechanical processes used to produce separations, to 
the paper type and press used - affect the size of printed dots. Typically, dots increase in size 
as wet ink spreads, under pressure from the offset press rubber blanket, as it is absorbed by 
the paper. A 50% halftone screen, for example, may show an actual density of 55% on the 
printed image when read with a densitometer. Dots may also increase in size as negatives 
from different sources are duplicated to produce the final film, or can result from miscalibration 
of an imagesetter during the imaging process. If too much dot gain occurs, images plug up 
and colours print darker than specified. 
Some applications, such as Photoshop, provide the means for compensating for dot 
gain. When a Dot Gain value is entered in Photoshop’s Printing Inks Setup dialog box, the 
program uses this percentage as the midtone dot gain value to generate a dot gain curve. 
Changing the dot gain makes the image appear lighter (if a lower percentage is entered) or 
darker (if a higher percentage is entered) on the screen. It does not affect the actual data in 
the image until Adobe Photoshop uses the setting to adjust the CMYK percentages for dot 
gain during the conversion process. 
73 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Thefillingin ofshadowsin a halftone 
imageiscausedbydotgain andcan be 
due toseveral factors, ora combination 
of factors - overinking, overabsorben t 
papeG overexposure of thepxintingplate 
orpoor film-to-pla te contact. Modern 
imagesetters are capable ofproducinga 
wide vmetyofdotshapes. Ellipticaldots 
(right) arelessprone to dotgain than 
conventionalround dots (lefi) 
Compensating for dot gain in greyscale images in Photoshop 
There are two ways to compensate for dot gain in greyscale images: 
1. Click Use Dot Gain for Greyscale Images option in the Printing lnks Setup dialog box. 
This option adjusts the display to reflect the dot gain. If the image appears too dark, the 
Curves or Levels dialog box can be used to compensate for the adjustment on an image- 
by-image basis. 
2. The Transfer Functions dialog box can be used to compensate for dot gain when the 
image goes to film. Transfer functions don't permit viewing the results of the adjustment 
on screen; however, they provide the most precise control over dot gain and permit 
adjustment of the dot gain to specific values throughout the image. 
Compensating for dot gain in colour images 
To compensate for dot gain in the proof of a colour image, the Dot Gain text box in the 
Printing Inks Setup dialog box may be used. The dot gain estimate in the Printing Inks Setup 
dialog box represents dot gain for the specified paper stock for the midtones (that is, the 
50% pixels). Photoshop then uses this value to create a dot gain curve which adjusts for dot 
gain throughout the image. The default dot gain estimate reflects the expected dot gain 
between film and final output (the expected dot gain between the colour proof and the 
final output is usually between 2 and 5%). 
7-- 
Ink Colors 
Teklronix Pharer II PX/PXi 
Dot 6ain 
E
X
 
Cancel I I 
Adjusting for dotgain via Photoshop's Prinkinglide 
dialogbox 
0 
5 
10 
70 
30 
40 
50 
IF 
Override Printer's Ddault iustlioni 
Adjustingfordotgain via Photoshops TransferFunctions 
dialogbox 
7 4  

Colour output 
To determine the correct dot gain, a calibration bar may be included with the proof by 
clicking the Calibration Bar option in the Page Setup dialog box. A reflective densitometer 
can then be used to take a reading at the 50% 
mark of the printed calibration bar, that value 
being then added to the printer's estimate of the 
expected dot gain between proof and final out- 
put. In the absence of a densitometer, the Dot 
Gain value should be adjusted until the image 
on-screen looks like the proof, and then the cor- 
responding value should be added to the print- 
er's estimate of the expected dot gain. 
~ 
Screens 
I 
Border 
I 
Cg'lb"''on 
Bars 
1 
1 r Regis!ration Marks 
A 
5 
r Corner Crop Marks 
Background 
I r &aPtlon 
r Center Crop Marks 
A calibration bar will beprovided with theproof when 
this option is checked 
Compensating for dot gain using transfer functions 
Transfer functions were used traditionally to compensate for dot gain due to a miscalibrated 
imagesetter. In addition, transfer functions can be used when precise control over the dot 
gain values throughout an image is required. Unlike the Dot Gain value in the Printing lnks 
Setup dialog box, transfer functions allow specification of up to thirteen values along the 
greyscale to create a customised dot gain curve. 
Adjusting transfer function values: 
1. A transmissive densitometer is used to record the density values at the appropriate steps 
2 .  Page Setup is chosen from the File menu, causing the Page Setup dialog box to appear 
3. Clicking the Transfer button opens the Transfer Functions dialog box 
4. The required adjustment is calculated and the values (as percentages) are entered in the 
For example, if a 50% dot has been specified, and the imagesetter prints it at 58%, then 
clearly there is an 8% dot gain in the midtones. Entering 42% (50% minus 8%) in the 50% 
text box of the Transfer Functions dialog box compensates for this gain. The imagesetter 
then prints the 50% dot required. When entering transfer function values, the density range 
of the imagesetter should be kept in mind. 
in the image on film 
Transfer Fun ctions d i a I og box 
Undercolourremoval and addition and grey componentreplacement 
In theory, equal parts of cyan, magenta and yellow combine to subtract all light and 
create black. As explained earlier, due to impurities present in all printing inks, a mix of 
these colours instead produces a muddy brown. To compensate for this deficiency in the 
colour separation process, prepress operators remove equal amounts of cyan, magenta and 
yellow from the C, M and Y plates in areas where the three colours overlap, and add black 
ink instead via the K plate. Called undercolour removal or UCR, the process adds depth to 
shadow areas and to neutral colours, reduces the amount of ink required and helps prevent 
ink trapping. 
75 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Black Ink Limit im 1 2 
 iota^ Ink Limit 
[niii ~ - 1  x 
-
>
 
- 
Gray Ramp 
Separation Type 
6CR 
* UCR 
I 
Cancel 1 
i 
Load 
I 
1 
SdVC 
1 
I 
j 
I I 
:- 
Adjusting UCR via Photoshop's Separation Setup dialog box 
ULAAmounl 
II 
2 
Adjusting GCR via Photoshop's Separation Setup dialog box 
Normal CMYK range 
,--. 
I 
'*> 
High fidelity colour extends the gam u t 
of colom which can be prin ted 
UCA or undercolour addition - the 
converse of UCR - is a way of compen- 
sating for the colour thinning which can 
occur with GCR or UCR, by adding back 
colour. UCA produces rich, dark shad- 
ows in areas that might have appeared 
flat if they were printed with only black 
ink. UCA can also prevent the 
posterisation which can occur if there is 
a lot of subtle shadow detail. 
GCR or grey component replace- 
ment is the process of substituting black 
for the grey component which would 
have been created in an area of a printed 
image, where all three colours combine. 
In GCR, more black ink is used over a 
wider range of colours. GCR separations 
tend to reproduce dark, saturated col- 
ours better than UCR separations do and 
GCR separations maintain grey balance 
' 
better on an offset press. 
A number of applications provide the user with the 
means of manipulating UCR, UCA and GCR values via a Sepa- 
rations Dialog Box. The type of separation adjustment required 
is determined by the paper stock being used and the require- 
ments of the print shop. 
Hgh fideliy colour 
High fidelity colour printing uses additional process 
inks to increase the gamut of printed colours by as much as 
20%. For example, Pantone Hexachrome colours are repro- 
duced using cyan, magenta, yellow, black, orange and green 
inks. PageMaker can create separations for up to eight inks, 
including both process and spot colours, varnishes and high 
fidelity colours. 
Wtandpaper 
The paper used has a major influence on the quality of 
the colour printed on it. Because process inks are transpar- 
ent, it is the light reflected from the paper's surface which 
supplies the colour to the ink. For example, when light passes 
76 

Colou r output 
through cyan ink printed on paper, the ink acts like a filter, 
absorbing the colour it is not (red) and allowing the colour it 
is (blue and green) to pass through. These two colours then 
reflect off the paper and back up through the ink. What the 
viewer sees is a blend of the blue and green colours which 
constitute cyan. It is the quality and quantity of the reflected 
light which dictate the quality of the reflected colour. For this 
reason, the paper must be bright and neutral in colour if it is 
to reflect maximum light without introducing any colour 
change. Also, the paper should be smooth and flat as a rough 
surface will scatter the light and distort the colour. 
Proofing a publication 
Digital proofs 
This category of proofs includes those generated from 
inkjet, laser, thermal wax, phase-change, or dye sublimation 
printers. Data is imaged directly from the original file on to 
paper. This method is quick and economical, and is useful to 
give a first pass representation of how a page will print, but 
it is not usually accepted by print shops as being a good 
enough representation of what they are expected to produce, 
as the proof is not produced from the film which will be used 
to make the printing plates. In particular, digital proofs can- 
not reproduce press conditions such as screen frequencies and 
angles, dot gain, etc. 
Off-press proofs 
These are made from the film separations which will 
ultimately be used to make the printing plates. This category 
includes blueprints, overlay proofs (e.g. Color Key) and lami- 
nate proofs (e.g. Cromalin, Matchprint or Agfaproof). 
Press proofs 
Produced using the very plates, inks and paper which 
will be used for the final print, press proofs provide the most 
accurate but also the most expensive proofing method. They 
are generally reserved for high-end projects f 
White paper reflects all colours. 
Yellow absorbs blue, reflects red 
and green. 
Magenta absorbs green, reflects 
red and blue 
Cyan absorbs red, reflects green 
and blue. 
Black absorbs all colours. 
Rough paper scatters light and 
distorts colour. 
77 

This page intentionally left blank




Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
After DaLi's Persistence ofMemoq 
Rendering of Picasso's Guernica 
- -  
.am-*.. 7 '  4 
ac 
8 
After Escher's Concave and Convex 
*.a 
technique which is 
#a'' 
P... ':* 
finding increasingly 
:>Y: - . 
~ 
... 
\*.-=:,, -*- .- 
.:: 
common use among 
*;;* 
<;+;!* 
graphic designers, par- 
a'.'.' 
.-.;*. :,. ticularly in the world of 
y:, .'.4 
?.*--* 
..: * I ,  
advertising, is one 
which aims to gain at- 
*& 
...a- 
tention by presenting a 
scene or an image in a way which defies the 
paradigms with which we expect the 'world 
around us to conform. Such a technique is not 
new, of course, being found in the work of 
artists like Salvador Dali and Pablo Picasso, 
to name but two illustrious exponents. Both 
produced works of almost hypnotic quality, 
startling the viewer with their unexpected- 
ness and nonconformity with conditioned 
concepts of structure and order. 
More recently, the work of the Dutch 
graphic artist Maurits Corneille Escher, who 
died in 1972, has become increasingly popu- 
lar because of its unique combination of me- 
ticulous precision with visual trickery. In 1955 
Escher created a visual paradox in the litho- 
graph Concave and Convexby combining two 
separate perspectives into a unified, coherent 
whole. His work is especially notable for its 
creation of impossible perspectives and opti- 
cal illusions - endless staircases and uphill 
waterfalls - as well as its exploration of the 
theme of metamorphosis. Even more recently, 
television advertising has exploited the new 
technology of morphing to capture viewers' 
attention by progressively deforming one ob- 
ject - e.g. a car - until it becomes another ob- 
ject such as a galloping stallion. 
Analysis of historical examples of this 
technique show that they fall into a set of cat- 
egories. Dali's clock appears to have the 
'wrong' physical properties, for example; we 
don't expect clocks to be flexible. Picasso's 
portraits have the wrong spatial relationships; 
we expect eyes to be side by side. Many of 
Escher's works appear to have the wrong 
*.% 
*..:4,*. 
.::;:y 
*-a *.-? 
@
:
.
-
:
 
* 
82 

Defying the paradigms 
perspective, although their precision attempts to persuade us other- 
wise. Other categories involve placing objects within the wrong con- 
text, giving them the wrong colour or texture, juxtapositioning ob- 
jects with the wrong relative sizes and so on. In all cases the objective 
is the same - to startle the viewer and thereby to gain attention. 
The historical examples mentioned above were, of course, cre- 
ated by master craftsmen, using traditional techniques to achieve their 
impact. In this first chapter of the workshop we shall explore ways in 
which we can also use digital techniques to defy the paradigms. 
M a p  bricks 
This example, which is typical of the 
work of Maurits Escher, presents a simple 
brick construction which, at first glance, ap- 
pears visually convincing. Only a closer look 
tells us that there is something not quite 
'right' about it. The secret about such decep- 
tions is to position components within a com- 
position in such a way that they appear to be 
physically connected when in fact they are 
only optically aligned. In this case, the first 
'brick' which, in fact, consists only of two 
sides and a top, is created by skewing a square 
as shown in Figure 4.l(a). The key in this ex- 
ample is to choose the correct skew angle so 
that assembly of the bricks as shown in Fig- 
ure 4.l(b) produces the required alignment. 
I 
.
.
 
.~ 
1 
'. 
Figure 4.1 (a) Constructing the first brick 
c 
Figure 4.1 (b) The final assembly 
83 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Weaving 
In our normal everyday experience, organic and inorganic ob- 
jects occupy separate domains (although there are minor exceptions 
such as the practice of body piercing for the purpose of wearing jew- 
ellery). This example overturns that normal experience by present- 
ing the viewer with a hybrid object which seems to have been con- 
structed by weaving together a face and what appears to be some 
kind of basketwork - Figure 4.2. 
Figure 4.2 Weaving 
Scuba diving 
One paradigm which alters with age is that of the scale of the 
objects around us in relation to one another. The baby's perception 
of scale adjusts as it grows to adulthood - the large teddy bear which 
terrorised it from the end of its cot now looks like the cuddly toy it 
seemed to its parents. Once developed, this paradigm of scale is very 
strong, providing an opportunity for the designer of advertising 
graphics to gain the attention of the reader by altering the relative 
scale of objects within a scene so that they no longer fit the viewer's 
expectations. The scuba diver in a goldfish bowl is an example of this 
- Figure 4.3. 
8 4  

Defying the paradigms 
The return of King Kong 
Figure 4.3 Scuba diver 
One of my most vivid childhood memories is that of watching 
the film KingKongin a state of almost paralysed shock. I should ex- 
plain that I was only about seven at the time and, to this day, I still 
wonder what the film censors were thinking about when they gave 
the film a general release certificate. Judging by the looks on the faces 
around me in the cinema and by the disappearance of heads in front 
of me as their owners sought refuge under their seats, I suspect the 
film traumatised many of my generation. Of course the director's 
objective was to shock and certainly in the matinee performance at 
my local cinema, he succeeded admirably. 
This success was achieved using the technique we just looked 
at for the scuba diver example - by giving the leading role to a fero- 
cious mountain gorilla one hundred feet tall when most of us in the 
cinema thought of a gorilla in the form of the docile aging male seen 
amiably munching leaves on family visits to Glasgow's Calderpark 
Zoo. The shock effect was further enhanced by removing the gorilla 
from his normal habitat - i.e. safely behind bars - to ourhabitat which 
we considered to be definitely a gorilla-free zone. 
Figure 4.4 shows a modern day King Kong transported this time 
from his native Africa not to the height of the Empire State building 
in New York, but instead to La Grande Arche at La Defense in Paris. 
85 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Figure 4.4 King Kong 
Spookbook 
This example -Figure 4.5 - achieves im- 
pact in several ways. The first is due to the 
fact that the hand holding the book is skel- 
etal, evoking subconscious associations with 
dark nights and grisly goings-on; the second 
way is through the fact that the book is not 
just any book, but has a dark, slightly sinister 
appearance, reinforced by the title; the third 
way is that the rest of the skeleton is missing, 
the hand appearing to emerge spookily from 
inside the book; finally the image begs the ob- 
vious question 'What use would a skeleton 
have for a book anyway?' 
86 

Defying the paradigms 
Stonehenge 
The megalithic structure of massive 
vertical stones and horizontal lintels which 
comprise Stonehenge has become an interna- 
tionally recognised monument which attracts 
thousands of visitors to Salisbury in England 
every year. Dating back to the late Stone Age, 
its chillingly named Slaughter Stone harks back 
to the practices of our early ancestors who are 
believed to have used the site for pagan ritu- 
als: The positioning of the stones as a means 
of predicting certain astronomic events also 
gives the site a very special atmosphere. This 
example (Figure 4.6) further enhances the al- 
ready ghostly nature of the site by adding a 
heavenly face which appears to be looking 
down on the stones, perhaps recalling with 
sadness the victims of the many sacrifices wit- 
nessed there! 
V 
I': 
J -  
0 
Y 
I 
V 
v Salisbury 
Figure4.6 Stonehenge 
87 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Kickinghorse 
The image of the wild, unbroken stallion is one familiar to lov- 
ers of old Western movies. Throwing its would-be riders and kicking 
down fences were virtually its stock in trade. The horse was also a 
popular subject for paintings in the centuries before photography, as 
wealthy owners commissioned artists to immortalise race winners on 
canvas. This example (Figure 4.7) combines these two threads in an 
unexpected way. A picture of a horse in a picture frame, or a picture 
of a horse kicking down a fence would be unremarkable. The sight of 
a horse within a picture kicking itself out of its picture frame, on the 
other hand, would be an altogether more unexpected image. 
CONSTRUCTION PROCEDURE - KICKING 
HORSE 
Fipe4.7 Kickinghorse 
The sign painter 
Of all the members of the animal kingdom, few command our 
respect more than the tiger. Perhaps we have inherited such respect 
from those among our ancestors who managed to avoid becoming a 
sabre tooth's supper! The image of the tiger used here (Figure 4.8) 
plays on our subconscious fear of this powerful predator, while the 
ploy of bringing such an outsized inanimate version to life is the stuff 
of nightmares. Amusement at the misfortune of others - in this case 
the hapless sign painter - is probably another instinct we have inher- 
ited from our ancient ancestors. 
'? 
,, '). , ? 
. Y  $7 
\ 
I 
i )q 
\-I 
88 

Defying the paradigms 
< *  
1 ... Y)ur I ritwtllv 
Motor Oil 
Figure 4.8 Sign painter 
xodeo 
While the classic Western movie may 
have given way to modern equivalents like 
Star Wars and Top Gun, the romance of the 
Wild West remains an enduring one. A famil- 
iar scene within the Western was the ro- 
deo, where cowboys pitted their skills 
and experience against the strength and 
wiles of wild mustangs. Inspired by such 
memories, this example plucks an unsus- 
pecting cowpoke from his passive and 
clearly aging mount and places him on 
the back of a rather surprised looking 
grasshopper whose height to weight jump- 
ing ratio would put to shame the wildest 
of rodeo stallions (Figure 4.9). Like earlier 
examples, this one uses the incongruity of 
scale for its effect as well as the unlikely part- 
nership of man and insect. 
# 
89 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
\ 
Figure4.9 Rodeo 
Providing the arena for perhaps the 
purest form of one-to-one intellectual 
competition, the chessboard, with its orderly 
rows of black and white squares, presents an 
environment for structured conflict - a vir- 
tual battlefield on which the combatants, rep- 
resenting royalty, the church and the army, 
play out the strategies of small boys and 
Grand Masters alike. The rules of the game 
are precisely defined and must be assiduously 
followed. 
In this example, that order and struc- 
ture is overthrown. Across the set piece runs 
a human figure, fleeing from some unseen 
danger, blissfully unaware of her surround- 
ings, even knocking over one of the pawns 
in her haste (Figure 4.10). 
90 

Defying the paradigms 
Figure4.10 Chessboard 
Muscles 
Few teenage boys have not fantasised about how their lives 
would be transformed if only they could acquire the physique of an 
Arnold Schwarzenegger - a fantasy which has been fuelled for rea- 
sons of commercial gain since the days of Charles Atlas, with prod- 
ucts ranging from lotions and potions, pills and tablets, to ingenious 
(and usually useless) exercise gadgets and contraptions. Playing on 
this male vanity, this example (Figure 4.11) offers an alternative 
solution! 
.. 
"\./ 
Figure 4.11 Muscles 
91 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Schizophrenia 
A technique exploited for many years in children's stories and 
films has been the transformation of a character in the story or film 
from one form into another - from a frog to a prince, from Clark Kent 
to Superman, for example. More often, however, particularly in hor- 
ror films, the transformation is from a benign form to a malign one, 
the classic examples being Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde and Portrait of Dorian 
Grey. This example (Figure 4.12) employs a similar technique. 
Figure 4.12 Schizophrenia 
Lamode 
In this example, the viewer's attention is captured by the unex- 
pected scale of the models in relation to the size of the text. The 
typeface chosen for the text - Bellevue - echoes the elegance associ- 
ated with high fashion and the positioning of the models, such that 
their hands appear to be resting on the type characters, helps to inte- 
grate them into the composition. 
92 

Defying the paradigms 
Given that a significant proportion of 
/ 
-
-
 
the population suffer, in varying degrees, 
from arachnaphobia, or fear of spiders, the 
use of spiders or spiders’ webs in any graphic 
is a sure way to get attention! This example 
plays on that fear by mutating the spider and 
web to human size and creating the illusion 
that a child has strayed on to the web, pro- 
voking conflicting reactions of repulsion from 
the spider and protection for the child (Fig- 
ure 4.14). 
CONSTRUCTION PROCEDURE - THE WEB 
I .  nit) c ~ l i p r f  
.spicfe~r, n.t6 ,intf ihjkf i \ ’ c n >  ~ . i ~ c ~ ~ ~ i l d c ~ t f  
in 
2. 77ic. i\.c47 i\.‘i.+ 
1in~r[)ti~7t’d‘iriif 
t h c ~ c ~ k m c ~ ~ i t . +  
c i c f j c i c ~ t ~ ~ i t  
to 
C-1 ) r c d f l R 4  I t  ’, .-i,ik~tf ,intf p( ritit i n c d  
t/ic,chi/cf i i z w  I N  )tfr e t f i t c d m d p c  nitit m c ~ l , i t  
cippi y i i i t c ~ / i ~ \ ~ ~ / . s  
ti I , L $ ~ >  thc~iiii~~rc~.s~icii~ 
t h ~ f  
t h c ~ c h i l c f  
Figure 4.14 R e  web 
93 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
- I "  
Figure4.15 Thebaby 
Figure4.16 Dancingmusicalinstents 
Further examples in brief 
Figure 4.15 - The clipart baby was scaled and 
positioned within a hostile fantasy back- 
ground, then edited to appear to be crawling 
down an icy slope towards the cliff edge. 
Figure 4.16 - Clipart cartoon arms, legs and 
musical instruments were grouped, scaled 
and positioned, then musical notes were 
added for effect. 
Figure 4.17 - A screenshot window was 
captured and pasted into Painter. Painter's 
Distortion Brush and Image Warp (from Effects/ 
Surface Control> were used to distort the im- 
age. 
Figure 4.18 - The old man's beard was cloned 
in Photoshop to cover his mouth completely. 
Figure 4.19 - Two clipart figures were scaled 
and one was rotated and then both were 
placed in position as hands of a clock. 
Figure 4.20 - A copy of the bulb's outline 
shape was edited and then given gradient fill. 
Corel's Transparency Lens was applied to two 
copies of the fish (50% and 25%) and one copy 
was positioned behind the filament support. 
Figure4.17 Screenshot 
Figure 4.18 Silence is golden 
94 

Defying the paradigms 
Figure4.19 Clockhands 
Figure 4.21 - A clipart clock was rotated and 
perspective was applied, then it was imported 
into Painter, where Surface EffectsMesh Warp 
were used to distort the shape further. Drop- 
let shaped selection made from bottom edge 
of clock using the Pen tool and three droplets 
were created, scaled and edited. Finally, the 
clock and droplets were given drop shadows. 
Figure 4.22 -A mutation was produced by im- 
porting clipart sheep and clipart wolf into 
CorelDRAW, scaling them to match in size and 
then node editing both objects to remove 
their heads from their bodies. The wolf’s head 
was then positioned in relation to the sheep’s 
body, using Arrange/Order/”To Front to keep it 
on top f 
Figure4.22 f i e  wolfsheep 
Figure 4.W Lightbulb 
Figure4.21 Dripping clock 
i 
95 

This page intentionally left blank


Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Architekturist die erstarrte 
Musik - Architecture is 
h z e n  music 
Friedrich von Schelling 
17751 854 
German philosopher 
or centuries, the tools and techniques of architectural 
design have evolved in parallel with those of the art- 
architecture depends heavily on the precision of 
ist and the graphic designer. By its nature, of course, 
arithmetic, geometry and trigonometry for its success 
and, ever since the design and construction of the 
pyramids, has required its designers to undertake 
complex numerical calculations. Since carrying out 
complex numerical calculations quickly and effortlessly is one of the 
things which computers do best, it is no wonder, then, that architec- 
tural design, a subset of CAD - Computer Aided Design - was one of 
the earliest and most successful computer applications. Although the 
hardware demands of early programs were beyond the capabilities 
of desktop computers, as those capabilities have increased, many desk- 
top applications have become available and many of the features of 
these applications have found their way into precision drawing pro- 
grams like Adobe Illustrator, CorelDRAW, Macromedia Freehand and 
Micrografx Designer, as well as three-dimensional programs like 
RayDream Designer, Extreme 3D and MetaTool's Bryce. In this chap- 
ter, we shall examine how such features can be used to create a range 
of structures and terrains for incorporation in design projects requir- 
ing such effects. 
, 
Two-dimensional layo u ts 
All the drawing applications mentioned above provide the user 
with a drawing environment which includes high precision rulers, 
grids and movable guides. Different elements of a drawing can be 
stored on a series of electronic layers - useful when drawing, for ex- 
ample, office layouts, as separate layers can be used for furniture, IT 
equipment, electrical wiring etc. Features such as snapping of objects 
to the background grid or guidelines, duplicating, scaling, rotating 
and mirroring of objects make possible the production of quite com- 
plex layouts. 
Drawing primitives start with straight lines of variable stroke 
and style as well as tangents and parallel, perpendicular and dimen- 
sioned lines. Freehand and Bezier curved variants include splines, 
parabolas and spirals. Closed shapes include squares, rectangles, cir- 
98 

Virtual architecture and terrain 
cles, ellipses, grids, stars and polygons. 
While the above set of primitives can be 
used to create the wide range of common 
objects normally featured in residential or 
commercial layouts, time can be saved by the 
use of ready-made architectural clipart in both 
plan and elevation formats. The plan views 
in Figures 5.1 and 5.2 and the city ele-vation 
in Figure 5.3 were constructed from a range 
of separate clipart items. 
A combination of the basic drawing tools 
plus features like Duplicate, Scale, Rotate and 
Mirror can be used to produce more complex 
structures like the church in Figure 5.4. 
A common requirement in architectural 
drawing is the addition to a drawing of de- 
scriptive labels. CorelDRAW provides useful 
tools for this purpose. A variant of the line tool 
- Figure 5.5(a) - allows easy placement of an 
arrow pointing at the feature to be highlighted 
and the automatic placing of the text cursor 
for typing an appropriate annotation. The 
Magnify lens, used in Frozen mode, can also 
be used to enlarge detail within an object. 
Simple layouts and structures can also 
be enhanced by adding vector or bitmap fills 
like Bricks or Stucco to facades; the simple ele- 
vation example in Figure 5.6(a) was created 
by first drawing the outline shape of the 
building, filling it with black and then draw- 
ing, duplicating and filling it with white 
shapes for the roof tiles, windows, doors etc. 
The finished result was imported into Painter, 
where Painter's Ivy and Poppies image hoses 
- Figures 5.6(b) and 5.6(c) - were scaled and 
used to add detail - Figure 5.5(d). 
il 
Figure5.1 Two-dimensionalroom layout 
Figure5.2 Simpleplan view 
figure5.3 Cityscape 
99 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Figure 5.4 Church frontal elevation 
Y 
Annotation 
(4 
Figure5.5 Annotatingandghlighting 
Figure5.6 Enhancingan elevation 
100 

Virtual architecture and terrain 
Pseudo 3 0  effects 
By utilising the same tools and draw- 
ing features used for producing two-dimen- 
sional layouts and by observing the three 
rules of perspective - convergence, diminu- 
tion and foreshortening - drawing applica- 
tions can be used to construct quite complex 
pseudo three-dimensional structures. By ap- 
plying these rules as well as other visual cues, 
such as the use of shading and simulated 
aerial effects, the graphic designer can trick 
the viewer’s eye into perceiving two-dimen- 
sional drawings as having a third dimension. 
Two point perspective has been applied to the 
line drawing of the frontal elevation of the 
Arche de Triomphe in Figure 5.7 by grouping 
the completed drawing and using the Perspec- 
tive tool. The drawing and skewing of the 
right hand side of the arch and the shaded 
inside of the arched opening, using the same 
lines of perspective, complete the illusion. 
The use of simple two point perspective 
and a view point close to ground level was 
enhanced by a simple shaded fill on the end 
of the building to produce the result in Fig- 
ure 5.8. As Figures 5.9 and 5.10 show, similar 
techniques can be used to create quite con- 
vincing representations of famous landmarks. 
F i p 5 . 9  ThesphesandparabolasofSydney Opera House 
Figure5.7 The use ofperspectiveandshade 
Figure5.8 Twopointperspech’ve 
Figure 5.10 Duplication and non-proportionalscalingfeatured 
headyin creafingthkrepresentation ofBerlin’s Brandenburg Gate 
101 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Figure5.11 Achievinga sense ofdepth through 
convergence, foreshorteningand diminution 
Figure 5.12 
Use of diminution, shadingand layering 
i 
Country scenes or terrains can also be 
given the illusion of three dimensions by ap- 
plying the same rules of perspective. Figure 
5.11 shows a simple example of a drawing of 
a country road scene which applies the rule 
of convergence (as the parallel sides of the 
road appear to converge in the distance), fore- 
shortening (as the equally spaced white 
marker lines appear to come closer together, 
at a constant rate as they recede into. the dis- 
tance) and diminution (as the equally sized 
marker lines become progressively smaller in 
the distance). 
In Figure 5.12 the more distant trees di- 
minish in size compared with those in the 
foreground. The feeling of depth is further 
enhanced by the shading of the ground from 
dark (foreground) to light (background) and 
the layering of the drawn objects to place the 
river and mountains behind the trees. 
Figure 5.13 uses a combination of aerial 
effects and gradient fills to create the illusion 
of a series of wooded foothills receding to- 
wards a distant mountain range. Figure 5.14 
just uses shading to achieve an aerial effect 
but also introduces a sharp change in appar- 
ent altitude to provide additional interest. 
Figure 5.14 
Combiningaerialeffectsand 
altitude change 
Figure 5.13 Use of aerial effects to convey distance 
102 

Virtual ,architecture and terrain 
Combining several of the techniques 
from the above examples, the simple land- 
scape shown in Figure 5.15 adds the power- 
ful visual effect of a shadow of the tree in the 
foreground to create an illusion of distance. 
Using a similar technique - a simulated 
reflection in water - Figure 5.16 shows how a 
combination of shading with the use of 
reflection can create a surprisingly effective 
seascape. 
Figure 5.17 uses a more novel technique. 
A Painter nozzle consisting of a series of 
whitewashed pueblo-style buildings was 
used to 'spray' layers of the buildings on to a 
flat canvas, producing the result shown. Ben- 
efiting, perhaps, from the absence of planning 
permission, the result is reminiscent of many 
a Mediterranean hillside village. 
The final example in this section - Fig- 
ure 5.18 - shows a more stylised example 
which achieves visual impact through layer- 
ing a series of high-rise buildings in a jum- 
bled, impossible perspective relationship. 
Figure 5.17 Sprayyour own village, usingone of 
Pain teis nozzles 
Figure5.15 Landscape usinga combination of 
perspective e f f i  
Figure5.16 The use ofreflection andshading 
Figure 5.38 High-rise hiatus 
103 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
3Dmodelling 
While a skilled designer can produce quite convincing three-dimensional illusions within 
a drawing application, using a combination of ingenuity and the techniques illustrated in 
the previous section, the results 
created. To produce scenes which 
are truly three dimensional, i.e. 
which, once created, can be freely 
rotated around Cartesian axes and 
viewed from any angle, the de- 
signer has to move on to applica- 
tions which are capable of pro- 
ducing genuine three-dimen- 
sional representations. 
Until recently the process- 
ing power needed to handle the 
complex calculations involved in 
manipulating 3D objects and 
scenes, especially when a compo- 
sition required the rendering of 
textures, reflections and shadows, 
was prohibitively expensive and 
was restricted mainly to high end 
are limited to the plane in which the drawing has been 
workstations used for CAD solid modelling work - Figures 5.19 and 5.20. Such was the com- 
plexity of the software that, even for the CAD professional, the application learning curve 
was daunting. All of that is happily now changing rapidly, with the advent of faster and 
cheaper processors and graphic cards and the trend in the design of applications like 
RayDream Studio (Figure 5.21), Extreme 3D or MetaTool's Bryce towards user friendliness, 
bringing true 3D modelling within the reach of the desktop user. 
While the desktop drawing application 'metaphor' is already starting to mature, with a 
growing commonality of commands, tools and features being offered by different vendors, 
the more complex 3D application metaphor is still at an early stage, as developers test the 
market with different approaches. Instead of the drawing area and line and shape tools of 
the drawing application, the 3D application offers 3D 'views' and solid primitives like spheres, 
Figure5.W The earlyapplication of3Dmodellingwasin the field of engineeringdesign 
104 

Virtual~architecture and terrain 
t 
Figure522 The same object viewed &om different camera angles 
105 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
cubes and cones. As well as these primitives, 
freehand organic shapes can be created us- 
ing the processes of lathing, extruding, skin- 
ning and sweeping and the resulting forms 
can be grouped or combined to create 
subassemblies which, in turn, can be grouped 
to produce higher assemblies. 
Results can be viewed through various 
camera lenses from a variety of positions (Fig- 
ure 5.22) and lighting can be manipulated to 
create different effects. A wide variety of ma- 
terials including bumpmaps and reflection 
Figure523 3Dpalm treesetagainst2Dbackground 
maps can be applied to objects and, when 
composition is complete, sophisticated ren- 
dering processes create shadows, reflections, 
refraciion and even environmental effects like 
fog and haze. 
As well as making it possible for the 
designer to create quite detailed architectural 
structures, applications like Extreme 3D can 
be used to produce hybrid results like the sea- 
scape in Figure 5.23, which combines the 
palm tree created in the foreground as a 3D 
BimPhaiFmPped 
object with an imported 2D backdrop. Such 
to 
sphere 
applications also provide image mapping and 
bumpmapping techniques which can be used 
to produce results like the mapping of a 2D 
map of the Earth on to the surface of a sphere 
(Figure 5.24) and the bumpmapping of the 
textured surface of another sphere to produce 
the lunar-like landscape in Figure 5.25. 
While Extreme 3D can be also be used 
to produce terrains - by dragging up nodes 
from a flat ground plane and then applying 
a suitable texture to its surface - the applica- 
tion which excels in this domain is 
Metacreation’s Bryce. Although capable of 
producing more conventional 3D models 
from a comprehensive set of primitives, it is 
in the creation of realistically stunning terres- 
trial or lunar landscapes that Bryce excels. 
Although the rather quirky interface (Figure 
5.26) takes a little time to master, the return 
on the time invested pays back handsomely. 
Figure 5.24 
:P 
Figure 5.25 
applied to thesurface 
of a sphere 
BumPmapped- 
106 

Virtual architecture and terrain 
The small window at the top left of the modelling screen shows 
a miniature rendering of the current scene as it proceeds. To the right 
of that (displayed when the Create menu is highlighted) is a set of 
selectable primitives which include, as well as the usual spheres, cubes 
etc., a number of 'geographic' primitives -water, skies, ground planes, 
relief surfaces and rocks. Primitives selected from the Create menu 
appear in the modelling area as shown in Figure 5.26 where they can 
be manipulated using tools from the Edit menu (Figure 5.27). In ad- 
dition to the single default light which illuminates each new scene, 
additional lights can be added from the group of four types at the 
right hand end of the display of primitives. A third menu, Sky & Fog 
(Figure 5.28) is used to edit the sky parameters and to add haze or fog 
to scenes. Down the left hand side of the modelling area are various 
tools for adjusting the camera view of a scene and for controlling the 
rendering process. A dazzling range of preset procedural textures is 
* * a + J v  
t r ) b b s ,  
" C  
Figure 5.26 Byce's modelling en vironrnen t 
107 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
t 4.. 
f 
I 
lj - . ’ ,  
rh 
“
C
 
W
L
 
available for application to objects 
(Figure 5.29), while the Materials Com- 
poser (Figure 5.30) can be used either 
Terrain Editor (Figure 5.31) provides a 
means of manipulating the topogra- 
phy of individual terrain or rock ob- 
iects within a scene. 
v 
* I k ’ 
,
.
.
J
 
i
.
a
a
i
a
 
Figure 5.28 Tools for editingsly, haze and fog 
Figure 5.29 Bryce’s Ma terialspresets 
Werials Composer 
,111 
Figure 5.30 Bryce’s Ma teriaki Composer 
Figure 5.31 
Bryce‘s Terrain editor 
108 

Virtual architecture and terrain 
The few examples which follow can only scratch the surface of what this extraordinary 
application is capable of, once the initial learning curve is overcome. With its high quality 
raytracing renderer, it can produce landscapes, seascapes, cityscapes and extraterrestrial ter- 
rains of breathtaking beauty, pointing the way to the future of architectural virtual reality 
development, as additional animation capability is added to the application's features. 
f 
I! 
Figure5.32 Mountain high. Beforerendering(ab0ve) 
and after(below) 
Figure5.33 Sandstonerock. Beforerendering (above) 
and after(below) 
109 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
f 
! 
..- - 
I_ 
_ I  
Figure5.34 Shallow water 
Figure 5.36 
BTce's Terrain Editor dialog box. A greyscale 
checkerboard was firstcreated in CorelDRA Wand 
saved as a TlFFfile. The file was then openedin the 
Terrain Editor by selecting Elevatioflcture. The 
resulting terrain consists of high-rise blocks, with 
height varyingaccording toglevel (white highest, 
blacklowestandintmediateheights corresponding 
to intennediate shades ofgrey) 
Figure 5.35 City lights 
110 

Virtual architecture and terrain 
e 
D 
Figure 5.38 Bryce's dialog box for setting Boolean 
object attributes 
Figure5.39 Polarscene 
Fimre 5.40 
" 
Bryce's dialog box for smoothing 
importedpolVhhedron oh& 
111 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
~~~~~ 
- __ - 
figure5.41 Return from space 
Figure5.42 Satellite 
Terrains can also be built from DEM 
(Digital Elevation Module) files. DEM is the 
file format used by the US Geographical So- 
ciety for cataloguing topographical informa- 
tion. DEM files can be converted to greyscale 
image maps using a Shareware program 
called DEM View which is available for 
download from the Internet. Figure 5.38 
shows such an image map of an area west of 
Salt Lake City in Utah. Once created, the 
Figure 5.43 DEM data file converted to an image map 
of an area near Salt Lake City (1:250 000) 
112 

Virtual architecture and terrain 
image file can be imported into Bryce’s Terrain Editor where it can be used to recreate its 
topography on a terrain object within the Bryce working window. There, the terrain can be 
edited and manipulated like any other terrain object. Figures 5.44 and 5.45 show two differ- 
ent views of the Salt Lake City area topography created in this way / 
Figure5.44 An aerial view of Salt Lake City area 
created from the image map in Figure 5.43 
Figure5.45 A second view of the Salt Lake City area 
usinga different camera angleand a late eveningsky 
113 

This page intentionally left blank


Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Figure 6.1 Although relativelycrudein execution, these 
earliest ofportraits have powerful visual impact, with 
imaginative use of thelimited colours then available 
+:$$!+? 
ince the earliest beginnings 
4,. 
‘ 2 9  
of art, the portrait has been 
eb 
one of its most popular 
*I; ** 
:;>:;.$!?$:.,,, 
’#;.:.:.;’-..:,. 
..,,,, :: .--.,. :, 
X;i-,! 
examples, dating from early 
& 
.. .. 
a. - 
Egyptian, through Greek 
I!.. 
.a. 
0r.i. ab#$.-S- 
:* 
and Roman times and into 
the first millennium, often 
feature deities or idealised heroic subjects. Al- 
though the ravages of time and climate have 
left their mark, the examples which survive 
bear testimony to the skills of the earliest por- 
trait painters. 
While the religious influence remained 
strong into the Middle Ages, the range of sub- 
jects broadened to include noblemen and 
wealthy merchants, members of their families 
or other chosen subjects. The reason for this 
is twofold; firstly because over the centuries 
very few gifted artists were financially inde- 
pendent and they were therefore obliged to 
seek financial sponsorship from wealthy pa- 
trons; secondly because, in exchange for their 
patronage, these noblemen and merchants 
would often require the artist to paint their 
portraits in order to satisfy their own vanity. 
Portrait painting over the centuries has, 
of course, evolved and developed like other 
forms of art, reflecting the changing moods 
of the centuries in which they were created, 
the different styles of the artists and the use 
of different materials and techniques as these 
evolved. As well as creating a fascinating 
visual record of our early ancestors, these 
portraits form a priceless archive of the 
anthropological development of the various 
ethnic lines traced by man’s rapid evolution 
during the last few thousand years. 
s; 
-.,,:.a 
forms. The oldest surviving 
-*.. ....;* 
3 *. .p 
I (. 
4 t# \’ 
116 

The portrait 
Figure 6.2 
Many early works conveyreligious themes. These were ofien commissioned fordisplayin churches and cathedrals 
117 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Figure 6.3 As theportrait developed as an art form, so did the skill of theportrait artist in rendering the subtleties of bone 
structure, skin tone and shade 
118 

The portrait 
Figure 6.4 Many earlyportraits were commissioned by wealthymerchants, noblemen or church dignitaries 
In the realm of portrait painting, the digital artist has a wide 
range of possibilities, starting from the most basic line art construc- 
tion (Figure 6.5) created within a drawing application, using a com- 
bination of line, curve and shape tools. Closed vector shapes can be 
given simple colour fills (Figure 6.6) or more exotic gradient, texture 
or pattern fills. Quite powerful results can be achieved with the use 
of such basic tools to produce shaded or hand rendered effects 
(Figure 6.7). 
Drawing application blend tools also provide the possibility of 
more subtle effects, as shown in the example in Figure 6.8; here, the 
blend tool has been used to create a smooth shading to the cheeks 
and to the eyelids of the face, producing much more impact to the 
finished result than could be achieved with simple flat fills. 
Some drawing applications, such as Macromedia Freehand, also 
offer the option of using a stylus and tablet to use drawing tools in a 
pressure sensitive mode, so that lines of variable stroke can be drawn 
as the designer varies the pressure of the stylus. 
Portraits created in a drawing application have the advantage 
that individual lines and shapes can be easily selected for editing. 
Such drawings are fully scalable without loss of definition and they 
print well even on relatively low resolution printers. Although 
simple in construction, they can have strong visual impact and make 
excellent posters. 
Another approach is to exploit the editability of a drawing 
application to create the basic features of the portrait and then to 
import the result into a painting application, where it becomes trans- 
formed into a bitmap for further enhancement. 
Figure 6.5 
Basicline drawing 
Figure 6.6 
Colourenhancement usinga 
vector Hl tool 
119 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Figure 6.7 Vectordrawnportraits can begiven depth through the use offills, handrendered effects orshading 
G/ 
, '* 
"' 
1.- 
P , 
I 
Figure 6.8 
Enhancement ofa vectorportrait using blends. The finalresult (a) is shown broken-down into its shape elements (b) and (c). 
(d)showshow theshadingofthecheeksand theeyelids wasachieved byusingtwo lostep blends between shapessUed with 
solid colour 
120 

The portrait 
Using a combination of the precision drawing tools offered by 
applications like Freehand, Illustrator, CorelDRAW or Designer, 
together with the glittering array of brush styles and painting tech- 
niques offered by the leading bitmap painting application Fractal 
Painter, there are few traditional portrait styles which cannot be emu- 
lated by the skilled digital designer or artist. However, while repro- 
ducing such styles represents an interesting technical challenge, the 
exciting thing about the digital medium is that it offers the opportu- 
nity to create unique and striking effects which would be difficult if 
not impossible using traditional methods. The aim of this chapter is 
t.o explore just a few of these effects in the examples which follow. 
Tonal control effects 
Interesting results can be obtained by using the tonal controls 
available in Photoshop or Painter. Figure 6.9 shows, for example, the 
use of Photoshop’s Hue/Saturation/Colorize controls to create a sepia 
image and the effect of changing the mode of a cutout of the image 
to Black and White and applying the Diffusion Dither option. 
1.11 
mzl 
Cancel I 
Pattern Dither 
* Dilfurion Dither 
I 
Halftone Screen 
Figure 6.9 Colorisingan orighal (a) to create a sepia effect (a) and using Diffusion Dither to create a hand rendered effect (c) 
121 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Other tonal controls which can produce dramatic changes in 
the appearance of an image are Threshold and Curves. After placing 
the image (a) in Figure 6.10 in Photoshop, Image/Map/Threshold was 
selected, opening the dialog box in (d). The effect of Threshold, as the 
name implies, is to convert all the pixels in an image either to black 
or to white, depending on which side of a greyscale threshold they 
fall. By adjusting the slider in the dialog box, the threshold setting 
giving the optimum contrast effect can be chosen (b). To produce the 
variant shown in (c), image (a) was duplicated and Image/Adjust/Curves 
was selected, opening the dialog box in (e). The x-axis of the graph 
represents the brightness values of the pixels in the original image; 
the y-axis represents the new brightness values. The default diago- 
nal line shows the starting relationship between the input and out- 
put values, with no pixels mapped to new values. Manipulating the 
shape of the curve in the dialog box causes selective changes in bright- 
ness, producing the solarised result shown in (c). 
Figure 6.10 Appljohg meshold to an originalimage (a) to create a bold, black and white contrast (b) and using Curves to 
create a drama tic solansed effect (c) 
122 

The portrait 
The posterisation technique - so-called because it produces an 
image using very few colours, or tints of the same colour, in the style 
of early silk-screened publicity posters - can produce some interest- 
ing portrait effects. The Posterise command in painting applications 
allows the user to specify the number of tonal levels (or brightness 
values) for an image and then maps pixels to the level that is the 
closest match. In the example shown below (Figure 6.11), a 3 level 
posterisation was applied to the image in (a) in Photoshop to pro- 
duce the result in (b), a 3 level posterisation offering a maximum of 
ten colours, compared with the millions of colours in the RGB origi- 
nal. To simplify the result even further, Photoshop’s Dust & Scratches 
filter was applied to image (b) to produce image (c). Although the 
normal purpose of this filter is to remove defects from scanned pho- 
tographic images, it was used in this case to remove the graininess of 
the posterised image. Such an image can easily be traced in a draw- 
ing application, where it can be scaled, without loss of resolution, for 
silkscreen printing. The same applies to the greyscale example in (d). 
G Pr- 
I 
Figure 6.11 Posterisinga colourimage: (a) orignal, (b) 3levelposterisation, (c) afler applying Dust & Scratches filter and (d) 
after conversion togreyscale; (e) and (4 show thePosterize and Dust & Scratches dialog boxesrespec%vely 
123 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Painting styles 
Starting with a photograph or original portrait painting, Fractal 
Painter offers a wide range of editing possibilities. The original por- 
trait can either be reproduced, via Painter’s cloning feature, using 
cloning brushes which emulate the style of, for example, the Impres- 
sionists or can be recreated using any of Painter’s wide range of draw- 
ing and painting tools. The original painting in Figure 6.12(a) was 
cloned three times; painting in the cloned images, using Painter’s 
Artist clone brushes produced the results in (b) using the Impression- 
iststyle, (c) using the Seurat style and (d) using the Van Gogh style. 
The results in Figure 6.13 were obtained using four of Painter’s 
other specific cloning tools: (a) used the Melt Cloner, in Soft Cover mode; 
(b) used the DrivingXain Clonerin Soft Covermode; (c) used the Chalk 
Clonerin GrainyHard Covermode and (d) used the FeItPen CIonerin 
Grainy Hard Cover mode. 
As stated above, any of Painter’s range of brushes can be used 
in clone mode either individually or in combination. Figure 6.14 shows 
the effect of cloning an original (a) using one of Painter’s special ef- 
fects brushes FDFire (b), while the result in (c) was obtained using a 
combination of the Spirexbrush in Comb mode to paint in the flowing 
lines of the hair and then the Airbrush in Clone mode to add the soft 
focus image of the face. When the objective is to clone a specific por- 
tion of the original image, then a ’ghost’ of the original can be dis- 
played in the clone window for guidance as shown in (d). For further 
guidance the optional non-printing grid shown can be switched on. 
t 
1 
(a) Original 
(b) Impressionist 
(c) Seurat 
(d) Van Gogh 
Figure 6.12 UsingPainter’s Arfistcloningbrushes torecreate an originalpainting(a) in a numberofaltemativestyles- 
(b) Impressionist, (c) Seurat and (d) Van Gogh 
124 

The portrait 
(a) Melt 
(b) Driving Rain 
(c) Chalk 
(d) Felt Pen 
Figure 6.13 Examples of Painter's other cloning brushes 
Figure 6.14 
Using Painter's tracing facility 
(a) Original 
(c) W e d  cloning 
(d) Tracingwindow 
125 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
(a) Original 
Applyingsurface control 
As well as applying a variety of different brush ef- 
fects using cloning brushes, Painter provides the means 
of editing the appearance of all or a selected part of a 
portrait using what it calls surface controls. Figure 6.15 
shows two examples. Placing the image (a) in Painter 
and then selecting Effects/Surface control/Apply surface tex- 
ture opens the dialog box in Figure 6.16. The dialog box 
offers the user a number of ways in which to edit the 
image (or preselected portion of the image). The Using 
dialog offers a number of options, including Using Im- 
age Luminance. 
Image luminance uses the portrait's luminance to 
determine where to add surface texture, creating an 
embossed effect at the edges of the imagery as shown in 
(b). The Softness slider controls the transitions in texture, 
increasing softness creating more intermediate steps and 
a smoother distortion. Picture controls the amount of 
colour in the image - at 10070, the full colour of the pic- 
ture shines through. Amount controls how much surface 
texture is applied to the image. Shine controls the high- 
lights. Reflection can be used to map a clone source on to 
the surface at a variable percentage. 
(b) Usingimageluminance 
(c) Usingsurface texture 
F'rewew 
Figure 6.15 
Surface confrolin Painter 
Figure 6.16 
Painter's Surface Control dialog box 
126 

The portrait 
Creatinga mosaic 
Some of the oldest surviving portraits from Greek and Roman 
times were created with the use of mosaics - a medium more endur- 
ing than most others in use at the time. Painter provides a twentieth 
century means of producing mosaic patterns. Figure 6.17 shows three 
simple examples. The method can also be applied to a scanned pho- 
tograph or painted portrait by simply applying tiles to the image or 
selected parts of the image. After selecting the target image in Figure 
6.18(a), the style of tile was selected from the Usingdropdown menu 
in the Custom Tile dialog box (b), which was opened by clicking Ef- 
fecfsEsoterica. Sliders and a colour swatch provide the means of 
manipulating the tile characteristics and the colour of the 'grout' 
between the tiles. The result is shown in (c). 
More sophisticated techniques - in which the tiles can be made 
to conform to the colour and shading of the underlying image - called 
Make Mosaicand Make Tesselation allow users to design imagery in the 
style of historic tile mosaics starting with a blank canvas or working 
from an existing painting or cloned photograph. Tiles can either be 
'painted' directly on to the canvas, where they remain selectable and 
editable as the design proceeds, or painted over an underlying im- 
age. The Make Tesselation tool creates tile inlay patterns which can be 
made to conform to the shape and colour of a cloned underlying 
image. 
After a mosaic has been created, it can be given a three-dimen- 
sional appearance and/or further edited using Painter's other brush 
tools. Figure 6.19 shows an example in which the same Photo CD 
image shown in Figure 6.18 was first cloned and then Make Tesselation 
was selected from the Canvas menu. After choosing the Pieces option 
from the Display dropdown menu (a), 500 points were added 
Figure 6.17 
Simple tile examples 
Bn b Wt i
y
d
i
 
h 
B n c ~  - 
L'r,-, 
~ a n c e l  1 
/,-\ 
I 
I 
1 c/ 
J 
Y 
Figure 6.18 ApplyingPainter's Custom Tiles to an image 
127 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
I o 
Points 
[ Done 1 I 
Click in Image to Add Tiles 
I 
-1 
- 
Grout 
r IJse Tracing Paper 
4 
Tiles 
'-1 
Figure 6.19 UsingPain ter's Make Tesselation and Make Mosaic options to tile an image 
automatically to the cloned image, distributed according to the lumi- 
nance of the clone source, lighter regions receiving a greater density 
of points, and so smaller polygons. Setting the check box in the col- 
our palette (b) to use Clone Color, meant that the colour of the tiles 
was picked up from the colours in the original image. Additional tiles 
were added by hand in the areas of greater detail and, using the op- 
tions in the Make Mosaic dialog box (c), final editing was carried out. 
The resulting mosaic is shown in (d). The result in (e) was obtained 
by overlaying the original image on top of the mosaic, with an opac- 
ity of 50%. The result in (f), giving the tiles a three-dimensional look, 
was obtained by rendering the tiles into a mask, using a command 
available from the Make Mosaic dialog box and then applying surface 
texture, choosing Mosaic Mask from the Usingmenu. 
128 

The portrait 
Appl'g 
Hters 
With each new release of painting and photoediting applica- 
tions like Photoshop and Painter, the number of plug-in filters in- 
creases, offering effects ranging from the sublime to the truly bizarre. 
Many of them are unsuitable for use in the editing of portraits, but a 
few of those which can produce interesting results are shown in Fig- 
ure 6.20. In all cases the Magic Wand tool was used to select just the 
face in the original (a) and then the filter was applied. The Notepaper 
filter (b) produces a textured greyscale effect. The Crystallize filter (c) 
produces an interesting Pointillist effect. The Mezzotint filter offers a 
range of mezzotint styles - (d) uses short horizontal lines. The Em- 
boss filter dialog provides control over the depth of embossing and 
light direction (e), while Difference Clouds (f) produces an interesting 
solarised result f 
' 
\ 
(a) Original 
(b) Gallery Effects Notepaper 
(c) Crystallize 
%
*
 
,.7* 
(e)Emboss 
J 
Id) Mezzotint 
 difference Clouds 
Figure 6.20 Using filters to create special effects 
129 

This page intentionally left blank


Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Figure Z 1 
FLintknapping 
Figure 7.2 
Limestone figurine 
Figure 7.3 
Sphinx and Middle pyramid 
OfKingKhepren 
he word sculpture derives from the Latin sculpere, 
to carve - a skill which can be traced back two mil- 
lion years to the Paleolithic period, when early 
humanoids first chipped pebbles and stones to 
form primitive tools and weapons. During the 
Mesolithic and Neolithic periods the skill of carv- 
ing developed, as the special properties of flint 
were discovered and exploited for the production 
of hand axes and knives (Figure 7.1). In turn, these tools were used 
for the carving of bone implements. 
The earliest objects sculpted from ivory, horn, bone, or stone 
for artistic, as opposed to practical, purposes date back about 30 000 
years, like a small ivory horse found in a cave in Germany and small 
female figurines like the Venus of Willendorf, carved out of limestone. 
Such figurines, which are characterised by an exaggerated female 
anatomy (Figure 7.2), are thought to represent fertility goddesses. 
Among the oldest surviving Egyptian sculptures, dating from 
about 3000 BC, is a piece of slate carved in low relief, known as the 
Palette of King Narmer, portraying kings, soldiers and various ani- 
mals. On a grander scale, the pyramids (Figure 7.3) and sphinxes of 
Egypt date from a similar period. Like much early sculpture, the 
sphinxes symbolised deities, combining the body of a lion and the 
head of some other animal, or the likeness of a king. 
Aegean art developed the use of terracotta and ivory for the 
sculpting of statuettes of goddesses, while the Greeks raised the tech- 
nique of stone carving (Figure 7.4) to a new plane, creating some of 
the greatest sculpture of the human form in the last few centuries BC. 
..my*. 
'I . 
....'.. 
' 
> 
I
.
 
132 

Digital sculpture 
Figure Z 4 
Afinelycarvedstonemaskdepicfingthe GodZeus 
(Museum of Olppia, Greece) 
In modern terms, sculpture can be defined as three-dimensional 
art concerned with the organisation of masses and volumes, subdi- 
viding into the two principal categories of freestanding sculpture in 
the round and relief sculpture, which itself is an extension of the col- 
lage technique in painting (Pablo Picasso used paper and other for- 
eign materials pasted on to canvas and also made three-dimensional 
objects such as musical instruments from paper and scraps of diverse 
materials). 
Sculpture can be made from almost any organic or inorganic 
substance including marble, bronze, clay, wood, glass and epoxy-resin 
using the processes of carving, modelling and casting. While carving 
is a subtractive process in which the artist subtracts, or cuts away, 
superfluous material until the desired form is reached, modelling is 
an additive process in which the artist uses soft and malleable mate- 
rial to build up form. Casting, using a material like bronze (Figure 
7.5), provides the most durable result. In casting, an impression or 
negative mould is formed from the original (usually clay) model and 
then a positive reproduction is made of the original work from the 
negative impression. 
Since the Industrial Revolution, the field of sculpture has been 
broadened by new techniques like welding and extrusion and mate- 
rials as diverse as neon tubing and even used car parts. 
As in other artistic domains, there were those quick to recog- 
nise and exploit sculpture’s commercial possibilities. While the mag- 
figureZ5 BrOmeCaSfing 
133 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
nificent cathedrals of the Middle Ages contained works by the great sculptors of the time, it 
was the combined skills of the stonemason and the architect which were responsible for the 
structures themselves. 
In a sense, the reverse has been true in the digital world. The development of hardware 
and software needed to create and manipulate objects in three-dimensional space has been 
driven by the world of commerce. In many industries, for example in the design and manu- 
facture of aircraft or motor cars, the ability to create and refine 
digital models in three dimensions offers huge savings in 
money and time over conventional clay modelling tech- 
niques - savings which are multiplied when the de- 
sign software is used to drive numerically control- 
led machine tools to produce parts and control 
assembly. Now it is the turn of the digital sculp- 
tor to seize the initiative and to adapt the com- 
mercial hardware and software for more artistic 
Earlier, we looked at how drawing and paint- 
ing applications could be used to create digital ar- 
explore what other possibilities are opening up for 
the budding digital sculptor. 
chitecture and terrains. In this chapter we shall 
dn'ven by engineering design opportunities 
While three-dimensional applications like RayDream Studio, Extreme 3D and Bryce 
offer the greatest opportunities, drawing and painting applications do offer some possibili- 
ties, as shown in Figures 7.7 and 7.8, which show how the use 
of simple shading and blends can produce powerful sculpted 
effects. Even without shading (Figure 7.9), a skilled designer 
can produce a 'carved' effect from only 
a line drawing. 
-\ 
---.. 
purposes. 
w 
Earholidmodefiginvestmentwas 
-, 
I 
( 
Figure 7.8 
Using blends to create a 
carvedeffed 
Figure 7.7 Sculptinga surface with solid fills 
134 

Digital scu I ptu re 
\ 
a 
Figure 7.9 
A line drawing (below) ofMount Rushmore (above) 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Cancd I 
R ereview 
figure 710 Embossingin Photoshop 
In Photoshop or Painter, filters can be 
used to create simple embossed effects. In the 
example shown in Figure 7.10, a suitably pa- 
trician clipart head (a) was imported via the 
clipboard to Photoshop, where the Noise fil- 
ter (b) was applied (Gaussian Distribution, 
Amount 20) to give it some texture. The Em- 
boss filter (c) was then applied using a height 
of 3 pixels and an angle of incidence of 135O, 
giving the result shown in (d). 
A more convincing result can be ob- 
tained using Photoshop's RenderLighting Ef- 
fects filter. Starting again with the imported 
clipart image in Figure 7.10(a), a copy of the 
image was made and pasted into a new im- 
age channel. The copy in the channel was 
given a Gaussian Blur of 2 pixels - Figure 
7.11(a) - and then noise was applied to the 
channel, using the same parameters as in Fig- 
ure 7.10(b). Returning to the RGB channel, 
the XenderLightingeffects filter was selected, 
opening the Lighting Effects dialog box in Fig- 
ure 7.11(b). The channel containing the modi- 
fied copy of the image - Channel #4 - was 
selected from the Texture Channel dropdown 
menu and an Omnilightwas chosen from the 
Light type menu, producing the result shown 
in Figure 7.11(c). 
I I  
1-1 
Figure 7.11 Appljing Lighting Effectsin Photoshop 
136 

Digital scu I ptu re 
Although dropped from later releases, Micrografx Designer 4.0 
includes a simple feature for producing and manipulating three- 
dimensional primitives. These can be rendered with either a smooth 
finish or as faceted wireframes. Figure 7.12(a) shows examples of fac- 
eted rendering. Figure 7.12(b) shows a library of shapes available and 
the buttons provided to adjust object rotation, shading, precision and 
lighting controls. Simple forms can be stretched, scaled, skewed or 
distorted, after conversion to curves, using Designer’s drawing tools. 
They can also be assembled and grouped as in Figure 7.13. More or- 
ganic shapes can be created by importing Designer’s objects into 
Painter and applying warp effects to them as in Figure 7.14. 
Shading 
\ 
12 
(a) Original 
controi 
(b) 
Library of 
three-dimensional shapes 
Creating3Dprimitives in Designer 4.0 
s*l* F.cra m
i
3
 
-3 3 
i’ Sphere 
i.‘ Swri 
r Gump 
i’ Ripple 
C Valley 
Cancel I 1
0
1
.
1
 
Ftewew 
(b) Painter‘s Quick Warp dialog box 
(d) Swirl effect 
Figure 7.13 
Agroupedassembly 
(c) Ripple effect 
Figure7.14 Warpinga 3Dobjectin Painter 
137 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
w 
Figure 7.3 5 
~ 
Designer 4.0 also provides the means of 
’lathing’ objects, i.e. creating objects as if 
turned on a lathe. To produce a lathed object, 
a path is first created using any, or a combi- 
nation, of Designer’s drawing tools. Apply- 
ing Designer’s Lathe tool then turns the path 
360° around a specified axis. Once created, a 
lathed object can be coloured, rotated and lit 
using the tools in Figure 7.12(b). Figure 7.15(a) 
shows an example of such an object. Because 
it is object oriented, it can also be ungrouped 
and disassembled into three-dimensional 
subcomponents as in Figure 7.15(b). 
To produce more complex objects, to 
which realistic surface effects can be applied, 
we have to move on to applications designed 
specifically for three-dimensional work. As 
we saw in Chapter 5, MetaCreations’ Bryce, 
as well as providing its main function of cre- 
ating terrains, offers the use of Boolean alge- 
braic operations of Addition, Subtraction and 
Difference to combine standard primitives like 
spheres and cubes, to provide new compound 
shapes. Figure 7.16 shows the Bryce palette 
of primitives, ranging from the rock on the 
left through spheres, toroids, cylinders, pyra- 
mids etc. Any object or group of objects can 
Figure 7.16 Bryce’s Objedspalette 
Figure 7.17 Setting ObjectAttributes 
ject when grouped with any other. For objects 
to interact in this way, they have to be as- 
signed Boolean object attributes from the 
dialog box shown in Figure 7.17. Grouping 
two objects with positive attributes unites 
them into a single object. Grouping a nega- 
tive object with a positive one simulates the 
flintknapping process, with the negative ob- 
ject acting as a tool to carve material out of 
the positive one. By altering the size and 
shape of the ’cutting’ object, precise control 
of the carving process can be achieved. 
If Intersect is selected as an object’s 
Boolean attribute, the space that is common 
to both objects will be the only material 
visible when the objects render. 
Quite complex objects can be con- 
138 

Digital scu I ptu re 
structed with compound Booleans. For example, a hollow cylinder 
can be made out of a grouped positive and negative cylinder; a 
Boolean property can then be assigned to that group, such as nega- 
tive, and that shape used to cut a circle thr0ugh.a cube and so on. 
Figures 7.18 to 7.21 show some examples of Boolean objects created 
in this way. 
Figure 7.18 shows the result of aligning a sphere within a cube 
in Bryce space and then giving the cube a positive attribute and the 
Figure Z 18 
Boolean subtraction -cuttings sphere from a cube 
Figure Z 19 
Boolean subtraction -cuttings cube from a sphere 
Figure 7.20 
Boolean intersection (lefi) and compound effect (right) 
CONSTRUCTIONPROCEDURE-Figure 7.18 
1. 7'hegroundplane wasselectedandbeven a flatgrey 
2. Thesphere on tlie let? was positioned so that its centre 
3. Tliecube was@m aptsitiveah'buteand then a 
4. Thesphere wasgeven a negativeatbibute 
5. The two items weregouped, so that the negative 
texture 
coincided wit11 tlia t o f  the cube 
wood texture was applied toit 
sphere was LU t ou t of the positive ci~be, &Giving the 
result on tlie right 
CONSTRUCTTONPROCEDURE- Figure 7.19 
1. Thegroundplane wasselected andgiven aflatpink 
texture 
2. The sphere on the left was given a positive a th'bu te, a 
marble texture aid aligned with the cubeas before 
3 .  Thecube wasgivenan negativeaftn'bute 
4. The twoitems weregrouped, so that thenegative 
cube wascutoiitofthepo)sitivesphere,gi~n~the 
result on the right 
CONSTRUCTIONPROCEDURE - Figure 7.W 
1. Theresulton theleft was obtained bygiving the cube 
an intersection attributeand tlie sphereapositive 
attributeanda marble texture, so that, when grouped, 
only the common space occupied by both objects was 
m d d  
negative cylinders, lying along the x-, y- and z-axes, 
were aligned with an unkxtured copy of the objecton 
theleftand therigrouped 
2. To obtain the result on the right, three identical 
139 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
sphere a negative attribute. Figure 7.19 shows the result of reversing 
the attributes of the sphere and the cube, while Figure 7.20 shows, 
on the left, how use of the Intersect attribute leaves only the material 
occupied in common by the two intersecting objects. The example 
on the right of the figure is a compound Boolean object created by 
subtracting three negative cylinders from an untextured copy of the 
Boolean group on the left. In turn, further operations could now be 
applied to this new group to produce even more complex objects. 
Figure 7.21 shows how more dramatic compositions can be cre- 
ated by the application of more exotic materials to Boolean groups 
which can then be set against sky or other backgrounds. The object 
on the left was created by grouping a positive cylinder and negative 
torus. The more complex object on the right involved three construc- 
tion steps. First, a hemisphere was created by grouping a negative 
cylinder with a sphere of same radius, then the hemisphere was 
grouped with an inverted cone; finally, that result was grouped with 
a negative torus. 
Figure 7.21 Setting off Booleangroups againsta Bryce Sky background 
140 

Digital sculpture 
As we saw in Chapter 5, Bryce can also import three-dimen- 
sional objects which have been saved in DXF format. Figures 7.22 
and 7.23 show two such examples. In the first, a Buckminster Fuller- 
like geodesic sphere was imported and transformed into a many fac- 
eted crystal ball, by applying a glass texture. Adding a sky background 
and an ocean ground plane, together with a highlight position al- 
lows a complex interplay of reflection and refraction to produce an 
almost surreal result. 
Imported objects can be duplicated, scaled and positioned to 
form three-dimensional groups. Figure 7.23 shows such an example 
using a model of a tiger. The polygonal surface was left unsmoothed 
to give the tigers a chiselled look. Different textures were applied to 
each tiger and a reflective ground plane was added for effect. 
Figure 7.22 
Usingan imported object to create a scene 
Figure 7.23 
Creating a group with imported objects 
CONSTRUCTION PROCEDURE - Figure 7.23 
141 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Available three-dimensional models include human figures 
which can be posed and then imported to Bryce. Figure 7.24 shows a 
figure imported from Extreme 3D. Like other polygonal objects, fig- 
ures can be smoothed or left in faceted form and, within Bryce, can 
be scaled and rotated to any position. Ground planes can be textured 
and skies can be added to provide a range of background effects. 
Figures can also be created, posed and imported from Fractal's 
Poser application which is specifically designed to position human 
figures with great precision and anatomical accuracy. The Poser model 
in Figure 7.25 strikes a pose reminiscent of Miche1angelo"s David 
(Accademia, Florence, Italy) although the silver finish applied in Bryce 
is more akin to an Oscar trophy without hair! 
1 
I 
Figure 7.24 
Smoothedand unsmoothedimportedfigures 
Figure 7.25 
Figureimported from Fractal Poser 
142 

Digital sculpture 
As well as placing complete three-dimensional models within a 
Bryce scene, DXF models can be ungrouped and individual elements 
can be used in compositions. Figure 7.26 achieves a dramatic effect 
by partially submerging an imported head below the surface of a ter- 
rain. The use of similar textures for the head and terrain, and the 
addition of a warm golden sky, unites the elements, while the reten- 
tion of the polyhedron form of the head gives it a carved, sculptured 
appearance. 
Figure 7.27 illustrates another powerful feature of Bryce - the 
use of bitmapped images within a three-dimensional scene. To pro- 
.duce this result, a copy of the Mount Rushmore image in Figure 7.9 
Figure 7.26 
Blendingobjecb into a background 
CONSTRUCTIONPROCEDURE - Figure 7.26 
I 
. 
D .  
I 
Figure 7. 27 
Using a bitmap within a 3Dsetting 
143 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Figure 7728 
Welcome to HoUywood 
was imported into a new file via the Picture 
dialog box shown alongside the figure (see 
top left thumbnail in Figure 7.27). A copy of 
the image's alpha channel, which isolated the 
blue sky area of the image, was also imported 
(see inset and second thumbnail) and the two 
images were combined (see third thumbnail) 
before placing in the scene. The purpose of 
the mask is to allow the selected Bryce sky to 
replace just the sky area in the original image 
and to prevent it showing through the rest 
of the image. After selecting a dark sky, a new 
terrain was positioned in front of the bitmap 
image to enhance the illusion of depth and 
given a stony texture. 
Unlike some other three-dimensional 
applications, Bryce does not provide the 
means of creating text characters, but these 
can be imported as DXF files and then ma- 
nipulated within a scene. An example of this 
is shown in Figure 7.28; the text was prepared 
in RayDream Studio (see dialog box below 
right) and saved as a single object in DXF for- 
mat. A new terrain was placed in Bryce where 
it was scaled and textured. The ground plane 
which appears behind the mountain was 
given a texture which simulates a low-rise city 
backdrop and a sky was added with high 
clouds and a haze on the horizon. The text 
object from RayDream Studio was next im- 
ported, scaled, placed in position on the 
mountainside and given a reflective grey- 
white texture. 
Imported text objects can also be used 
to create convincing stone engraving effects 
by making the text object negative and cut- 
ting the text out of a flat positive Boolean sur- 
face, or embossed effects by making the text 
object positive and then giving it, say, a mar- 
ble or metal texture and then grouping it with 
a positive Boolean surface to which the same 
marble or metal texture has been applied. 
We have seen how primitive objects in 
Bryce can be 'sculpted' by means of Boolean 
144 

Digital scu I ptu re 
operations and how objects created in other applications can be im- 
ported and used in constructing scenes. To find the means of creat- 
ing three-dimensional forms of a more complex nature, however, we 
have to look beyond Bryce at, for example, RayDream Studio or Ex- 
treme 3D. Such applications offer the user processes like extrusion, 
lathing, skinning and pipelining to create solid or hollow objects or 
flowing, three-dimensional surfaces. Shapes modelled using these 
techniques can be edited down to the level of nodes on individual 
outlines, providing the designer with virtual 'digital clay' which can 
be manipulated with a precise level of control. 
The few examples which follow are intended only to give a 
briefest glimpse into the possibilities offered by such techniques. In 
the first (Figure 7.29), a profile was first drawn in Illustrator (a) and 
imported into RayDream Studio, where a Symmetrical extrusion win- 
dow was chosen from the Geometrybox and the profile was extruded 
(b); a node point was then added to the extrusion profile (blue lines 
on drawing plane in the Perspective box) and dragged to give the 
extrusion a fishtail appearance. A metallic surface finish was then 
applied to the extrusion and the result was rendered (c). 
In the second example (Figure 7.30), Studio's lathing feature 
was used to lathe a path created on the drawing plane (the blue line 
in (a). Applying a marble texture and rendering the object produced 
the result in (b). Re-rendering after rotation and after the application 
of a wood texture produced the result in (c). 
Figure 7.31 shows an example of the kind of result which can 
be obtained using the skinning process. Using the Create Multiple com- 
EXTRUDING 
Applying a three- 
dimensional appearance 
to a selected object by 
adding surfaces to it. 
L A T m G  
A technique for creating 
a three-dimensional 
object with axial 
symmetry by fjrst 
creating a two- 
dimensional outline and 
then rotating the outline 
around a specified axis. 
SKlNNING 
A three-dimensional 
modelling technique 
which simulates the 
stretching of a flexible 
skin over a series of 
cross-sectional shapes 
or formers. 
PIPELINING 
In the pipelining 
process - sometimes 
called a sweeping 
process - a single cross- 
section is extruded 
along a path. 
L. 
(b) 
Figure 7.29 Extrudingin RayDream Studio 
145 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
mand from Studio's Sections menu a number of cross-sections can be 
placed along the length of an extrusion. Each cross-section can be 
selected and its shape can be edited. Its positions on the extrusion 
path can also be adjusted by dragging the corresponding point along 
the extrusion profile. Cross-sections can be filled or unfilled; in the 
latter case, the result looks as if a surface or skin has been stretched 
over a series of cross-sectional formers, hence the name skinning. 
Figure 7.31(a) shows an extrusion with four cross-sections. (b) and (c) 
show two rotated and rendered copies of the result. 
Figure Z30 A lathed object 
Figure 731 Skinning 
146 

Digital sculpture 
In the pipelining process - sometimes called a sweeping pro- 
cess - a single cross-section is extruded along a path. In Figure 7.32(a), 
after selecting Extrusion MethoaYF'ipeline from Studio's Geometry menu, 
a hexagonal cross-section has been extruded along the profile path 
shown on the right hand plane of the Perspective box. The shape of 
the profile path can be edited using the Selection and Node-editing 
tools to refine the result. (b) and (c) show two rotated and rendered 
versions of the result. 
More complex results can be obtained by creating compound 
objects (Figure 7.33) or using preset functions (Figure 7.34). Figure 
7.33 shows the result of creating a profile consisting of two overlap- 
ping squares made into a compound object using Studio's Arrange/ 
Figure 7.33 
A mmpozmdStudioobject 
Figure 7.32 Pipelining 
Figure 7.34 
Using the Spiral preset 
147 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Combine as Compound command and then extruding the compound 
using GeometryBxtrusion PreseUorus. Figure 7.34 shows the effect of 
using Extrusion PreseVSpiral with eight turns to transform a simple 
circle into a three-dimensional spiral. Studio’s modelling tools can 
also be used to produce hollowed-out objects (Figure 7.35) and three- 
dimensional surfaces like the example in Figure 7.36. 
Using a combination of the tools and techniques described 
above, quite complex sculptured forms can be created. Figure 7.37(a) 
shows such an example - a likeness of Pegasus, the mythical winged 
horse. Deformers such as Stretch, Sha tter, Bend and Twist constitute a 
powerful class of three-dimensional manipulation tools to modify and 
twist objects and groups of objects. Figure 7.37 shows, for example, 
how the Twistdeformer, using the settings in dialog box (b), has been 
used to select and turn the head of the horse towards the viewer. 
.
.
 
(a) Headlookingdown 
*e 7.35 
A hollokd-out cuboid 
Figure 7.36 
A she,!-like surface 
J 
0’ 
I W l S t  
- 
Bend 
-7 
49’ 
Bend &IS 
-F 
-45’ 
Twist start 
J
-
 
0% 
Twlst gize 
Ji 
00% 
(c) Head twisting to righ t 
Figure7.37 Usingthe Twistdeformer to turn thehorse’shead 
148 

Digital scu I ptu re 
Extreme 3D offers the same processes of extrusion, lathing, skin- 
ning and pipelining as RayDream Studio, but provides even more 
detailed control over surface modelling by displaying the surface of 
an object as a matrix of spline-based control points, which can be 
manipulated by the designer. Figure 7.38 shows the effect of select- 
ing and dragging several of the nodes on a faceted spherical surface. 
The object in Figure 7.39 started life as a flat plane. The red dots cor- 
respond to the surface nodes, some of which were dragged up to 
create a terrain effect. Figure 7.40 shows the use of the same tech- 
nique on a modelled head. (a) shows the underlying polygonal struc- 
ture and (b) shows the node points corresponding to the polygon 
boundaries; selecting the group of nodes at the bottom of the chin 
figure 7.38 A node-edited sphere 
I
I
 
b
r
 
Figure7.39 Anode-editedplane 
figure7.40 Nodeeditingthemodelofa head 
149 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
and dragging down produced the elongation shown in (c). The elon- 
gation applied to all the nodes of the chin, not just those in a single 
plane, as shown when the head is rotated in (d). 
By its nature, the manipulation of digital three-dimensional 
shapes places extra demands on the imagination of the designer, who, 
unlike his traditional counterpart, is unable to walk around the piece 
under construction, and on the hardware being used, which must 
cope with the complex computational demands of a third dimension. 
Compared with drawing, painting and photoediting applications, 
which in a few short years have advanced rapidly, desktop three- 
dimensional applications are still at an early stage of refinement and 
an intuitive sculpting metaphor is still some way off. Already, how- 
ever, the pace of development is picking up and the continuing rapid 
advances in hardware development are pushing outwards the inte- 
gration of visualising, modelling and rendering to open up exciting 
new opportunities for the future fl 
150 


Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
om0 sapiensis identified, for purposes of anthro- 
pological classification, as an animal with a 
backbone and segmented spinal cord which is 
on the chest, with eyes at the front of the head 
equipped with five-digited extremities, a col- 
larbone, and a single pair of mammary glands 
and a proportionately large brain. 
Belonging to the family Hominidae, the 
details of skeletal structure distinguishing Homo sapiens from the near- 
est primate relatives - the gorilla, chimpanzee and orang-utan - stem 
largely from early adaptation to a completely erect posture and a two- 
footed striding walk. The S-shaped spinal column places the centre 
of gravity of the human body directly over the area of support pro- 
vided by the feet, giving stability and balance in the upright posi- 
tion. Other mechanical modifications for bipedalism include a broad 
pelvis, a locking knee joint, an elongated heel bone, and a length- 
ened and aligned big toe. 
The large brain of Homo sapiens is approximately double that of 
early human tool-makers, an increase which took two million years 
to achieve. Unlike the early human adult skull, with its sloping fore- 
head and prominent jaw, the modern human skull exhibits a high- 
rounded dome, straight-planed face and reduced jaw size. 
The discovery of the remains of Java Man in the 1890s gave im- 
pressive evidence of an extremely long process of human evolution 
(Figure 8.1), supported by the Leakey's discovery, during the 1960s, 
of a series of hominid fossils in Olduvai Gorge in East Africa. Fossil 
remains unearthed in the late 1970s and 1980s have provided further 
Figure 8.1 Evolution 
152 

The human figure 
evidence that, as long as three million years ago, the genus Homo co- 
existed in East Africa with other advanced man-ape forms known 
as Australopithecines. 
The weight of fossil evidence suggests that Africa is the prob- 
able centre of earliest human evolution, which spread later to Eu- 
rope and Asia. All humans living today are Homo (sapiens) sapiens and 
are descended from the same ancestors. Genetic features such as 
height and skin colour vary geographically, but the categorisation of 
people by 'race', into oriental, black, hispanic or white, is more a 
social than an anthropological statement. 
While the cave paintings of our prehistoric ancestors, discov- 
ered at 150 sites in western Europe left us a fascinating, if crude, record 
of the animals which roamed the Earth at that time, there are, sadly, 
few records of the cave dwellers themselves, although one painting 
at Lascaux in France depicts a dying hunter lying alongside a 
wounded bison. It is only from Ancient Egyptian times that pictorial 
records really begin, most notably in the form of amazingly well pre- 
served murals discovered in the sterile conditions deep inside the 
burial chambers of the Pharaohs and on the walls of great temples 
(Figure 8.2). Although simple in execution, these murals provide a 
rich archive of information about the physique and posture of some 
of our most ancient ancestors. Male figures in particular were given a 
strong, stylistic, geometric emphasis, with the shoulders and chest 
plane resembling an inverted triangle. 
In the centuries which followed, as we saw in the last chapter, 
the human figure has appeared in art of antiquity in many forms. 
The famous Winged Victoryfigure, now in the Louvre in Paris, dating 
from about 190 BC, is one of the most famous Greek sculptures from 
the Hellenistic period. Aphrodite of Melos, named by the French the 
' I Q  
. L  
. L  
.
.
 
Figure 8.2 Ancient Egyptian murals 
153 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Figure 8.3 
Greekdphm featured Gods 
and athletes 
Venus deMilo (see chapter title page) also dates from this Hellenistic 
period. The sculptor of this graceful and evocative work is unknown. 
The Greeks' mastery of stone carving and bronze casting cre- 
ated some of man's greatest statuary, with figures well proportioned 
and shown in movement. Gods and athletes were favourite sub- 
jects of this period (Figure 8.3). 
Though less creative than the Greeks, the Romans and, in par- 
ticular, the Etruscans, admired their work and mimicked their style, 
producing life-size figures of the Gods in terracotta and bronze. 
Through the eleventh and twelfth centuries and into the Gothic pe- 
riod, the skills of the sculptor spread across much of Europe, the 
majority of figures being produced to complement and enhance 
church architecture. 
The fifteenth and sixteenth centuries saw the emergence of 
two of the giants of creative art - Michelangelo and Leonard0 da 
Vinci. As both sculptor and painter, Michelangelo was still only in 
his twenties when he created one of the greatest works in the his- 
tory of art - the heroic figure of David (Figure 8.4). In 1505, 
Michelangelo was recalled to Rome by Pope Julius I1 to work on 
Vatican frescoes such as The Group of Blessed (Figure 8.5). Working 
high above the floor of the building, he created truly awesome im- 
ages which demonstrate a masterly understanding of human 
anatomy and fluidity of movement unsurpassed to this day. 
Figure8.4 Michelangelo's David 
Figure 8.5 Michelangelo's The Group of Blessed 
154 

The human figure 
The scientific studies of Leonardo da Vinci in the field 
of anatomy anticipated many of the developments of mod- 
ern science. One of his best known works - Proportions of 
Man - illustrates his study of the biological proportions of 
the male figure. Although much of his work has been de- 
stroyed, Leonardo’s many extant drawings reveal an ex- 
traordinary draftsmanship and mastery of the anatomy of 
both humans and animals. 
Figure 8.7 shows three paintings which exemplify this 
growing understanding of human biology. When combined 
with supreme artistic skill of the artists, such knowledge 
produced works of timeless beauty. 
In the centuries which followed, as tools, materials 
and techniques evolved, artists strove to produce studies 
of the human figure which were ever more accurate in their 
representation and more outspoken in their content, such 
as the painting of the Naked Maja in 1786 by the innovative 
Figure 8.6 Leonardo da Vinci’s 
l?ropo&ons ofMan 
Spanish painter Francisco de Goya (Figure 8.8). Goya preserved the 
impression of natural light by the elimination of minor shadows and 
the representation of areas of light rather than details of form. Much 
of the art of the great nineteenth-century French masters like Edouard 
Manet and the twentieth-century genius Pablo Picasso was taken from 
Goya. 
In more recent work, like that of the French Impressionist Pierre- 
Auguste Renoir (1841-1919) and Postimpressionist painter Paul 
Gauguin (1848-1903), the pendulum has swung away from accuracy 
of representation. Gauguin’s figures in particular display flat, brightly 
coloured, two-dimensional forms in a style vjhich formed the basis 
of what we now call modern art. 
Figure8.7 Masteryoflineandlight 
Mchelangelo’s Studio di Nudo (left and centre) and Andrea Man tegna’s Man Laying on a Stone Slab (right) 
155 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Figure 8.8 
Goyas Naked Maja (lefi), Renoir's Young Girl Ba thing (centre) and Gauguin's Two Figures on a Tahitian Beach (right) 
I
I
 
4, 
As well as studying and learning from 
the works of the Masters, the digital designer 
would do well to emulate Leonard0 da Vinci 
by studying the human form; understanding 
its natural dimensions and especially the 
muscular and bone structures which con- 
strain the body's movements. 
Figure 8.9 shows, on the left, simple line 
drawings of front and side views of Homo 
sapiens. In the centre we can see how the mus- 
cle system within the body is configured, 
while, on the right, we can see the underly- 
ing bone structure. More detail, of course, can 
be found in medical treatises. 
In a sense, digital figure drawing began 
a little bit like cave drawing - with crude 
drawing tools capable of producing only the 
most rudimentary of results, like the simple 
'line and fill' graphics shown in Figure 8.10. 
Perhaps we should protect this early digital 
heritage against a future nuclear holocaust by 
painting facsimiles on the walls of some of 
our deeper potholes! 
As digital tools improved and the de- 
veloping technology began to attract the at- 
and quality of results which could be obtained 
broadened considerably. 
2 
2 t' 
$1 J: 
!pT 
B
'
 
& 
;I? 
't., 
ypp/ 
2 
\ .\ 
I 
tention of more skilful designers, the range 
Figure8.9 Muscleand bonestructure 
156 

The human figure 
Figure 8.10 shows a range of figures cre- 
ated using contrasting techniques which, al- 
though visually simple, convey a surprising 
fluidity of motion, while the figures in Fig- 
ure 8.11 show how well-drawn and filled sil- 
houettes can achieve a high impact. 
Figure 8.12 (top row) shows a nice ex- 
ample of how the same basic line drawn fig- 
ure can be posed in different styles, using a 
combination of B6zier drawing tools and 
node editing. The use of shadingadds a sim- 
ple posterised effect. The figures in the lower 
Figure810 Basicsilhouettes and outlines 
row illustrate how the 
duce graceful movement 
I, 
* .  
'-, 
skilled designer can intro- 
A' 
A: 
,. 7,. 
*' 
into a simple line drawing. 
/F 
1' 
A \ '  
.. 
range of stylised examples 
-_ 
1 
t
.
 
. -  
I
\
 
A 4  
6.F 
I 
ii 
I
.
 
K b  -h c' 
, 4  
?.>, 
I 
Figure 8.13 shows a 
', 
/ 
from svelte mannequin to 
sumo wrestler. 
reversal or even the limited 
use of shading can add to 
the impact of a simple draw- 
ing. 
Finally, Figure 8.15 shows the transfor- 
mation which occurs with the use of colour 
to produce, in this case, a series of easily rec- 
ognised national figures. 
, '  
+;'. 
*?+* 
Figure 8.14 shows how 
' 3 %  
%& 
+ 
,' 2, 
Figure 8.11 A little more style 
Figure8.12 Movementandgrace 
157 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Figure 8.13 A variety of styles 
Figure 8.14 Using fills 
Figure 8.15 Figures from around the world 
158 

The human figure 
As we saw in the last chapter, it is possible to create figures 
within three-dimensional applications like RayDream Designer, but 
until later releases offer more intuitive sculpting tools, such as digital 
chisels, drills and rasps, an easier way is to use Fractal's Poser - an 
application designed exclusively for posing three-dimensional 
figures . 
Poser offers three basic anatomies - an adult male, an adult fe- 
male and a child (Figure 8.16). Any one or any combination of these 
can be displayed and saved in a choice of seven modes - Silhouette, 
Outline, Wirehame, Hidden Line, Lit Wirehame, 
Flat Shaded or Rendered. A classic mannequin 
is also available. Figure 8.17 shows some ex- 
amples. A Tools palette (Figure 8.18) provides 
a range of tools which are used to manipu- 
late whole figures or body parts and to adjust 
camera and lighting settings. 
A Poser figure has nineteen separately 
adjustable body parts. In Pose mode individual 
body parts can be selected and manipulated 
to alter their position or size, to bend an arm 
or turn a head or twist a hand. Poser uses In- 
verse Kinematics - a technique which creates 
hidden links between the body parts so that 
if one part, e.g. a hand, is moved, then the 
forearm and upper arm move with it in a 
natural way. 
Body mode freezes the posture and allows 
control of the model so that it can be moved 
or scaled as a single object. 
Figure8.16 Lit Wireframe examples of adult female, child 
and adult male figures 
Figure8.17 Lit Wirefame (left) andrendered (right) examplesofPoseradultmalefiguredisplayedas (fromleft toright) Stick 
figure, Mannequin, Skeleton and Normal 
159 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Camera mode permits adjustment of the view in the main win- 
dow (Figure 8.19). The Main Camera provides a perspective view while 
the Front, Top and Side cameras provide orthographic views. The Fo- 
cal Length tool changes the 'lens' of the Main Camera to adjust the 
sense of perspective. Figure 8.20 shows other camera adjustments. 
Light mode is used to colour and aim lights to illuminate the 
figures. Poser provides three distant light sources which can be 
edited independently of each other. Figure 8.21 shows the lighting 
adjustment panel. 
Bumpmaps and textures can be applied to body surfaces (Fig- 
ure 8.22) to create 'clothes' or just to apply interesting effects. As well 
as specifying whether bumpmaps and textures should be used when 
rendering, the Render dialog box (Figure 8.23) allows choice of back- 
ground colour and specification of whether shadows should be 
rendered. 
figure 8.19 Poser's main figure editing window 
[] 
1 Male Muscle 1-1 
Load 1 
Texture 
Strenqt 
, ,*1 
111, 
1 
j 
i? AppI, teRurti ta high1 g?t 
Otlrcl Color 
Highlight Color 
Figure8.22 Setting bumpmaps and surface textures 
Figure 8.20 
Camera adjustments 
Figure 8.18 
Poser's Toolspalette 
g a g  
a
o
m
 
Figure 8.21 Lightingpanel 
r Anti-alias 
15 i l s e  bump maps 
R Use texture rneps 
Render 
I 
' I  
I 
I 
J 
Surface M~Ierial J 
Render t4ow I 
Lancet I 
OK 
1 
Figure 8.23 Spenfymgsettings forrendering 
160 

The human figure 
Poser provides libraries of preset poses, lighting 
configurations and camera positions. Figure 8.24 shows 
an example of one of the preset poses. In this example, 
the ground plane has been made visible, allowing the 
rendered shadow of the figure to be seen. A greyscale 
bumpmap (Mmekanik. ti4 and texture map (Mmekanik. ti4 
have been applied to the figure to give it a surface to- 
pography and texture. 
A figure or group of figures can be posed against 
an imported background image or saved in bitmapped 
format and then opened in Photoshop or Painter for ed- 
iting. Such editing is facilitated by the fact that Poser cre- 
ates and exports an alpha channel mask corresponding 
to the silhouette of the figure, so that it can be easily sepa- 
rated from its background. Figures can also be exported 
in DXF or another three-dimensional format and then 
incorporated into Bryce for construction of a three- 
dimensional scene, as we saw in Chapter 7 (Figure 7.25). 
Figure 8.25 shows an example of a posed figure 
saved in TIFF format in Lit Wirefiame 
mode. After importing the file into 
Photoshop, the imported alpha mask 
was used to select the background be- 
hind the figure and above the ground 
plane. Using Photoshop’s Gradienttool, 
shading from 50% black to the same 
shade of green as the ground plane 
(picked up with the Eyedropper tool), a 
radial gradient was applied, adding 
drama to the scene. 
Figure 8.26 shows, on the left, an 
adult female figure created in Poser, to 
which a bumpmap (Fcompmek.bum) and 
surface texture (Fcompmek. ti4 have 
been applied. After saving the scene as 
a TIFF file, it was imported into 
Photoshop for editing. A Photo CD file 
of a Yosemite scene was opened in a 
separate window, a new layer was cre- 
ated, and the size and resolution of the 
image were adjusted to match those of 
the Poser scene. Next, using the Poser 
alpha channel, the figure of the girl was 
selected and dragged across into the 
Figure 8.24 
Bumpmap and texture applied to figure 
Figure 8.25 
Addinga backpundin Photoshop 
161 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Figure 8.26 Bumpmap and texture applied to figure on left. Copy offigure on the right merged with a Photo CDimage 
F 
p 
b
’
 
c, 
. 
, 
3 
Figure 8.27 
Bumpmap and texture applied to fip 
Yosemite scene where it floated above the 
new layer. While it was still floating, Adjust/ 
Hue/Saturafion was selected from Photoshop’s 
Image menu and the Colorize controls were 
used to adjust the colours of the figure, cha- 
meleon-like, to match its new background. 
More natural effects can be achieved by 
combining the features of both Poser and 
Bryce applications. Figure 8.27 shows such an 
example. The kneeling male figure - shown 
in wirenet form (a) -was exported from Poser 
and saved in DXF format. It was then im- 
ported to Bryce as an object, where it was 
scaled, rotated and positioned in front of a 
setting sun background. The ground plane 
was given a water texture and its height was 
raised so that the figure appeared to be kneel- 
ing in the water. The figure was then selected 
and given a metallic bronze texture so that it 
reflected the light from the water as well as 
reflecting in the water. 
Poser figures placed in Bryce can also 
be manipulated and placed in a three-dimen- 
sional relationship to other objects within the 
Bryce scene. In Figure 8.28, for example, the 
diving male figure has been scaled, rotated 
and placed so that it appears to be diving off 
the rock on the left. The scene was composed 
162 

The human figure 
using Bryce’s different camera views (top, 
left, right etc.) to ensure the correct placement 
of figure and rock. The reflection of one arm 
’ 4 c .  s r s f ’ b  
j 
can be seen on the surface of the rock. A glass 
sulted in interesting reflection and refraction 
When the relative position of figures 
and objects is more critical, detailed align- 
ment can first be carried out within Poser and 
then the objects can be imported and manipu- 
lated in Bryce. Figure 8.29 shows an exam- 
ple. The model of the buffalo was first 
imported into Poser as a DXF file and the Man- 
nequin was selected as the Poser figure type 
(a). Using Poser’s rotate, twist and translation 
tools, the mannequin was placed on the buf- 
falo’s back and the arms and legs were 
t ‘* 
& % %  
/- 
9ry 
texture was applied to the figure which re- 
of light from the background. 
,-- * 
6.--‘‘ 
3- €mL.- 
uw 
e 
-
5
 
Figure8.28 Placingafipreinrelation toanotherobject 
Figure8.29 Posingobjectsin Poser and then importing them to Bryce 
163 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
adjusted into natural looking positions. The mannequin was then 
saved as a DXF and both it and the buffalo were then imported into 
Bryce and positioned as they had been in Poser. The buffalo model 
was converted into a polyhedron, smoothed to remove the model’s 
surface facets and given a dark, glassy texture. A wood texture was 
applied to the mannequin, a desert-like texture was applied to the 
ground plane and a sombre sky was added to give the scene an over- 
all surrealistic effect. 
More complex figure groups can be constructed by posing fig- 
ures in Bryce, saving them individually in DXF format and then im- 
porting them for deployment in Bryce. Figure 8.30 shows such a 
group, looking vaguely reminiscent of our friends in Figure 8.1. 
Figure 8.30 Evolution, Poser-Bqcesfyle 
As well as posing solitary still figures and groups, Poser can 
create animations, which can be saved in standard Quicktime or AVI 
format or as a sequential image file. Such files can be imported into 
Photoshop or Painter for the addition of special effects, before im- 
porting into, for example, Adobe Premiere for merging with other 
video clips. 
Poser’s Animation Control dialog box is shown in Figure 8.31. 
Creating an animation uses the same figure positional techniques as 
those used for still images. In the simplest case, a figure is first posed 
as it is required to appear in the first frame of the animation and this 
pose is saved to Keyframe 1 of the animation. The figure pose is then 
adjusted to a new position, e.g. by moving an arm or leg, and this 
164 

The human figure 
second pose is saved as, say, Keyframe 5 of the animation. When the animation is played 
back, Poser 'interpolates' Frames 2, 3 and 4 so that the figure pose 1 translates smoothly to 
the figure pose 5. Additional key frames can now be added at intervals to extend the motion 
of the figure. Lights, cameras and imported props can also be animated f 
Figure 8.31 Poser's Animation Control dialogbox 
165 

This page intentionally left blank


Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Figure 9.1 
Earlycivilisationsgave 
substance to their Gods 
by creatingidols 
n its struggle to survive and evolve on this restless planet, 
the human race has faced, over the centuries, the natural 
terrors of volcanoes, earthquakes, floods, hurricanes and 
famine, with sudden death or mutilation a fact of every- 
day life. Attributing these events to the anger of vengeful 
Gods, early civilisations would offer animal or even hu- 
&5:' =.. 
atp;.'; 
. 
man sacrifices by way of atonement. To provide a focal 
point for these sacrifices, idols representing the Gods 
would be painted or carved from wood or stone, their faces and bod- 
ies often taking on frightening forms to symbolise the fears provoked 
by their anger (Figures 9.1 and 9.2). 
For many, life was a fragile existence, fraught with the dread of 
such natural disasters and further compounded by the self-inflicted 
horrors of war between local tribes and even between whole nations. 
It is perhaps not surprising, therefore, that refuge from these fears 
was sought, but it remains a curious aspect of the human psyche that 
this refuge was often found at the expense of others. The Romans, 
for example, as they sat, socialising in the security of the stands of 
the Coliseum, apparently relished the spectacle of Christians and 
sundry other enemies of the Empire being crushed or torn apart by 
bulls, bears or lions. In later centuries, large crowds gathered to watch 
public executions, where victims were hung from gallows or beheaded 
with an axe or guillotine, the severed head often being impaled on a 
spike and put on display, or to attend so-called 'freak shows' which 
exploited poor creatures suffering from gross physical deformities. 
Echoes from these bloodthirsty events can still be heard today 
at bullfights and heavyweight boxing matches, and how many sec- 
ondary traffic accidents are the result of drivers slowing and taking 
their eyes off the vehicles ahead as they gawp at the poor victims of 
Figure 9.2 
Egyptian friezeslike this oneincluded supernaturalimages - 
note t h e m  emergingkom the eye 
168 

The bizarre and the macabre 
a pile-up on a motorway? Why is it that, in Christian countries, we 
still celebrate the pagan festival of Halloween (Figure 9.3), with its 
dark images of witches and warlocks? Somehow, it seems, we take 
comfort from the misfortunes of others, or by flirtingwith dark forces, 
as a means somehow of expurgating the fears from our own night- 
mares. 
Whatever the correct psychological explanation, we humans 
clearly love to be scared, whether it is in the safety of our armchairs, 
securely strapped into fairground rides or clinging to the arms of our 
cinema seats, as evidenced by the runaway success of early films like 
Dracula and Frankenstein and their modern day equivalents like Jaws 
and the Alien series. 
Figure 9.3 ThestasofHalloween and earlyhomorfilms 
Images of a bizarre or macabre nature appear not only in films 
but also, increasingly in the advertising of products like music CDs 
and even life insurance - one advertisement featured a surprisingly 
animated Grim Reaper lookalike. In this chapter, we shall look at 
images related to this curious aspect of human nature and at the tech- 
niques we can now use to create and embellish them. 
Perhaps foremost among the images guaranteed to bring a tin- 
gle to the spine are those most obviously associated with the hereaf- 
ter, i.e. skeletal remains. Featured defiantly on the Jolly Roger (Fig- 
ure 9.5) - the flag of the pirate sailing ships of the Caribbean - the 
skull and crossbones struck fear, into the heart of many merchant- 
men, while, more recently, an image of a human skull has appeared 
on bottles containing poisons, or signs warning of minefields or other 
hazards (Figure 9.6). Four, more detailed, representations are shown 
in Figure 9.7; rendering in black gives the images a suitably sombre, 
funereal, cast. A more complex form - showing a skull leering from 
within the hood of a monk-like robe - is the familiar Grim Reaper, 
shown in two different poses in Figure 9.8, 
Figure 9.4 
Who’s for swimming? 
Figure 9.5 
The JoUy Roger 
169 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Figure 9.6 Achtung! Achtung! 
170 

The #bizarre and the macabre 
Another graphic device for conveying 
a sense of mystery or malevolence is the mask, 
an artefact which has provided a primary ar- 
tistic outlet for many cultures over the cen- 
turies. Dating back to Paleolithic times, masks 
were often constructed to represent spirits, 
deities or ancestors and, in early civilisations, 
it was believed that the wearing of such masks 
bestowed magical powers on the wearer. Gro- 
tesque war masks were worn in battle in 
ancient Greece and Rome. 
. 
The practice of creating death masks - 
so called because they were made from wax 
impressions of the features of the dead - 
originated in Egypt and Rome. The impres- 
sions were used as models for sculpted por- 
traits, a practice which continued into the 
early twentieth century. 
In some tribal rituals, the wearer was 
believed to be possessed by the spirit of the 
mask. Made from a range of materials includ- 
ing wood, leather, bark and even animal or 
human skulls, they varied widely in their 
style and degree of ornamentation, ranging 
upwards in size to the six metre totem masks 
of Papua, New Guinea. 
Masks were central to many types of 
ritual ceremony, from initiation of children to 
ensuring rainfall and success of the harvest 
to successful hunting. Some were believed to 
enhance the curative skills of their wearers 
while others were worn to protect against 
disease. Burial masks were placed on the face 
of a corpse to protect the deceased from evil 
spirits. 
The ritual mask still survives in mod- 
ern Western culture in various folk pageants 
and customs and in Halloween and carnival 
masquerading, and occasionally in other in- 
stances. Figure 9.9 shows some examples. 
In Europe, it became the practice for 
public executioners to wear a hooded mask 
which bestowed on its wearer an almost 
bestial appearance and thus enhanced the 
,-.. .... 
"c- 
-W- 
Figure 9.9 Chmgingfaces 
171 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Figure9.10 Headhunter 
Figure 9.11 fiemasquerade 
_L 
theatrical spectacle of the event (Figure 9.10). In fact, in medieval Eu- 
rope, masks were widely used in the theatre, in mystery and miracle 
plays to represent a variety of characters, including monsters, God 
and the devil. During the Renaissance period, the full face mask gave 
way to half masks which covered only the eyes and nose and these 
in turn gave way to a mask covering only the eyes. Masks were also 
worn by the aristocracy at Renaissance courtly events such as mas- 
querade balls (Figure 9.11) and the ballet de cour, while a simple vari- 
ant found favour with Dick Turpin and other highwaymen (Figure 
9.12). 
Since the days of the original Greek theatre, theatrical masks 
have fallen generally into two categories - tragic and comic - with 
many variations on both themes, giving rise to the now familiar 
theatrical logo (Figure 9.13). 
Outside the theatre, most masks found today are worn for pro- 
tective purposes, such as the industrial welder's mask or the mask 
worn by the ice hockey goalkeeper (Figure 9.14) which bears more 
than a passing resemblance to the faceplate of a suit of medieval Eu- 
ropean armour, while the balaclava - a simple woollen full-head mask 
which leaves only the eyes and mouth visible - is favoured both by 
clandestine terrorist organisations and by the skiing community. The 
painted face mask of the clown (Figure 9.15) dates back to the first 
modern circus which was staged in London in 1768. 
Figure9.12 Thehighwayman's 
adaptation of thecouriier'smask 
Figure 9.13 
Make them laugh, make them cry 
Figure 9.14 
Twentieth centmyamour 
Figure 9.15 
Theroar of thegreasepaint 
172 

Thegbizarre and the macabre 
Astrology, which first appeared as early 
as 3000 BC, is a quasi-science which possesses 
its own special group of mystic signs or sym- 
bols. Astrology was practised by many early 
civilisations in China, India, Greece and 
South America, who observed the correlation 
between planetary movement and the terres- 
trial seasons. Mystical signs, which became 
known as the twelve signs of the Zodiac, were 
ascribed to the apparent path of the Sun 
among the stars, which was divided into 
twelve sections of 30" each. 
Astrology has been practised in Europe 
since the Middle Ages, in spite of condemna- 
Capricorn 
Aquarius 
Pisces 
Aries 
Taurus 
tion by Christian leaders and progressive 
undermining by the discoveries of the science 
of astronomy, and there are still many avid 
readers of astrological charts who remain con- 
vinced that the movements of the planets 
govern their lives. 
The zodiacal signs are Aries, the Ram; 
Taurus, the Bull; Gemini, the Twins; Cancer, 
the Crab; Leo, the Lion; Virgo, the Virgin; Li- 
bra, the Balance; Scorpio, the Scorpion; Sag- 
ittarius, the Archer; Capricornus, the Goat; 
Aquarius, the Water Bearer; and Pisces, the 
Fishes. 
One of the simplest and most effective 
Libra 
Scorpio 
Figure 9.16 
Signs of theZodiac 
Gemini 
Sagittarius 
173 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Figure 9.17 
Modighani’s La Tete Rouge 
ways of creating bizarre or macabre images is to edit or even inter- 
change features between familiar objects. The viewer, at first reas- 
sured by what appears to be a scene conforming to normal visual 
rules, is startled to discover that something is not quite right. Such a 
technique was widely employed by artists like Modigliani 
(Figure 9.17), whose portraits are characterised by the oval faces and 
elongated features often conveying to the viewer a strong sense of 
pathos. 
In the example shown in Figure 8.18, the appearance of the girl 
has been altered by replacement of her eyes - the most important 
feature of the face - with the eyes of the tiger. A Photo CD image of 
the girl was opened in Photoshop and then, using the Paths tool, a 
path was drawn around the girl’s right eye and converted to a selec- 
tion, with a feather of two pixels. A Photo CD image of the tiger was 
then opened and the tiger’s right eye was selected with the Marquee 
tool. The selection was copied to the clipboard and then, using Pho- 
toshop’s Paste Inside command, the tiger’s eye was pasted inside the 
selection of the girl’s eye on a new layer. The opacity of the tiger eye 
was reduced to 75% to allow some show-through. Using a small brush 
size, the Smudge tool was used to blend the edges of the tiger eye into 
the face. The same procedure was then used to replace the other eye. 
Another variation of this procedure is shown in Figure 9.19. In 
this case, a ceramic mask purchased on a vacation trip to Spain was 
placed on the platen of a flatbed scanner and scanned at 150 dpi in 
24-bit colour using Photoshop’s Acquire function (a). A copy of the 
174 

The bizarre and the macabre 
image was made and a similar procedure to 
that described for Figure 9.18 was used to se- 
lect the eyes from a Photo CD image and paste 
them into the empty eye orbits of the mask 
(b). What helps to give this result visual im- 
pact is the convincing three-dimensional look 
of the mask, shadowed against its background 
so that the viewer is satisfied that the object 
is both inanimate and inorganic. The appear- 
ance of what are quite clearly human eyes in 
the sockets of the mask, which in all other 
respects remains the same, creates a disturb- 
ing visual conflict - a technique widely ex- 
ploited by the 'fantasy and horror' film 
industry. 
Figure 9.20 shows an image reminiscent 
of an Egyptian sarcophagus, in which a hu- 
man figure appears to be 'embedded' within 
a block of stone. This was created by import- 
ing a DXF model of the male figure into Bryce, 
where it was rotated into a horizontal posi- 
tion. A Bryce cuboid primitive was added, 
scaled and positioned so that the figure lay 
partially below its surface. Textures with com- 
plementary colours were then applied to the 
figure and plinth and a grey sky was added 
to give the scene atmosphere. 
'--nu- 
@) 
<&.. -...- 
Figure 9.19 Seeing is believing! 
Figure 9.20 Peace atlast 
175 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Figure 9.21 Drowningin a virtual sea 
Figure 9.22 Fraying at the edges 
1 
To produce the 'drowning man' image 
in Figure 9.21, the male figure was first cre- 
ated in Poser with the head tilted back and 
the arms outstretched. The image was saved 
in DXF format and imported to Bryce, where 
it was scaled and rotated into position. In 
Bryce, a new water plane was created and the 
relative positions of the figure and the water 
plane were adjusted so that most of the fig- 
ure appeared to be below the surface. Textures 
were then added to the figure and the water 
plane. Finally a daytime sky with high cloud 
cover was added to complete the effect. 
A more complex technique was used to 
produce the result in Figure 9.22. The figure 
was first created and positioned in Poser and 
Lit Wireframe was selected from the Display 
menu to display the figure in wireframe for- 
mat. This wireframe version was saved as a 
TIFF file. The figure was then rendered, us- 
ing the Nude Male surface texture provided 
with Poser and this rendered version was 
saved as a separate TIFF file. Next, both files 
were opened in Photoshop and a new layer 
was added above the rendered version of the 
image. The wirenet image of the figure was 
next selected, using Photoshop's Magic Wand 
tool and copied on to the new layer above 
the rendered version. A Layer Maskwas added 
to this upper layer and then the Airbrush, us- 
ing a large brush size, was used to paint out 
the mask covering the lower part of the fig- 
ure, revealing the rendered version on the 
background layer. Using a pressure sensitive 
stylus and tablet to apply the airbrushed ef- 
fect, the pressure was reduced in the solar 
plexus area and on the upper arms to create 
the impression that the wirenet was 'show- 
ing through' the skin. The rest of the figure 
was left untouched to leave the resulting hy- 
brid effect. 
The same technique can be applied to 
just part of a figure, as shown in Figure 9.23. 
In this case, the figure was first posed and 
76 

The bizarre and the macabre 
-Export 
F Export oblea groups for each body part 
then scaled up until only the head and shoul- 
ders were visible. The Lit Wireframe display 
was selected and the resulting wireframe im- 
age was saved as a TIFF file. The image was 
then rendered and saved as a second TIFF file. 
The same technique as described above was 
used to create the hybrid shown in (b). 
When a Poser figure is saved as a DXF 
file, the option is provided of saving the fig- 
ure as one object or as a group of separate 
body parts which can be ungrouped in some 
other applications (Figure 9.24). Figure 9.25 
shows such an example, in which the DXF file 
was imported into Bryce, ungrouped and the 
body parts were redistributed as if the figure 
had been pulled apart. 
Figure 9.24 Poser DXF Export dialog box 
Figure 9.23 Thatnettedfeeling 
Figure 9.25 Ripped asunder 
177 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Figure groups can also be created within Bryce. The figures can 
either be created and exported separately from Poser, or posed to- 
gether, saved together as a single DXF file and then imported to Bryce 
as a single file, so that their spatial relationship is maintained. Once 
inside Bryce, they can be separated by using the Ungroup command 
and then manipulated separately if, for example, different textures 
are to be used. 
Figure 9.26 shows an unusual dance ensemble created in this 
way. The figures were created using the Female Nude and Male Skel- 
eton options and then the figures were posed, scaled and positioned 
with respect to each other. The pair were then saved as a single DXF 
file and imported to Bryce. After separating the figures, different tex- 
tures were applied to them. A ground plane texture was chosen to 
create a shimmering effect in the distance and to reflect the colour of 
the sky. 
Figure 9.26 Danse macabre 
178 

The'bizarre and the macabre 
Figure 9.27 uses the technique of dis- 
turbing the symmetry of an image (the eyes 
in the face, in this case) as well as mixing an 
inorganic object (the monitor) with an organic 
one (the face). To create this effect, a Photo 
CD image of the face was first opened in 
Photoshop and a new layer was added. The 
clipart monitor was copied to the clipboard 
from CorelDRAW and pasted on to the new 
layer, where the white background was se- 
lected with the Magic Wand tool and erased, 
leaving the monitor floating over the face. 
The Paths tool was then used to draw the 
shape of the monitor screen and the path was 
converted to a selection and saved. Switch- 
ing to the background layer, the selection was 
loaded and dragged into position so that it 
framed the right eye. The selection contents 
were copied to the clipboard and the Paste 
Inside command was used to place the copy 
on the screen which was then rotated as 
shown. 
CorelDRAWs Powerclip fea- 
Figure 9.27 Transposition 
ture was used to produce 
the result in Figure 9.28. 
A 30 30 grid was first 
skull (a) and the skull 
was powerclipped into 
placed over the clipart 
Figure 9.28 Using CorelDRA W s  Powerclip feature 
179 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
the grid. Next, the outline colour of the grid was changed to None 
and the grid was ungrouped, so that the skull was now divided up 
into 30 30 individual elements. A number of these elements were 
selected, moved and rotated as shown in (c). They were then extruded, 
using CorelDRAW’s Extrude feature and a Solid edge fill, to give them 
an appearance of depth. Finally a clipart brain (b) was imported, scaled 
and placed in position over the skull and then, using Arrange/Order/ 
To Back, was placed beneath the skull so that it now appeared that 
the brain was being revealed through the opening in the skull. 
Finally Figure 9.29 shows how an existing painted image such 
as the face in the Dutch master on the left can be edited to produce 
the result on the right which is more reminiscent of the grotesque 
images painted by Francis Bacon. To produce this result, the original 
Photo CD image was opened in Photoshop and duplicated. The Lasso 
tool was used to cut out the face and neck and the rest of the image 
was filled with black. The result was then saved and opened in Painter, 
where the Hairy Bristle brush was used to add red and white to se- 
lected areas of the image. A combination of the Wet Drip Distortion 
brush and the Add Water brush were then used to paint the added 
colours into the image and to modify and smooth the features as 
shown fl 
Figure 9.29 Rubens’Head ofa Negro (left) edited in Painter (right) 
180 


Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Nature is the art of God 
Sir Thomas Browne 160582 
English w'terandphysiaan 
&.<qb':** ,:*.=+%, 1: .. 
v.;.,-;j~~~f;~. 
;;r 
o;.: *-.::. 
*;.. 
s? 
.. 
?: 
- 
B'. 
.a: *2i *a?*>.*:-.- 
z * d ~ a \ -  
ince the days of Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle and 
8 . .  
2 .  
Archimedes, man has sought to investigate and ex- 
plore the wonders of nature which surround him, 
giving birth to the sciences of astronomy, physics, 
chemistry, botany, geology, biology and zoology, 
together with many subdivisions of these, like 
metallurgy, crystallography and meteorology. Since 
digital graphic design is only possible through the 
application of scientific and mathematical principles to the design 
and manufacture of computer hardware and software, it is only fit- 
ting that a chapter of this book should be devoted to images derived, 
directly or indirectly, from these disciplines. 
Instruments developed and used for scientific study, including 
the camera, microscope and telescope, have allowed us to view and 
capture images of breathtaking beauty and diversity - images con- 
ceived by Mother Nature, the greatest of all designers. The brilliant 
plumage of a parrot (Figure 10.1) or the beautiful colouring and tex- 
ture of a simple shell on the ocean bed (Figure 10.2), the delicate 
tracery of winter frost on a window pane (Figure 10.3) or stalactites 
formed by hundreds of years of chemical reaction (Figure 10.4), are 
just a few examples of thousands of such images now available to the 
designer. 
Throughout the history of Man, art and science have been 
closely intertwined. As well as discovering and applying the princi- 
ples of mechanics to the building of the Pyramids, it was the Egyp- 
tians who arrived at correct rules for finding areas of triangles, 
rectangles and trapezoids, and for finding volumes of figures such as 
bricks, cylinders and, of course, pyramids. 
a*:.:* .. 
t:::.:b 
.;;.:y.+?! ..,,, -... 
- 0 o - e  
Figure 10.1 
The ricluy colouredplumage of a p m t  
Figure 10.2 
The m a n ' s  harvest 
182 

Images from nature and science 
Figure 10.3 Frostpatterns 
Figure 10.4 Stalactite formations 
Artists over the centuries have found inspiration in the beauty 
of a sunset, the sensuous flowing contours of sand dunes, in fresh 
winter snow shimmering on fir trees on a mountainside, water drop- 
lets glistening on the gossamer strands of a spider’s web, in the spec- 
tacle of forked lightning illuminating a night sky or the symmetry of 
a fern - all of them masterpieces of nature. Indeed, the very materi- 
als used by artists to paint a landscape (Figure 10.5) or fashion a sculp- 
ture in marble (Figure 10.6) are provided by nature’s generous bounty. 
From the earliest cave painter’s charcoal to natural chalks like cal- 
cium carbonate and the rust colour of iron oxide, artists searched and 
found pigments which could be made from mineral ores mined from 
the Earths crust, including blue azurite, green malachite, yellow 
orpiment, red cinnabar, blue frit and white lead. 
Figure 10.5 A classicallandscape 
183 
Figure 10.6 Marble textures 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
The sculptor may also find inspiration in nature’s carving of a 
rockface (Figure 10.7) or even of a whole landscape (Figures 10.8), 
created by the action of the elements as they combine to reshape the 
topography of the Earth’s surface. 
Figure10.7 Erosion ofa coastalrockface bythesea 
”, . 
. .. . 
Figure 10.8 Erosion by wind-bomesand 
Advances in science have also allowed 
man to reach beyond the Earth, to break free 
from its gravitational force and to see and 
record breathtaking images of the Earth and 
the Moon set against the inky darkness of 
space (Figure 10.9). 
At the same time, the boundaries of 
’inner space’ have been pushed back, with 
advances in the resolution of optical micro- 
scopes and development of the scanning elec- 
tron microscope which achieves a level of 
resolution capable of approaching atomic 
dimensions. 
Figures 10.10 to 10.12 show just a few 
examples of the astonishing variety of colours 
and textures displayed by sections of crystal- 
line materials when viewed with polarised 
light under a high powered optical micro- 
scope. Such images, available in Photo CD for- 
mat, are of such high resolution that even 
small areas can be selected and successfully 
blown up for use as elements of a graphic 
composition. 
Figure 10.9 (a) and (b) Planet Earth photographed from Apollo 
spacemksions; (c) Earthtise, seen from thesurface of themoon; 
(d), (e) and (0 Approaching the moon 
184 


Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
The most powerful optical microscopes can magnify 
an object by around 2000 times. To penetrate further into 
nature’s inner space, we have to turn to microscopes 
which employ electron beams, rather than light, to explore 
4 
even finer detail. A transmission electron microscope, 
-f-F 
1 
which fires a beam of electrons through a thin sample of 
the target object on to a photographic plate or fluorescent 
screen, is capable of magnification up to a million times. 
A scanning electron microscope (SEM) scans the surface 
of the target object with an electron beam and electrons 
which are scattered by the target are detected by an elec- 
tronic counter. The resulting signal is displayed on a TV 
monitor, building up a 3D picture of the target object as the electron 
beam scans over the entire sample. An SEM can magnify objects 
100 000 times. 
Superb examples of these can be found at the Web site http:// 
surf/eng/iastste.edu, where the images are provided courtesy of 
Microscopy Today. Original photos were created by David Scharf us- 
ing his patented ‘SEM Wideband Multi-Detector Color Synthesizer’ 
and computer digital recording. David Scharf is a scientist and pho- 
tographer whose SEM images have earned him critical acclaim for 
their artistic and technical perfection. His images have been featured 
in many publications including Life, Time, National Geographic, Scien- 
tific American, Discover and many others. Images were acquired with 
Gatan’s DigiScan, DigitalMicrograph and the SEM Wideband Multi- 
Detector Color Synthesizer. In addition, his images have been shown 
in numerous exhibitions in science and art museums and are included 
in many collections. 
Figure 10.13 ffitachiS-900Scanning 
Electron Microscope 
Images from scientific research 
The fresh new sources of graphic images which have resulted 
from space exploration and electron microscopy are direct spinoffs 
from fundamental scientific research, which continues unabated, 
notably in the United States and in Europe. Figures 10.14 to 10.16 
show some other examples, courtesy of IBM’s Communications De- 
partment at its UK Hursley Laboratory, near Winchester. 
Figure 10.14 pictures the letters I-B-M written by a new data 
storage method that has the potential for storing many times more 
information than current optical data storage techniques. The tech- 
186 

Images from nature and science 
nique uses an atomic force microscope and a laser to make tiny pits in a flat, clear plastic 
surface. The letters I-B-M were written as some 42 marks within a single 2 micron wide data 
track of a plastic optical disk. The spacing between the pits, which look like peaks in the 
image, is about 0.2 microns (0 
IBM Corporation, Research Division, Almaden Research 
Center). 
Figure 10.15 shows a face mask created using a radar scanning technique, while Figure 
10.16 shows two images created using advanced computer 3D modelling techniques devel- 
oped at IBM’s UK Scientific Centre, Hursley (0 
IBM’s UK Scientific Centre, Hursley). 
As well the categories of photographic images described above, today’s digital designer 
has access to other exciting sources of imagery as described below. 
Figure 10.14 Preasionlaserindentation 
F i p  10.15 Three-&ensionalscanning 
Figure 10.16 Images created usinga thn?e-&ensionalmodelling technique 
187 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Fractals 
The origins of fractal geometry can be 
traced back to the late nineteenth century, 
when mathematicians started to create shapes 
-sets of points - that seemed to have no coun- 
terpart in nature. The mathematics which 
evolved from that work has now turned out 
to be more appropriate than any other for de- 
scribing many shapes and processes found in 
nature - shapes which seemed to fall between 
the usual categories of one-dimensional lines, 
two-dimensional planes or three-dimensional 
volumes and processes like the flooding of the 
Nile, price series in economics or the jiggling 
of molecules in Brownian motion in fluids. 
It was Benoit Mandelbrot, working at 
IBM in the 1 9 5 0 ~ ~  
who was first to realise what 
all these phenomena had in common and it 
was he who pulled the threads together into 
a new discipline called fractal geometry with 
which he sought to explain these shapes and 
processes. As computers gained more graphic 
capabilities, the skills of his mind’s eye were 
reinforced by visualisation on display screens 
and plotters. Again and again, fractal models 
produced results - for the growth of a fern or 
the delicate formation of a snowflake -which 
closely emulated their creation in nature. 
The power of the desktop computer 
now allows us to give vibrant graphic expres- 
sion to these otherwise remote mathematical 
formulae, adding an exciting new dimension 
of expression to our graphic design toolkit. 
Fractal applications suitable for use by the 
non-technical designer include Fractint (a re- 
markable shareware program) and KPT 
Fractal Designer. 
Fractint (Figure 10.17) is a remarkable 
Shareware application which has been devel- 
oped and evolved by a group of dedicated 
‘fractophiles’. It allows the designer to display 
and explore a wide range of fractal types. 
Each type can be redrawn with infinite vari- 
ations, by simple adjustment of parameters 
within the mathematical expressions describ- 
ing the fractal and without the need for any 
mathematical knowledge. Each example can 
be zoomed and rotated and its colour palette 
can be changed. 
Fractal Grafics, by Cedar Software (Fig- 
ure 10.18), uses a quite different approach. 
The user is provided with a menu of simple 
fractal templates and tools to colour and 
Select a Fractal Type 
I 
barnsleyjl 
barnsleym3 
cmplxmarksjul 
fn(z) +fn(pix) 
formula 
julfn fzsqrd 
julzzpwr 
lorenz 
rnagnet2j 
mandellam bda 
rnanzpower 
newtbasin 
popcornjul 
sqr(fn1 
barnsleyj2 
barnsleyj3 
bif+sinpi 
bif=sinpi 
cmplxmarksmand complexbasin 
fn(z*zj 
fn*fn 
gingerbreadman 
henon 
julia 
julia4 
kamtorus 
kamtorus3d 
lorenz3d 
lsystem 
magnet2m 
mandel 
rnanfn+exp 
manfn+zsqrd 
manzzpwr 
marksjulia 
newton 
pickover 
rossler3d 
sierpinski 
test 
tetrate 
barnsleyml 
biflam bda 
complexnewton 
fn*z+z 
ifs 
julibrot 
lambda 
magnet1 j 
m a n d e I4 
manowar 
marksmandel 
plasma 
pider 
tim’s-error 
barnsleym2 
bifurcation 
diffusion 
fn+fn 
julfn+exp 
julzpower 
lam bdafn 
magnet1 m 
mandelfn 
manowarj 
marksmandelpwr 
popcorn 
sqr(1 /in) 
unity 
Figure 10.17 Fractint screen forselectingfractal types 
188 

Images from nature and science 
manipulate these templates before drawing 
or painting with them. Astonishingly beauti- 
ful results can be achieved with a little pa- 
tience and exploration. The fern example 
shown was created using the simple fractal 
template in the bottom corner of the screen 
KPT Fractal Designer is a Photoshop 
plug-in which can be used from within 
Figure 10.38 TheFractalGrafics editingwndow 
Photoshop (or any other application which 
can access Photoshop plug-ins) to apply 
fractal fills to masked areas of an image or to 
a complete image layer (Figure 10.19). 
Figures 10.20 and 10.21 show examples 
of the kind of fractal images which can be cre- 
ated, with a little practice, using these appli- 
cations. 
Figure 10.19 KPT Fractal Explorer 
Figure 10.20 Fractalpatterns 
189 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Figure 10.21 Fractalpattems 
Procedural textures 
The examples of marble textures which were included in Fig- 
ure 10.6 are typical of a growing range of high quality scanned im- 
ages of natural materials like wood, rock samples, metal and glass 
etc. which are available as Photo CD images. Excellent as such im- 
ages are, they can only be used 'as is', i.e. they are not editable. To 
overcome this limitation, the same principles used to develop appli- 
cations which can produce the kind of fractal images shown above 
have been adapted to provide the designer with the means of crest- 
ing a much wider range of textures which closely resemble natural 
materials and which are also fully editable. Such textures, which are 
created by means of mathematical algorithms, are called 'procedural' 
textures. 
We already saw examples of such procedural textures in Chap- 
ters 5 and 7, where they were used within the Bryce application to 
create terrain materials. Bryce offers both preset options from its 
Materials dialog box and also the ability to edit materials within its 
Materials Composer, but the purpose of this is to provide a wider choice 
within the application. Core1 TEXTURE, on the other hand (Figure 
10.22), provides a sophisticated means of creating and rendering pro- 
cedural textures which are easily saved as bitmap files for use in any 
application. 
190 

Imagesffrom nature and science 
Fractal techniques are used as the mathematical basis for Corel 
TEXTURE, which means that, instead of the quality degrading as the 
image is enlarged, finer details simply appear, as if zooming into a 
fractal, and the resolution and image quality are maintained. Textures 
are created by combining four properties: 
(i) Lightingof the surface, using up to three lights 
(ii) Shader Layers, which may carry Material (such as wood, 
marble, or granite); Colour, which acts like the colour filter on a 
camera lens; and Blend, which specifies the way layers interact 
to form the final texture 
(iii) Topography, which is used to define the surface contour of a 
texture 
(iv) €dge, which provides a round, bevelled, or flat border for a 
texture 
Each of these four properties can be controlled independently 
to adjust specific aspects of a texture. As well as simulation of solid 
materials like wood or rock, the generator can mimic the textures of 
clouds and waves. Corel TEXTURE’S editing screen (Figure 10.22) 
shows a preview of the texture which is in process in the top left 
Figure 10.22 
Corel TEXTURES 
editingsmen 
Figure 10.23 
Texturein themaking 
191 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
hand corner. Below the preview are the three 
light icons which can be selected individu- 
ally for editing and below the lights are the 
layers of which the texture is composed; any 
of these can be selected for editing independ- 
ently of the others. Figure 10.24 shows some 
examples of the kind of results which can be 
produced. Textures can be rendered at a reso- 
Woodgrain 
Terracotta 
Fabric 
Marble 
lution appropriate to their planned use, e.g. 
72 dpi for screen use or 300 dpi if the texture 
is to be used in a project to.be printed at high 
resolution. 
Other procedural renderers are pro- 
vided within Kai’s Power Tools suite of 
Photoshop plug-ins. Texture Explorer (Figure 
10.25) provides the user with a wide range of 
Evening sky 
Waves 
Japanese lacquer 
Jungle 
Figure 20.24 Procedural textures createdin Core1 TEXTURE 
Figure 10.25 KpTs Texture Explorer dialog box 
Figure 10.26 Kl”s Spheroid Designer dialogbox 
192 

Images from nature and science 
presets and controls for mutating new variants from these. Spheroid 
Designer (Figure 10.26) wraps textures around a sphere and also pro- 
vides a wide range of tools for editing the many presets provided, 
offering the designer a simple way of introducing shaded and tex- 
tured spherical objects into a composition. Figure 10.27 shows an ex- 
ample, in which a spheroid has been added to the scene on the left in 
order to produce the result on the right. First a Photo CD image of 
the cave scene was opened in Photoshop and a selection was made 
using Photoshop’s circular selection tool and feathered by one pixel. 
The selection was positioned so that it overlapped the horizon and 
then, with Quick Mask selected, the lower part of the selection was 
’painted out’ using the brush tool, with black as the foreground col- 
our. KPT Spheroid Designer was opened via the Filters menu and a 
suitable spheroid was selected from the preset list. Clicking on Accept 
closed the dialog box and applied the sphe- 
roid to the selection, with the result shown. 
Figure 10.28 shows a more dramatic way 
of creating such a scene using Bryce. In this 
case a sphere primitive was added to a scene 
containing a terrain object and both terrain 
and sphere were scaled and positioned so that 
the sphere was partially obscured by the ter- 
rain. Bryce’s procedural textures were applied 
to the sphere, the terrain and the ground 
plane (the terrain’s vertical position was ad- 
justed so that it disappeared below the 
ground plane in the foreground). A deep blue 
Figure 10.27 UsingSpheroid Designer to edita scene 
193 
Figure 10.28 Creatinga mysteriousplanetin Bryce 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
sky texture was added, together with a distance-sensitive blue haze, so that the 'planet' 
appeared to be seen through the haze. 
Spheroids can also be used to edit features of either existing vector or bitmap images. 
Figure 10.29 shows an example in which spheroid 'eyes' have been added to a clipart face to 
make the face look even more surprised! 
Figure 10.29 Usingspheroids to edit &part 
As we have seen in this chapter, applied science is opening up a rich treasure chest of 
new raw material for use in design projects. High powered optical cameras developed to 
work in the hostile conditions of space or even strapped to the back of an eagle or a great 
white shark are providing unprecedented images of nature, while the scanning electron mi- 
croscope has penetrated a hitherto inaccessible world of near-atomic proportions. 
Fractal geometry and the development of procedural generators are creating virtually 
infinite new possibilities for exploring new combinations of colour and texture. 
With the advent of high quality, high resolution libraries of royalty-free images avail- 
able on CD ROM, the emergence of affordable digital still and video cameras and the grow- 
ing ease of trading images via the Internet, the digital designer now has unprecedented ac- 
cess to the wonders of nature and science f 
194 


Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
ore than 10 000 
years ago, as the 
first 
Paleolithic 
painter picked up a 
stick or reed and 
reached out to 
47 
p ? 3  
smear 
coloured 
#e: 
earth on to a cave 
wall in southern Europe (Figure ll.l), little 
could he or she have realised that these first 
tentative strokes laid the foundation for 
Man's most creative pursuit. 
The thousands of years which followed 
have witnessed continuous evolution in both 
the materials and the techniques used for 
painting and the creation of works of endur- 
ing and universally acknowledged beauty as 
well as works which have provoked bitter 
controversy (see sidebar below). 
This process of evolution has continued 
apace during the twentieth century, as new 
artists have emerged and new materials and 
techniques have become available, many of 
them derivatives of innovative industrial 
processes and techniques. Notable among the 
latter has been the rapid development of the 
digital medium, driven mainly by commer- 
Of Post-Iinpressionist 
paintings.. . 'The drawingis 
on thelevelofthatofan 
untaught child of seven or 
eigh tyears old, the sense of 
colour that of a tea-fray 
painteG themethod thatofa 
schooIboywho Wipeshis 
hgers on a slate after 
spittingon them.. . Theseare 
not works of art at all, 
unless throwinga handful of 
mud against a wall may be 
called one. They are the 
works ofidlenessand 
impotent stupid@, a 
pornographicshow' 
Wilfrid Sca wen Blunt I@& 
1922, English poet. 
-. 
I 
q !- 
4 '  
cia1 interests, but now attracting growing in- 
terest within the artistic community. 
While the early emphasis of desktop 
drawing and photoediting applications was 
mainly on providing tools and techniques for 
graphic designers, users with a more artistic 
leaning were quick to see the potential for us- 
ing the applications for purely aesthetic pur- 
poses. Responding to this interest, a number 
of developers now offer products which are 
actually tailored for the artist, rather than the 
designer and, in recent years, a whole new 
genre of computer art has begun to evolve. 
Artistic styles are almost as varied as the art- 
ists themselves, ranging from emulation of 
the techniques of the traditional schools of 
painting, to styles which are unique to the 
digital environment. 
To describe the facilities available to to- 
day's digital artist is to try to hit a moving 
target, as every few months brings forth a 
further application upgrade offering new fea- 
tures and opening up new and unforeseen 
possibilities. This chapter, therefore, should 
be seen as just a set of snapshots of the tech- 
niques presently on offer from state-of-the-art 
drawing and painting applications. 
Figure 11.1 Cavepainting of buffdos found in southern Europe 
196 

Digital art 
Drawing versuspaintingapplications 
In their earliest form, drawing applications offered little more 
than the ability to draw simple, straight or freehand lines and basic 
geometric shapes, using a palette of sixteen colours. Today’s applica- 
tions, by contrast, offer a dazzling range of tools, techniques and spe- 
cial effects, a palette of 16.7 million colours and even the ability to 
control the stroke width of lines, using stylus pressure sensitivity, 
and the transparency of objects within a scene. 
As Figure 11.2 shows, the use of transparency can dramatically 
alter the effect of a simple scene. This scene was created in CorelDRAW 
using three copies of a clipart elephant. The Interactive Transparency 
tool was applied to each in the vertical direction, to differing degrees 
and the copies were then scaled and positioned so that the group 
appeared to be emerging from a mist. 
The drawing application has traditionally offered the artist a 
greater degree of precision through the use of rulers, movable guides, 
node editing and multiple layers for the separation of elements within 
a composition. This distinction, however, is becoming increasingly 
blurred, as developers seek to port many of these features to 
photoediting and painting applications like Photoshop, Painter and 
PHOTO-PAINT. The ability to move elements of a composition or 
even a partially completed composition between applications for ed- 
iting purposes is also improving rapidly, for example through 
the exporting of paths or alpha channels or by file con- 
version using increasingly sophisticated import/ 
export filters. The need for a creative artist to 
work spontaneously and intuitively has also 
been recognised by the developers who are 
now offering deferred rendering fea- 
tures which relieve the problem of slow 
response time, when working with 
large colour files, by allowing the artist 
to work with a screen resolution image 
and later to render changes to the higher 
resolution required for printing. 
By working with a combination of 
applications, therefore, the artist can 
now combine the precision of a draw- 
ing application with the virtuosity of a 
painting application and the lighting 
and atmospheric effects of a three-dimen- 
sional application. 
Figure11.2 Elephantsin themist 
197 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
fiamples 
Figure 11.3 shows the result obtained by using Photoshop’s Paths 
tool to select the left side of a bitmap image which was then traced in 
Core1 Trace. When tracing was complete, the fill was set to None and 
the outline to black. The result was then reimported to Photoshop 
where it was ’spliced’ back on to the right half of the original. Figure 
11.4 shows an alternative effect which was created in Painter by us- 
ing the Distortion brush to break up the sharp boundary between the 
two halves of the image, giving the impression that one half is bleed- 
ing into the other. 
Tracing was also used to produce the result in Figure 11.5. Adobe 
Streamline was used to trace a photograph of my wife Julia, using 
two different threshold settings. The copies were opened in Illustra- 
tor, where the vector elements of each image were combined before 
radial gradient fills were applied. After importing the images to 
Photoshop and placing them side by side, a ten pixel stroke was ap- 
plied to a rectangular selection to form a frame, using a colour se- 
lected from one of the images with the Eyedroppertool. Finally, a drop 
shadow, using the same colour, was applied to the frame. 
Figure 11.6 - a self-portrait of my younger son, Simon - again 
used a combination of drawing and painting applications. After prop- 
ping up a mirror alongside the computer monitor, he first sketched 
his image in CorelDRAW using a stylus and tablet. Fills were applied 
and then the image was saved and imported into Photoshop where 
shading was added, using the Airbrush tool. 
Figure11.3 
Using Tracing to create a compound image 
Figure11.4 
Softeningthe boundarywith Paintefs Distortion tool 
198 

Digital art 
Figure 11.5 Portrait study 
Continuing with the family theme, Fig- 
ure 11.7 is based on a family snapshot of my 
younger daughter, Claire, imported and ed- 
ited in Painter. A clone was first made from a 
scan of the snapshot, using Painter’s FileClone 
command, and the image was erased from the 
clone window. 
Clicking the icon in the vertical scroll 
bar of the clone window produced a 50% 
Figure 11.6 Simon render-a self-portrait 
ghost of the original source image, providing 
a guide for the editing process. 
To create the ’ice crystals’ effect for the 
hair, a Chalk brush variant was chosen, using 
the Cloning method and Grainy Hard Cover 
subcategory (the brush grain control was set 
to 100% to maximise the effect); using these 
settings, the hair and tinsel tiara were painted 
back in, using a large brush size and bold 
strokes. The brush subcategory was then 
-
-
 
changed to Soft Cover and, again using a large 
brush size, the face and neck were painted 
back in. 
figure 11.7 Icemaiden 
199 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Figure 21.8 Ghostlyapparition 
Creating the effect in Figure 11.8 in- 
volved the use of two Photo CD images. The 
first image - of a hooded figure in a monas- 
tery - was opened in Photoshop and the Lasso 
tool was used to select just the hood and 
gown, leaving the face and background 
unselected. The selection was feathered to 
one pixel and saved as an alpha channel. The 
second image - of a woodland against a sky 
backdrop -was opened in Photoshop, where 
it was cropped to the same size as the first 
image, with the same resolution. The whole 
scene was selected and copied to the clip- 
board. 
The mask in the first image was 
reselected and inverted, protecting the mask 
and gown and Paste Inside was used, from the 
Edit menu, to paste the woodland scene 'be- 
hind' the hooded figure, so that it appeared 
to show through where the face had origi- 
nally been. Finally the area of the face was 
selected and a Lens Flare filter was amlied. 
Figure 11.9 also involved the useof two 
Photo CD images, this time to create a 'hy- 
brid' being in which the eyes and nose of the 
monkey replaced those of the man. To achieve 
Figure 11.9 The beast within 
200 

Digital art 
this result, a selection of the eyes and nose of 
the image on the left was selected, feathered 
and saved and the eyes and nose of the mon- 
key were pasted inside, as in the previous ex- 
ample. To make the result more dramatic, 
while the monkey eyes and nose were still 
floating, Photoshop’s Hue/Satura tion dialog 
was used to adjust the colouring. The float- 
ing image was then dropped and the Smudge 
tool was used to blend the pasted image more 
smoothly into the face. As smudging tends 
to obliterate texture, the areas which had been 
smudged were selected and the Gaussian 
Noise filter was used to restore the lost tex- 
ture. Finally, using the Eyedropper tool to 
match the colours, a fine brush was used to 
touch in any blemishes at the boundary be- 
tween the two images. 
Painter’s distortion brushes were used 
to create the multi-coloured eagle’s head in 
Figure 11.10. With the original image of the 
head set against a black background, a Pen- 
etra tion brush variant was used to add a range 
of colours to the head feathers from one of 
Painter’s Custom Sets. The Distortiofiard 
Grainy Drip variant of the Liquid brush was 
then used to blend the new colours into the 
original, taking care to follow the original di- 
rection of the feathers. The same brush vari- 
ant was used to edit the eye and beak to give 
them a more evil-looking aspect. 
Figure 11.11 was created by first scan- 
ning a simple carved wooden figure which 
my daughter had purchased on a trip to Po- 
land. The figure was simply laid flat on the 
bed of the scanner and the lid was closed as 
far as possible on top of it. The resulting scan, 
which was surrounded by shadow, was 
cleaned up in Photoshop and saved, with an 
alpha channel which defined the figure’s out- 
line, as a TIFF file. The file was then imported 
into Bryce, where it was rotated, scaled and 
positioned and a duplicate was made and off- 
set to the right. Loading the alpha channel 
Figurell.10 Feathered venom 
Figure 11.11 Silentsentinels 
201 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
figure 11.12 Killingfields 
mask saved with the file has the effect of 'cut- 
ting out' the white background of the bitmap, 
leaving just the figure visible. A water plane 
was added to the composition and its level 
was adjusted so that the two figures appeared 
to rise out of the water. Finally, a suitable sky 
background was added and the lighting ad- 
justed to produce the final effect. 
Figure 11.12 was also produced in 
Bryce, using a feature not mentioned earlier. 
The bitmap of the skull fragment was first 
saved, as a TIFF file, with an alpha channel 
mask as in the previous example. The file and 
its mask were then loaded into Bryce and ro- 
tated, scaled and placed in position, so that 
the skull appeared to be floating in the air. A 
ground plane was added and the same TIFF 
image was used as a texture map for the 
ground plane, so that the same skull image 
was echoed in the ground plane, with per- 
spective matching that of the ground plane. 
Finally a suitably sombre sky background was 
added and the position of the lighting was 
adjusted so that the floating skull cast a 
shadow on the ground below. 
To produce the illusion of footprints in 
the sand in Figure 11.13, a clipart left foot- 
print symbol was first opened in CorelDRAW 
Figure11.13 Man Friday 
202 

Digital art 
and then a copy was flipped to make a right 
footprint. Further copies of both feet were 
made and positioned to create a trail of prints. 
The result was copied and pasted into 
Photoshop, where a mask of the footprints 
was saved as an alpha channel. The Blur fil- 
ter was used to blur the mask slightly. The 
Background layer was then given a sand-col- 
oured fill and the Gaussian Noise filter was ap- 
plied to add texture. Next, Renderflighting 
effects was selected from the Filter dropdown 
menu. In the Lighting Effects dialog box, the 
mask of the footprints was chosen as the Tex- 
ture Channel and a spotlight was configured 
to add a lighting effect. Gaussian Noise was 
added to the result, to add texture to the 
'sand' and then the whole image was selected 
and perspective was applied by choosing Ef- 
fectsflerspective from the Image menu and 
dragging the corner handles. 
Another result created in Photoshop is 
shown in Figure 11.14. The flower vase was 
sketched using the Freehand tool, filled and 
then given the appearance of depth by shad- 
ing it with the Airbrush tool. A simple flower 
shape with petals was then drawn in 
CorelDRAW, saved in Illustrator format and 
imported into Photoshop as a selection. Du- 
plicates were made and the KPT Texture Ex- 
plorer and Spheroid Designerplups were used 
to apply a range of textures to the petals and 
spheroid effects to the flower centres. Finally 
the stems were drawn in and coloured. 
To produce the result shown in Figure 
11.15, the girl's head was first removed from 
its background, saved as a TIFF file and then 
opened in Painter. The image was cloned us- 
ing the File/Clone command and then the copy 
of the head was deleted from the cloned im- 
age. From the Brushes palette, the Scratchboard 
variant of the Pen tool was selected and the 
Subcategorywas set to Soft Cover Cloning. The 
default brush size was increased to 22% and 
a sweeping brush motion was used to paint 
Figure 11.14 Digital still life 
ZJ .$' 
Figure 11.15 Disintegration 
203 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Figure11.16 Impasto 
Figure11.17 Lmpasto Optionsdialogbox 
in the clone window, causing just that part of 
the original image to reappear which corre- 
sponded to the brushstokes. Using the Magic 
Wand tool, the new image was selected and 
floated and a soft shadow was applied via the 
Effects/Objects menu. 
Painter was also used to create the next 
example in Figure 11.16. Once again, a Photo 
CD image was separated from its background, 
cloned and the copy was deleted from the 
clone window. The Grainy Hard Cover 
subcategory of the Scratchboard pen variant 
was selected from the Brushes palette and the 
size was set to 5% in the Brush Controls pal- 
ette. Next, the Impasto Floater was selected 
from the Objects palette and Apply was acti- 
vated to open the Impasto Options dialog box 
(Figure 11.17). Using the settings shown in the 
dialog box, sweeping brushstrokes were ap- 
plied to the clone window, recreating parts 
of 
the original image beneath the 
brushstrokes, which simulated the appear- 
ance of richly applied oil paint. Finally, a light 
colour - which affects both the painted area 
and the background - was chosen to comple- 
ment the colours in the cloned image. 
One of Painter's newest and most re- 
markable features was used to create the 
result in Figure 11.18. A Photo CD marble tex- 
ture was first imported and cropped to size 
to form a substrate. The Liquid Metal Floater 
was then selected from the Objects list, open- 
ing the LiquidMetaldialog box (Figure 11.19). 
Using the default settings - including the 
Standard Metal map - a number of mercury- 
like blobs of metal were deposited on the 
marble surface. Using the Pick tool and ex- 
ploiting the simulated surface tension feature 
of this plugin, one of the smaller blobs was 
moved closer to the largest one until it was 
'captured' and the two began to merge. Three 
other blobs were also moved closer to the larg- 
est one, so that their shapes began to deform, 
as if they, too, were about to be captured. A 
204 

Digital art 
Figure 12.18 Fatalattraction 
drop shadow was added to the blobs to en- 
hance the impression that they were sitting 
on the surface of a marble block. 
A number of techniques were combined 
to produce the result shown in Figure 11.20 
from three separate Photo CD images. First a 
background 'canvas' was chosen and the lev- 
els were adjusted in Photoshop to soften its 
texture. A new layer was created and a cut- 
. out image of a classical face in profile was 
imported to the new layer, where it was in- 
verted, its transparency was reduced to 70% 
and Photoshop's Image/Adjus~~e/Saturation 
~~~ 
Figure 11.19 Liquid Metal dialog box 
_ -  
.I 
'=a . *. 
:i 
controls were-used to adjust the colouring of 
the image to blend with the background 
canvas. 
A third layer was added and a cutout 
image of fuchsias was imported, scaled, ro- 
tated and positioned in the top corner of the 
layer. As before, the colouring of the fuchsias 
was adjusted to blend with the underlying 
layers. Finally, while it was still selected, the 
fuchsia image was feathered, copied and a 
second copy was added. 
7; 
figure 11 20 Profile 
205 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Eelon 
M r r  
I 
Red 
Gnen 
.- 
flood 
PhotoLab 
figure 11.21 Photohbdialogbox 
With every new release, Corel's 
PHOTO-PAINT offers interesting new paint- 
ing and photoediting possibilities. One of 
these, for example, is the ability to apply one 
of a range of PhotoLab HSV presets to an im- 
age to give it a more dramatic appearance 
(Figure 11.21); another is the ability to apply 
photographic 'filters' to an image simulating 
traditional photographic editing effects. 
These effects were used in the production of 
the composition in Figure 11.22. 
Four photographic images representing 
spring, summer, autumn and winter were 
assembled in PHOTO-PAINT and a different 
effect was applied to each; PhotofilterM20was 
applied to spring, the Orange Cast filter was 
applied to summer, Photofilter 8lD was ap- 
plied to autumn and Photofilter 82C was ap- 
plied to winter). After assembling the four 
images in a single window, the Marquee tool 
was used to select the horizontal strip sepa- 
rating the upper two images from the lower 
two and the Diffuse filter was applied twice 
to break down the sharp boundary and blend 
Figure 11.22 Les quatresaisons 
206 

Digital art 
the images together. The same technique was 
then applied to the vertical boundary. As a 
further means of bringing the four images 
together and to provide more texture to the 
composition, the composite image was 
opened in Photoshop and Uniform (Monocho- 
matic) noise was applied, using the Noise fil- 
ter with the Amount set to 25. Finally, the 
Marquee tool was used to select a narrow strip 
around the edge of the image and Lightness 
was reduced to create a border effect. 
The next two compositions - Figures 
11.23 and 11.24 - were created in Bryce. The 
rock object in Figure 11.23, representing a fall- 
ing meteorite, was scaled, rotated and posi- 
tioned just above a water plane. A material 
texture was chosen to give it an eerie, green- 
ish glow, which was enhanced by choosing a 
sky containing green and by positioning the 
lighting to reflect off the front surface. A re- 
flective, rippled, texture was applied to the 
water plane to reflect and shadow the falling 
'meteorite' . 
The objective in creating Figure 11.24 
was to create the impression of a glass moun- 
tain rising from the ocean. A terrain object 
was placed in position and scaled to size. Its 
topography was then edited in Bryce's ter- 
rain editor to smooth the edges and vary the 
altitude of the peaks. Various glass textures 
were tried, to find one with the best reflec- 
tive and refractive properties and then a re- 
flective water plane was added and its level 
adjusted. Finally a cool blue-grey sky was se- 
lected to introduce reflected colours and the 
lighting parameters were optimised. 
.. h 
f 
> ? '  
Figure11.23 Imminentimpact 
207 
Fip11.24 Glassmountain 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
The final example in this chapter involved the use of the re- 
markable Alchemy filters provided with Core1 PHOTO-PAINT. The 
staring image - a clay face mask - was opened in PHOTO-PAINT 
and the Alchemy filter was selected from the EffectdFancy menu. In- 
cluded in the Style dropdown list in the Alchemy dialog box are a 
number of variants of the Spatula style; the first of these was selected 
and applied to the image. A cutout of the result was copied to the 
clipboard and pasted into the left side of a new image containing 
only a black fill (Figure 11.26). Two other variants of the Spatula style 
(Horizontaland Angular) were then applied to copies of the mask and 
the results were pasted into the centre and right hand side of Figure 
11.26. Next a border selection encompassing the boundary between 
each of the three masks and the black surround was created and the 
Diffuse and Gaussian Blur filters were used to blend the faces into the 
black background. A fine black brush was also used to touch up the 
, 
4) 
edges. 
Finally, the Lasso selection tool was used to select the eye orbits 
Figure 11 25 Mask 
in the first mask and a radial white-to-black fill was applied, centred 
on the midpoint between the eyes. The same operation was then re- 
peated for the eye orbits in each of the other two masks f 
Figure 11 .% Triptych 
208 

Summary 
Summary 
A few readers may be old enough to 
remember sitting in the darkness of a cinema 
auditorium watching the original screening of 
the Wizard of Oz in which Dorothy, the young 
heroine played by Judy Garland, is knocked 
unconscious as the family house is struck by a 
tornado. The opening sequences leading up to 
this event were filmed in black and white and 
then, as Dorothy, still unconscious, begins to 
dream, suddenly the images on the screen 
transform into dazzling Technicolor. For me, as 
a child, this film encapsulated the magical qual- 
ity of colour, as Dorothy set off, not along a pale 
grey brick road, but along a bright yellow brick 
road, in search of the magical land of Oz. 
For most of us, who just take colour for 
granted, it is hard to imagine how life would 
be in dull monotone. Life without the vibrancy 
which colour brings to a sunset, a rainbow, the 
petals of a flower or the plumage of a bird. 
Thanks to science, we have some understand- 
ing of the physical relationships between light 
and colour, but even today we do not fully un- 
derstand how the brain perceives colour. We do 
know, however, from research that colour is an 
catalyst in the process of communication be- 
tween people, for example that the visual im- 
pact and retention rate of information commu- 
nicated with the aid of colours is much higher 
than that communicated in black and white. 
In our world with its population ap- 
proaching six billion people, sharing hundreds 
of languages and thousands of dialects, the 
importance of using graphics wherever possi- 
ble to surmount language barriers is self-evi- 
dent and colour offers a whole new dimension 
to the graphic designer and artist in this task. 
Over the centuries, artists have sought to 
reproduce the colours in nature’s palette - the 
blues, greens and browns of a landscape, the 
delicate skin tones of a living subject - using 
paints made from nature’s materials. As we 
have seen, such paints rely for their effect on 
the absorption and reflection of light, so in a 
sense, today’s digital artist is simply using a 
variation of this technique by using an electron 
beam to emit light from the phosphor screen of 
a monitor. What has changed is that the digital 
artist possesses a level of precise control over 
the colour of that light that his predecessors 
could not have imagined. 
The technology of satellite communica- 
tions is already bringing colour television pic- 
tures into billions of homes around the globe 
and the same technology will provide the same 
homes with access to the Internet. Instead of 
art galleries displaying coveted works of art for 
the pleasure of the elite few, free access to vir- 
tual art galleries will become available to mil- 
lions, motivating many of them to participate 
in the revolution, contributing their own crea- 
tions via their own Web sites. 
In this book we have looked briefly at the 
way digital colour works and at exciting new 
ways in which it can be applied to the creation 
of a wide variety of illustration types. As the 
digital revolution continues its dizzy pace, the 
opportunities unfolding before the designer are 
enormous. The future’s bright! The digital fu- 
ture is coloured! 
209 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Bibliography 
@ 
Baird, R.N. Turnbull, A.T. and McDonald, D. The 
Graphics of Communication, New York: Holt, Rinehart 
& Winston, 1987. 
Blatner, D. and Roth, S. Real World Scanning and 
Halftones, California: Peachpit Press, 1993. 
Dean Lem Associated Znc. Graphics Master 4,4th Edition, 
Los Angeles: 1988. 
Craig, J. Production for the Graphic Designer, New York: 
Watson-Guptill, 1976 (revised edition 1990). 
Craig, J. and Barton, B. Thirty Centuries of Graphic 
Design, New York: Watson-GuptiU, 1987. 
Craig, J. and Bevington, W. Working with Graphic 
Designers, New York: Wa tson-GuptiU, 1989. 
Dalley, T. (ed.). The Complete Guide to Illustration and 
Design, London: Phaidon, 1980. 
Gill, R. W. Basic Rendering, London: Thames &Hudson, 
1991. 
Gosney, M. and Dayton, L. The Desktop Colour Book, 
California: MIS Press, 1995. 
Gosney, M., Dayton, L. and Chang, P.Z. The Verbum Book 
of Scanned Imagery, California: M&T Books, 1991. 
Greiman, A. Hybrid Imagery, London: ADTPress, 1990. 
HeUer, S. and Fink, A. Low Budget High-Quality Design, 
New York: Watson-Guptill, 1990. 
Hollis, R. Graphic Design - A Concise History, London: 
Thames &Hudson, 1994. 
Meggs, P.B. History of Graphic Design, New York: Van 
Nostrand Reinhold, 19B. 
Miles, J. Design for Desktop Publishing, London: Gordon 
Fraser, 1987. 
Nyman, M. Photoshop in 4 Colors, California: Peachpit 
Press, 1996. 
Oliver, D. Fractal Vision, Carmel, Indiana: Sams 
Publishing, 1995. 
Olsen, G. Getting Started in Computer Graphics, Ohio: 
North Light Books, 1993. 
Parker, R.C. Looking Good in Print, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina: Ventana Press Lnc., 1988. 
Peacock, J. et al. The Print and Production Manual, 
London: Blueprint (5th edition), 3990. 
Pender, K. Creative PC Graphics, Wilmslow, Cheshire: 
Sigma Press, 19%. 
Pender, K. Digital Graphic Design, Oxford: Focal Press, 
1996. 
Pipes, A. Production for Graphic Designers, London: 
Laurence KingPublishing, 1992. 
Porter, T. and Goodman, S. Manual of Graphic Techniques 
2, London: Butterworth Architecture, 1982. 
Porter, T. and Greenstreet, B. Manual of Graphic 
Techniques 1, London: Butterworth Architecture, 1980. 
Rudolf, A. Art and Visual Perception, Berkeley, California: 
University of California Press, 1974. 
Sanders, N. and Bevington, W. Graphic Designer's 
Production Handbook, N e w  York: Hastings House 
Publishers Znc., 1981 
Sutton, J. Fractal Design Painter Creative Techniques, 
Indiana: Hayden Books, 19%. 
Tektronix Znc. Picture Perfect: Color Output in 
Computer Graphic, WilsonviJle, Oregon, 1988. 
Turnbull, A.T. and Baird, R.N. The Graphics of 
Communication, New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 
1980. 
210 

Glossary 
(I 
Glossary 
?..-BIT COLOUR A description of systems which allocate 24 bits of 
data to each pixel in an image. Usually, the bits are allocated as 8 bits 
each for the three additive primary colours (red, green and blue). 
That arrangement provides over 16.7 million colour possibilities. 
ALPHA CHANNEL In applications like Photoshop, alpha channels 
are used to create and stir; masks. Alpha channels^ar<additional to 
the three channels of an RGB image or the four channels of a CMYK 
image. 
AMBIENTLIGHT Normal background light, for example daylight, 
as opposed to artificial light cast by room lights or spotlights. 
BF,ZIER Using the BCzier tool, smooth curves can be created by plac- 
ing and manipulating BCzier nodes and the handles which radiate 
from these nodes. 
BITMAP A type of graphics format in which the image is made up 
of a large number of tiny dots (bits) arranged on a closely spaced 
grid. 
BITS/PD(EL A description of the number of levels of information a 
system stores about each point in an image. For every extra bit, the 
number of available colours or shades of grey doubles. Also called 
pixel depth. 
BLEND A feature on many digital painting programs that allows 
softening of the edges or mixing of colours where two objects or re- 
gions meet. 
BOOLEAN OPERATION- Action that can be performed within 
solid modeller to allow obiects to be differeneced. intersected or 
joined. 
BUMPMAPPING In Photoshop, the Texture Channel in the Light- 
ing Effects dialog box allows use of a greyscale texture to affect how 
the light bounces off the image. By creating unique textures, or by 
using general textures like those of paper or water, 'bumps' can be 
produced in the image which appear to bounce the light off a three- 
dimensional surface. 
CLIPART Copyright-free illustrations, available as conventional 
artwork and in formats that which can be used directly in DTP-pro- 
duced publications. 
CLONE In a painting application, the cloning tool takes a sample of 
the original image, which can then be applied to, or painted over, 
another image. In a drawing application, subsequent changes ap- 
plied to the original object (the master) are automatically applied to 
update the copy (the clone). 
CMYK Cyan, magenta, yellow and key (black). This is the system 
used to describe and separate colours for printing. Other systems 
include RGB (red, green, blue) for transmitted colour, as on compu- 
ter screens, and HLS (hue, luminance, saturation), a more theoreti- 
cal description. The Pantone Matching System matches colours by 
mixing 11 basic colours. 
COLOUR CORRECTION The process of changing the colour bal- 
ance of an image to approach more closely the desired values. Im- 
ages are colour corrected to make up for the differences between 
the response of the film and inkand the human eye and to compen- 
sate for the effects of the printing process. 
COLOURDEFIX Determines the range of colours and tones that 
are available in an image, and is usually measured by the number 
of colours displayed, e.g. 256 colours, or 16 million colours. 
COLOURDISPIAY SYSTEM The colour computer display screen 
itself, and the graphics card which drives it. 
COLOUR GAMUT The range of colours that a device, such as a 
monitor or colour printer, can produce or detect. 
COLOURMANAGEMENT The process of ensuring that colour is 
reproduced as accuratelv as possible by all of the devices in a com- 
p;ter system. The majorknckons of electronic colour management 
are gamut mapping, device characterisation and onscreen colour 
correction. 
COLOURMODE A system which defines the number and kind of 
colours that make up a bitmap image. Black-and-white, Greyscale, 
RGB, CMYK and Paletted are examples of popular colour modes. 
COLOURMODEL A simple colour chart which defines the range 
of colours displayed in a colour mode. RGB (red, green, blue), CMY 
(cyan, magenta, yellow), CMYK (cyan, magenta, yellow, black), HSB 
(Hue, Saturation, Brightness), HLS (Hue, Lightness, Saturation), and 
CIE L*a*b (Lab) are examples of popular colour models. 
COLOURSPACE A virtual representation of a device or colour 
model's colour gamut in electronic colour management. The 
boundaries and contours of a device's colour space are mapped by 
colour management software. 
COLOURSEPARATIONS A set of films for the cyan, magenta, 
yellow and blackcomponents of a full colour image. 
COLOUR TEMPERATURE In monitor calibration, colour tem- 
perature is the colour of light expressed as an absolute temperature 
(on the Kelvin scale). The white point of a monitor is defined in 
terms of colour temperature. 6500 K is bluish white, like daylight, 
while 5000 K is a yellowish white, like an incandescent bulb. 
COMPOSITE IMAGE An image created from the blending of two 
or more other images, e.g. Photoshop's Mode options, determine 
which pixels in a floating selection will replace the underlying 
pixels, based on a comparison of the pixels. Darken mode, for exam- 
ple, pastes only pixels that are darker than the pixels in the under- 
lying image. 
CONTINUOUSTONE Artworkor photography containing shades 
of grey. 
CYAN Process blue -really more turquoise in colour. 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
DIGITISING RESOLUTION The fineness of detail that a scanner 
can distinguish. Unless otherwise stated, it is the spatial resolution, 
reported in dots per linear inch (or dots per mm in metric areas). 
DITHER PATTERN For a scanner, a pattern of dots used to simu- 
late grey tones or intermediate colours. Also called screen pattern. 
DITHERING A crude computer method of screening. Thermal wax 
and inkjet printers produce their colours by interspersing pixels of 
cyan, magenta and yellow (and sometimes black) in regular pat- 
terns, grouped together in either 2 2 or 4 4 matrices. 
DPI Dots per inch, a measure of the resolution or addressability of 
a raster device such as a laser printer. 
DRAWING PROGRAM A computer program which stores im- 
ages in terms of the lines and curves used to create them. See also 
Painting Program. 
DROP SHADOW A copy of an object positioned below it and offset 
from the orignal to create the appearance of a shadow. In a drawing 
program, the tone of the shadow can be adjusted. In a painting pro- 
gram, the edges can be blurred for additional effect. 
EMBOSSING A finishing process producing an image in low re- 
lief. 
ENVELOPING Constraining the boundaries of text or of a drawn 
or painted object to fit within a predefined shape. 
EXTRUDING Applying a three-dimensional appearance to a se- 
lected object by adding surfaces to it. In a drawing program, the 
surfaces become new objects. Extruding an object creates an extrude 
group which includes the original object and the extruded surfaces. 
FEATHER To blend or smooth the edge of a region or shape into a 
background or other object, especially in a slightly irregular fashion 
to achieve a natural-looking effect. 
FOUR COLOUR PROCESS Full colour printing in which colours 
are approximated by various percentages of the process colours: 
cyan, magenta, yellow and black. A full colour image is separated by 
filters into four different films - one for each of the four process 
colours - and four plates are used for the printing. 
GAMMA CURVE A graphical representation of an image, show- 
ing the distribution of pixels in the image with colour values rang- 
ing from dark to light. 
GEL An image placed between a light source and a surface so that 
it casts a shadow on to the surface. 
GOURALJD SHADING Average quality rendering method which 
can make polygonal meshes look smooth 
HALFTONE A continuous-tone image converted to line by turning 
it into a pattern of dots, either electronically, by laser, or by photo- 
graphing it through a screen. 
HIGHLIGHT The lightest area on an image being photographed 
(and therefore the darkest area on the negative). 
IMAGE MAPPING Projecting an image on to an object to give it a 
surface appearance. 
IMAGESETTER A high-resolution output device, producing 
typesetting or whole pages on bromide paper or film. 
INKJET PRINTER An output device that creates an image by spray- 
ing tiny drops of ink on to paper. See also Bubblejet Printer. 
LASERPRINTER An output device in which black toner is attracted 
to an image on a drum that has been electrostatically charged by the 
action of a laser; the image is transferred to paper and fixed by heat. 
LATHING A technique for creating a three-dimensional object with 
axial symmetry by first creating a two-dimensional outline and then 
rotating the outline around a specified axis. 
LAYER Like the transparent acetates used to build up the layers of 
a traditional composition, the electronic layers of a drawing or paint- 
ing program are used to keep elements of a composition separate 
from each other. The attributes of each layer, e.g. the layer’s trans- 
parency, can be adjusted independently of the other layers. 
LINE ART Illustrations containing only blacks and whites, with no 
intermediate tones (or similarly a bitonal arrangement of some 
other colour). Line art can be reproduced without the screening or 
patterning step most printing processes need to produce a range of 
tones. 
LINE SCREEN Measurement of a halftone screen, short for lines 
per inch or Ipi; the higher the number of lines, the finer the screen. 
MAGENTA The process colour red; really more a purple colour. 
MASKING Drawing a path around an area of a composition so that 
an effect can be applied just to that area, or conversely, applied only 
to the area outside the mask. 
MOIRE Unwanted ’basket-weave’ effects caused by superimposed 
regular patterns, such as halftone dots. Screens must be set at angles 
to minimise moire. 
OFFSET LITHOGRAPHY Usually abbreviated to offset litho, 
prints first on to a rubber or plastic blanket, and then on to the paper. 
OPACITY The property of a layer defining the visibility of objects 
lying on a lower layer. The converse of transparency. 
PAINTING PROGRAM A computer program which stores the 
image on the screen as a bitmap. See also Drawing Program. 
PALETTE The collection of colours or shades available to a graph- 
ics system or program. On many systems, the number of colours 
available for use at any time is limited to a selection from the over- 
all system palette. 
PANTONE MATCHING SYSTEM (PMS) A widely used propri- 
etary system for specifying flat colour in percentages of 11 standard 
colours; 
coordinating 
papers and markers corresponding to Pantone colours can also be 
purchased. 
PEN PLOTTER A point-to-point output device used mainly for 
engineering drawings; if equipped with a knife in place of the pen 
it can be used to cut stencils for screenprinting or vinyl letters for 
signs. 
PHONG SHADING High quality rendering method which adds 
better smoothing textures, shadows and subtle lighting effects to 
Gouraud. 
PHOTO CD A product launched by the Eastman Kodak Company 
in 1992 which converts 35 mm film negative or slide into digital 
format by a high resolution scanning process and stores the images 
on CD. Images are stored at multiple levels of resolution, allowing 
users to select a version with a quality and file size appropriate to 
their application. 
PHOTOREALISTIC Description of images that looklike they could 
have been produced by a photographic process. For a computer 
image, this usually means one with good spatial resolution and 
sufficient colour depth (number of colours). 
PIXEL Short for picture element and refers to the dot on a compu- 
ter display. The resolution (sharpness) of a raster display is meas- 
ured by the number of pixels horizontally by the number of scan 
lines vertically, e.g. 1280 1024. 
212 

Glossary 
PLATE A metal or plastic sheet with a photosensitive face on to 
which an image is chemically etched, either changing the charac- 
teristics of the surface as in lithography, or cutting below the surface 
as in relief or intaglio printing. 
POLYGONAL MODELLING Shapes generated by meshes of small 
polygonal shapes which can approximate to curved surfaces. 
PORTRAIT The orientation of a page when the height is greater 
than the width. 
POSTERISE To transform an image to a more stark form by round- 
ing tonal or colour values to a small number of possible values. 
PROCEDURAL TEXTURES Object textures which are based on 
small mathematical algorithms and are resolution independent. 
PROCESS COLOURS The four colours -cyan (pro-cess blue), 
magenta (process red), yellow and key (black) -used to approxi- 
mate full colour artwork. 
RAY TRACING A process for rendering a scene. The ray tracer 
sends hypothetical rays of light from the sources in the scene and 
calculates the visual effect for each pixel in the rendering, as rays 
encounter and reflect from the various objects making up the scene. 
REGISTER 1. The alignment of the printed image with its intended 
position on the page. 2. The alignment of parts of an image with 
other parts, especially with parts that are printed separately, as in 
colour separation. 
RELIEF PRINTING A printing process, such as letterpress and 
flexography, in which inklies on the raised surface of the plate but 
not in the grooves and is transferred to the paper by pressure. 
RENDER To produce an image from a model or description. Usu- 
ally, this means filling in a graphic object or image with colour and 
brightness (or just shading for monochrome systems). Realistic ren- 
dering takes a lot of computingpower and advanced techniques. 
RESOLUTION A measure of the fineness and quality of an output 
device, usually measured in dots per inch (dpi) -the number of 
dots that can be placed end to end in a line that is an inch long. 
RGB (RED, GREEN, BLUE) A system for specifying colour on a 
computer screen. See also CMYK. 
SCALING Enlarging or reducing - usually applied to an image - 
and calculating the percentage of enlargement or reduction so as to 
anticipate the space it will occupy on a layout. 
SCAN 1. To convert an image from visible form to an electronic 
description. Most available systems turn the image into a corre- 
sponding series of dots but do not actually recognise shapes. How- 
ever, some attempt to group the dots into their corresponding char- 
acters (Optical Character Recognition) or corresponding objects. 2. 
Particularly, to use a scanner (an input device containing a camera 
or photosensitive element) to produce an electronic image of an 
object or of the contents of a sheet of paper. 3. A scanned image. 
SCREEN PRINTING A printing process using a stencil supported 
on a mesh or screen; ink is forced through the open mesh but is 
prevented from reaching the non-image areas of the paper by the 
stencil. 
SEPARATION Film in register relating to one of the four process 
colours; also artwork or film in register relating to flat colour. 
SHARPEN An image enhancement that increases the apparent 
sharpness of an image by increasing the contrast of edges. Actually, 
the effect further distorts an image and its repetitive use on the 
same signal will create a less realistic image. 
SHEAR In painting and drawing programs, to slant an object along 
a specified axis (much the way a type of simple italic might be made 
by slanting a normal upright roman character). 
SKINNING A three-dimensional modelling technique which 
simulates the stretching of a flexible skin over a series of cross-sec- 
tional shapes or formers. 
SMUDGE A feature on some graphics programs that blends col- 
ours or softens edges that are already in place in an image. The 
effect is supposed to resemble what would happen if the image was 
made of wet paint and you ran a finger over the area. 
SOLARISE To change the intensity levels in an image in a way that 
particularly brightens or transforms the middle levels. 
SPLINE BASED MODELLING Uses Bezier-like splines to define 
an object’s surface. More precise than polygonal modelling. 
SPOT COLOUR Colour that is applied only as individually speci- 
fied areas of a single ink colour; compare process colour, whereby 
colours may be mixed and each dot of painted colour must be deter- 
mined by a more complex overall colour-separation process. 
THERMAL-TRANSFER PRINTER An output device that prints 
by ’ironing’ coloured wax on to paper by the action of heat. 
The CD 
The CD provided with Digital Colour in Graphic Design contains bitmap files of the Workshop images 
contained within the book. A readme.txt file catalogues the contents. 
The purpose of providing the CD is to allow the purchaser to view the images as they were originally 
created on screen. As explained within the book, the colour printing process fundamentally differs from that 
used to display images on a colour monitor and, therefore, some differences will be noticed. 
The CD images are provided in the widely used TIFF format so that they may be viewed on any of a wide 
range of painting or photoediting applications on either a PC or a Mac-intosh. 
Images are provided to the purchaser for viewing purposes only. They may not be redistributed by 
electronic or other means or included in a product for sale. 
213 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
3D modelling, see Three dimensional 
24-bit colour, 211 
Adobe: 
modelling 
Photoshop, see Photoshop 
Postscript, 37,61,64,66-7 
Streamline, 198 
Trapwise, 70 
Agfa, 67 
Alpha channels, 211 
Ambient light, 211 
Animation, 164-5 
Applications, see Drawing applications; 
Page makeup 
applications; Painting 
applications; Photoediting 
Applying colour, 36-43 
Architecture, 98-101 
Art: 
digital, 195-208 
light sources for, 7-9 
applications; Shareware programs 
Astrology, 173 
Bezier tool, 211 
Bit (colour) depth, 256.211 
Bitmaps, 211 
Bits, 211 
Bizarre and macabre images, 167-80 
Blends, 37,211 
Boolean objects, 138-40 
Boolean operations, 211 
Bryce, 104,106-13 
bizarre images with, 175-6,177-8 
for digital art, 201-2,207 
with Poser figures, 1624 
sculpture with, 138-44 
textures with, 190,193-4 
Bumpmapping, 106,160,211 
Calibration, 32.-3,34,212 
Cameras, 20-1 
Canon laser printers, 63 
CDs, see Photo CD 
Cedar Software, 188-9 
Choke, 70 
Clipart, 211 
Clones, 124-5,211 
CMS Wizard, 34 
CMYK, 24,211 
CCDs, 21-2 
Index 
CMYKmode, 25 
CMYK model, 26-7 
ColorSmart, 59 
Colour, 1418,209 
applying, 36-43 
working with, 19-56 
Colour blindness, 11 
Colour cast, 47 
Colour combination techniques, 40-3 
Colour correction, 211 
Colour depth, 25-6,211 
Colour display system, 211 
Colour editing, 4452 
Colour gamut, 29,31,76,211 
Colour laser printers, 58,634 
Colour management, 31-5,211 
Colour management systems, 31-2,34 
Colour masking, 457,213 
Colour matching systems, 29-31 
Colour models, 267,211 
Colour modes, 25-6,211 
Colour output, 57-77 
see also Printing 
Colour reproduction, 20-5 
Colour separation, 64-7,212,214 
Colour space, 26,212 
Colour temperature, 8,212 
Colour wheel, 17 
Combination techniques for colour, 40-3 
Commercial printing, 64-77 
offset process, 23-5,69,213 
Composite image, 212 
Cone of vision, 12 
Constable, John, 8 
Construction procedures: 
see also Laser printers 
chessboard, 90-1 
city lights, 110 
kicking horse, 88 
King Kong, 85-6 
LaMode, 92-3 
magic bricks, 83 
mountain high, 109 
muscles, 91 
polar scene, 111 
return from space, 112 
rodeo, 89-90 
sandstonerocks, 109 
satellite, 112 
schizophrenia, 92 
scuba diving, 84-5 
for sculptures, 139,141,142,143 
shallow water, 110 
sign painter, 88-9 
spookbook, 86 
Stonehenge, 87 
volcanic island, 111 
weaving, 84 
web, 93 
Continuous tone, 212 
Convergence and perspective, 13 
Corel Photo CD Lab, 35 
Corel PHOTO-PAINT, 206,208 
applying colour, 38 
colour combining in, 42 
Corel TEXTURE, 190-2 
CorelDRAW 
bizarre images with, 179-80 
colour management system, 34 
for digital art, 198,202,203 
fill options, 37 
labels, 99 
lenses, 44-5 
for portraits, 121 
trapping, 70-1 
Corrective colour editing, 47-8 
Creative colour editing, 48-52 
Crete, 7 
Cyan, 212 
Dainippon, 31 
Dali, Salvador, 82 
Degas, Edgar, 8 
DEM (Digital Elevation Module) files, 112 
DEMView, 112 
Designer, 36,37,121,137-8 
Desktop printers, 23-5,58-64 
calibration, 33 
inkjet, 58-9,61-2,212 
laser, 61,213 
colour, 58,634 
thermal wax, 59,62-3,214 
Desktop systems, 20,31 
Device profiles, 31-2 
DIC Colour Guide, 31 
DIC palette, 31 
Digital art, 195-208 
Digital cameras, 22 
Digital colour, working with, 19-56 
Digital colour separation, 66-7 
214 

Index 
Digital Elevation Module (DEM) files, 112 
Digital palette, 28-9 
Digital proofs, 77 
Digital sculpture, 131-50 
Digitising resolution, 212 
Diminution and perspective, 13 
Dither pattern, 24,212 
Dithering, 212 
Dore, Gustave, 8 
Dot gain, 73-5 
DPI, 212 
Drawing applications, 197,212 
applying colour in, 36-7 
colour editing in, 44-5 
file size, 52 
for portrait painting, 119,120-1 
sculpture in, 134-5 
trapping in, 70-1 
see also CorelDRAW, Micrografx Designer 
Drop shadow, 212 
DuPont SpectraMaster, 30 
Dye sublimation, 63 
Eastman Kodak Company, 55 
seealsoPhotoCD 
Edison, Thomas, 7 
Editing, colour, 44-52 
Egyptians, 7 
colours used by, 14-15 
figure paintingby, 116,153 
science of, 182 
sculptures of, 132 
supernatural images by, 168 
Embossing, 212 
Enveloping, 212 
Environment, work, 3 3 4  
Escher, Maurits Corneille, 10,82-3 
Extreme 3D, 104,106,142 
sculpture with, 149-50 
Extruding, 145,212 
Eyedropper tool, 45 
Eyes and vision, 9-13 
FastBits, 53 
Feathering, 212 
Figures, see Human figures 
Files: 
DEM, 112 
manipulating large, 52-5 
Fills, 36-7,38-40 
Film, photographic, 21 
Filters, applying, 129 
FlashPix, 55 
Focoltone, 29,30 
Foreshortening and perspective, 13 
Four-colour process, 65-6,212 
Fractal Grafics, 188-9 
Fractal Painter: 
applying colour, 38,39,40 
bizarre images with, 180 
colour editing in, 50,51-2 
for digital art, 199,201,203-5 
for portraits, 121,124-9 
and pseudo 3D effects, 103 
warping effects, 137 
bizarre images with, 176-8 
figures imported from, 142 
Fractal Poser, 159-65 
Fractals, 188-90 
Fractint, 188 
Freehand, 36,37,45 
for portraits, 119,121 
Gamma curves, 212 
Gauguin, Paul, 155-6 
GDI (Graphics Device Interfaces), 60-1 
Gel, 212 
Geographical Society, US, 112 
Gouraud shaping, 212 
Goya, Francisco de, 155,156 
Graphic User Interface, 10 
Graphics Device Interfaces, 60-1 
Greeks: 
colours used by, 15 
portraits by, 116,127 
sculptures by, 132-3,153-4 
Grey component replacement, 75-6 
Greyscale images, 49-50 
Greyscale mode, 25 
GUI (Graphic User Interface), 10 
Halftone, 23-4,69,212 
Hewlett-Packard, 55,59,61 
High resolution images, 52-5 
High-fidelity colour, 76 
Highlights, 212 
of art, 196 
of figure painting, 153-6 
of horror, 168-9 
of human evolution, 152-3 
of light sources, 7 
of portrait painting, 116-19 
of sculpture, 132-4 
HLS model, 27 
Horror, history of, 168-9 
HSB model, 27 
Hue, 17-18 
Human figures, 151-65 
History: 
bizarre images with, 176-8 
imported into Bryce, 142 
see also Portraits 
IBM Corporation, 1867,188 
Illusions, 10-11 
Illustrator, 121 
Image mapping, 212 
Images: 
bizarre and macabre, 167-80 
composite, 212 
greyscale, 49-50 
high resolution, 52-5 
photorealistic, 213 
sharpen feature for, 214 
Imagesetters, 212 
Inkjet printers, 58-9,61-2,212 
Inks, 15,65,76-7 
Intelligent Color, 59 
Internet, 112,194,209 
Web sites, 186 
Kodak, 55 
KPT: 
seealsoPhotoCD 
Fractal Designer, 189 
Gradient Designer, 39 
Spheroid Designer, 192-3,203 
Texture Explorer, 192-3,203 
L*a*b mode, 25 
L*a*b model, 27 
Laser printers, 61,213 
colour, 58,624 
Lathing, 145,146,213 
Layers, 213 
Lenses, colour editing with, 44-5 
Leonard0 da Vinci, 154-5 
Light, 4-7 
artists’ sources, 7-9 
Lightness, 17-18 
Line art, 213 
Line screen, 213 
Lines, applying colour with, 36,374 
Linotype-Hell, 67 
Live Picture, 53,55 
Macabre and bizarre images, 167-80 
Macromedia: 
Freehand, see Freehand 
xRes, 53-5 
Magenta, 213 
Magic Wand tool, 45-6 
Mandelbrot, Benoit, 188 
Manet, Edouard, 155 
Masking, 45-7’213 
Masks, 171-2 
Matching systems, 29-31 
MetaCreations, 39,106,138 
Michelangelo, 154 
Micrografx Designer, 36,37,121,137-8 
Microscopes, images from, 184-7 
M m m p y  Today, 186 
Microsoft, 55 
Modigliani, Amedeo, 174 
Moire patterns, 69,213 
Monet, Claude, 8 
Monitors, 22-3,32-3,212 
Morphing, 82 
Mosaics. 127-8 
see also Bryce; KM 
Nature, images from, 181-94 
Off-press proofs, 77 
Offset printing, 23-5,69,213 
Opacity, 213 
Output, see Colour output; Printing 
Page description languages (PDLs), 60-1 
Page makeup applications, 72-3 
PageMaker, 66,72-3 
Painter, see Fractal painter 
215 

Digital Colour in Graphic Design 
Painting applications, 197,213 
applying colour in, 37-40 
colour editing in, 45-7 
file size, 52 
for portrait painting, 119,121 
trapping in, 71-2 
see also Corel PHOTO-PAINT; Fractal 
Painter; 
Photoshop; Picture Publisher, 
Painting styles for portraits, 124-5 
Palette, 28-9,213 
Pantone Hexachrome, 76 
Pantone Matching System, 29-30,213 
Pantone Spot Colours, 29-30,36,213 
Paper, 76-7 
Paradigms: 
definition of, 83 
defying, 81-95 
PDLs, 60-1 
Perspective, 12-13 
Phong shading, 213 
Photo CD, 35,213 
in pseudo 3D effects, 101-2 
and L"a*b colour mode, 25 
bizarre images with, 174-5,179,180 
for digital art, 200-1,204,205 
microscope images on, 184 
Photo CD Lab, 35 
Photoediting applications: 
trapping in, 71-2 
see also Corel PHOTO-PAINT Fractal 
Painter; 
Photoshop; Picture Publisher 
Photographic colour separation, 64-6 
Photorealistic images, 213 
Photoshop: 
applying colour, 37,39 
bizarre images with, 174-5,176,179,180 
bumpmapping, 211 
colour combining in, 42-3 
colour editing in, 46,47,48-51 
for digital art, 198,200-1,203,205,207 
dot gain compensation, 73-5 
filters, 129 
plugins for, 189,192-3 
portraits in, 121-3 
with Poser figures, 161-2 
sculpture in, 136 
tilesin, 40 
trapping in, 71-2 
Picasso, Pablo, 82,133,155 
Picture Publisher, 35 
applying colour, 38,40 
colour combination in, 41-2 
colour editing in, 46-7,48 
and large files, 52-3 
Pipelining, 145,147 
Pixels, 211,213 
Plates, 213 
Plotters, 213 
PMS (Pantone Matching System), 29-30,213 
Pointillism, 8,9 
Polygonal modelling, 213 
Portrait (page orientation), 213 
Portraits, 115-29,198-9 
Poser, seeFractal Poser 
Posterise command, 123,213 
Postscript, 37,61,64,66-7 
Press proofs, 77 
Primary colours, 16-17 
Printer driver software, 59-60. 
Printers, desktop, seeDesktop printers 
Printer's marks, 67-8 
Printing: 
commercial, 64-77 
desktop, 58-64 
offset, 23-5,69,213 
see alsoDesktop printers 
Procedural textures, 190-4,213 
Process colours, 30-1,213 
Programs: 
printer driver software, 59-60 
shareware, 112,188 
see also Drawing applications; Page 
makeup applications; Painting 
applications; Photoediting applications 
Proofing, 64,77 
Pseudo 3D effects, 101-3 
Psychology of visual perception, 9-11 
QColor, 59 
QMS, 59 
Ray tracing, 213-14 
RayDream Studio, 104,105 
sculpture in, 145-8 
text preparation in, 144 
Register 1, 214 
Relief printing, 214 
Rendering, 214 
Renoir, Pierre-Auguste, 155,156 
Resolution, 197,214 
digitising, 212 
high resolution images, 52-5 
printers, 59 
of raster displays, 213 
RGB mode, 25 
RGB model, 26,214 
Romans, 168 
colours used by, 15 
portraits, 116,127 
Saturation, 17-18 
Scaling, 214 
Scanners and scanning, 21-2,32,214 
Scharf, David, 186 
Science and nature, images from, 181-94 
Screen printing, 214 
Sculpture: 
digital, 131-50 
Greek, 153-4 
history of, 132-4 
Secondary colours, 17 
SEM Wideband Multi-Detector Color 
Synthesizer, 186 
Separation, colour, 64-7,212,214 
Seurat, Georges, 8 
Shades, 17-18 
Shareware programs, 112,188 
Sharpen (image enhancement), 214 
Shear, 214 
Sight, 9-13 
Skeletons, 169-70 
Skinning, 145-6,214 
Skulls, 169-70 
Smudge, 214 
Software, see Programs 
Solarise, 214 
Spectral ranges, 29 
SpectraMaster, 30 
Spheroid Designer, 192-3,203 
Spline based modelling, 214 
Spot colours, 29-30,214 
Spread, 70 
Stereoscopy and vision, 12 
Streamline, Adobe, 198 
Studio, see RayDream Studio 
Supernatural images, 168-9 
Surface control for portraits, 126 
TekColor, 59 
Tektronix, 59 
Temperature, 8,212 
Terrain, 102-3,106-13 
Texture Explorer, 192-3,203 
Textures: 
in Picture Publisher, 40 
procedural, 1904,213 
with Texture Explorer, 192-3,203 
Thermal wax printing, 59,62-3,214 
Three dimensional modelling, 101-13 
applications, 98,104,134,150 
see also Bryce; Extreme 3D; RayDream 
Studio 
Tints, 17-18 
Tonal control for portraits, 121-3 
Tones, 17-18 
Toyo Colour Finder system, 30 
Transfer functions, 75 
Trapping, 69-73 
Trapwise, Adobe, 70 
Trumatch, 30 
Turner, Joseph, 8 
Two dimensional layouts, 98-100 
Undercolour removal, 75-6 
US Geographical Society, 112 
Visual perception, psychology of, 9-11 
Wax phase change, 63 
Weaves, Painter's, 40 
Web sites, 186 
see alsoIntemet 
Work environment, 33-4 
Xerox, 59,63 
xRes, 53-5 
21 6 

