
Digital Technologies and 
Generational Identity
The short lifetime of digital technologies means that generational identities are 
difficult to establish around any particular technologies let alone around more 
far-reaching socio-technological ‘revolutions’. Examining the consumption and 
use of digital technologies throughout the stages of human development, this 
book provides a valuable overview of ICT usage and generational differences. 
It focuses on the fields of home, family and consumption as key arenas where 
these processes are being enacted, sometimes strengthening old distinctions, 
sometimes creating new ones, always embodying an inherent restlessness that 
affects all aspects and all stages of life.
Combining a collection of international perspectives from a range of fields, 
including social gerontology, social policy, sociology, anthropology and gen­
der studies, Digital Technologies and Generational Identity weaves empirical 
evidence with theoretical insights on the role of digital technologies across 
the life course. It takes a unique post-Mannheimian standpoint, arguing that 
each life stage can be defined by attitudes towards, and experiences of, digital 
technologies as these act as markers of generational differences and identity.
It will be of particular value to academics of social policy and sociology with 
interests in the life course and human development as well as those studying 
media and communication, youth and childhood studies, and gerontology.
Sakari Taipale works as an Academy of Finland Research Fellow at the 
University of Jyväskylä, Finland. He is also an Adjunct Professor at the University 
of Eastern Finland.
Terhi-Anna Wilska is a Professor of Sociology at the Department of Social 
Sciences and Philosophy, University of Jyväskylä, Finland.
Chris Gilleard is a Visiting Research Fellow at the Division of Psychiatry, 
University College London and a Visiting Senior Research Fellow at the 
Department of Social and Policy Sciences, University of Bath, UK.

Routledge Key Themes in Health and Society
www.routledge.com/Routledge-Key-Themes-in-Health-and-Society/book-series/
RKTHS
Available titles include:
Empowerment
A Critique
Kenneth McLaughlin
The Story of Nursing in British Mental Hospitals
Echoes from the Corridors
Niall McCrae and Peter Nolan
Living with Mental Disorder
Insights from Qualitative Research
Jacqueline Corcoran
A New Ethic of ‘Older’
Subjectivity, Surgery and Self-stylization
Bridget Garnham
Social Theory and Nursing
Edited by Martin Lipscomb
Older Citizens and End-of-Life Care
Social Work Practice Strategies for Adults in Later Life
Malcolm Payne
Digital Technologies and Generational Identity
ICT Usage Across the Life Course
Sakari Taipale, Terhi-Anna Wilksa and Chris Gilleard
Forthcoming titles include:
Identity, Ageing and Cultural Adaptation
Understanding Longevity in Crossdisciplinary Perspective
Simon Biggs

Digital Technologies and 
Generational Identity
ICT Usage Across the Life Course
Edited by Sakari Taipale, 
Terhi-Anna Wilska and 
Chris Gilleard

First published 2018
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
 2018 selection and editorial matter, Sakari Taipale, Terhi-Anna Wilska 
and Chris Gilleard; individual chapters, the contributors
The right of the editors to be identified as the authors of the editorial 
material, and of the authors for their individual chapters, has been asserted 
in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and 
Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or 
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now 
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in 
any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing 
from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or 
registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation 
without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book has been requested
ISBN: 978-1-138-22597-8 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-39862-4 (ebk)
Typeset in Times New Roman
by Swales & Willis Ltd, Exeter, Devon, UK

Contents
List of figures	
vii
List of tables	
viii
List of editors	
ix
List of contributors	
x
Acknowledgements	
xiv
  1	 Introduction	
1
SAKARI TAIPALE, TERHI-ANNA WILSKA AND CHRIS GILLEARD
PART I
Historical, theoretical and methodological perspectives	
9
  2	 The place of age in the digital revolution	
11
CHRIS GILLEARD
  3	 Generational analysis as a methodological approach to 
study mediatised social change	
23
GÖRAN BOLIN
  4	 Generational analysis of people’s experience of ICTs	
37
LESLIE HADDON
PART II
Family generations and ICT	
53
  5	 Mobile life of middle-aged employees: fragmented time 
and softer schedules	
55
MIA TAMMELIN AND TIMO ANTTILA

vi  Contents
  6	 Intergenerational solidarity and ICT usage: empirical insights 
from Finnish and Slovenian families	
69
SAKARI TAIPALE, ANDRAŽ PETROVČIČ AND VESNA DOLNIČAR
  7	 Gendering the mobile phone: a life course approach	
87
CARLA GANITO
  8	 How young people experience elderly people’s use of 
digital technologies in everyday life	
102
LEOPOLDINA FORTUNATI
  9	 ICTs and client trust in the care of old people in Finland	
119
HELENA HIRVONEN
10	 Mobile phone use and social generations in rural India	
134
SIRPA TENHUNEN
PART III
Consumption, lifestyles and markets	
147
11	 Necessities to all? The role of ICTs in the everyday life 
of the middle-aged and elderly between 1999 and 2014	
149
TERHI-ANNA WILSKA AND SANNA-MARI KUOPPAMÄKI
12	 A risk to privacy or a need for security? Digital domestic 
technologies in the lives of young adults and late middle-agers	
167
SANNA-MARI KUOPPAMÄKI, OUTI UUSITALO AND TIINA KEMPPAINEN
13	 Personality traits and computer use in midlife: leisure 
activities and work characteristics as mediators	
183
TIIA KEKÄLÄINEN AND KATJA KOKKO
14	 Electronic emotions, age and the life course	
201
JANE VINCENT
15	 Conclusions	
217
CHRIS GILLEARD, TERHI-ANNA WILSKA AND SAKARI TAIPALE
Index	
222

Figures
  3.1	
Three Swedish age cohorts and use of three functions of 
mobile phone 2003–2013	
29
10.1	
Age groups according to gender in Janta	
136
10.2	
Illiteracy rate according to gender and caste status in Janta	
139
11.1	
Mean perceived necessity of PCs, cohorts aged 45 to 74, 
1999–2014	
156
11.2	
Mean perceived necessity of home internet connection, 
cohorts aged 45 to 74, 1999–2014	
157
11.3	
Mean perceived necessity of mobile phone, cohorts aged 
45 to 74, 1999–2014	
158
11.4	
Mean perceived necessity of mobile internet and tablet 
computers, all age cohorts in 2014	
160
13.1	
Hypothesised path model	
188
13.2	
The mediator path model between personality traits and 
computer use	
194

Tables
  3.1	
Focus group composition in Sweden and Estonia	
30
  5.1	
Characteristics of interviewees	
57
  7.1	
Interviewees, their age and main activity according to life stage	
90
11.1	
Perceived necessity of PC, the internet and mobile phone, 
1999–2014, 45- to 74-year-olds	
159
11.2	
Perceived necessity of tablet computer and mobile internet, 
2014, 45- to 74-year-olds	
161
13.1	
Frequencies and means with gender differences	
191
13.2	
Differences in personality traits between computer users 
and non-users	
192
13.3	
Correlations between personality, computer use, 
work characteristics, leisure activities	
193
14.1	
Summary of primary research sources on mobile phone 
and ICT users cited	
203

Editors
Sakari Taipale, PhD, works as an Academy of Finland Research Fellow at 
the University of Jyväskylä, Finland. He is also an Adjunct Professor at the 
University of Eastern Finland. Presently, he is running a five-year research 
project on intergenerational relations in digital societies. Taipale has pub­
lished on the social aspects of new media technologies and mobilities in many 
highly ranked academic journals, such as British Journal of Sociology, New 
Media and Society, Information, Communication and Society, Social Science 
Research, Telecommunications Policy, European Journal of Communication, 
and Mobilities. He is also a co-editor of Social robots from a human perspective 
(Springer, 2015).
Terhi-Anna Wilska, PhD, is a Professor of Sociology at the Department of 
Social Sciences and Philosophy, University of Jyväskylä, Finland. Her 
research interests include consumption and consumer society, lifestyles and 
well-being, age and generation, and the social effects of new technology. 
She has studied particularly the role of ICTs and online environments among 
young people and children. She has published in journals such as Journal of 
Consumer Policy, Acta Sociologica, Childhood, YOUNG, Journal of Youth 
Studies, and Information, Communication and Society. She is the co-editor of 
The Routledge handbook on consumption, which came out in 2017. Currently, 
she leads the project DIGI50+ Mature consumers, customer experience and 
value creation in digital and physical environments.
Chris Gilleard, FAcSS, PhD, is a Visiting Research Fellow at the Division of 
Psychiatry, University College London and a Visiting Senior Research Fellow 
at the Department of Social and Policy Sciences, University of Bath, UK. His 
principal research interests concern change and continuity in the experience 
and understanding of ageing and old age. He is a Fellow of the Academy of 
Social Sciences and author of a number of books on ageing, written with his col­
league, Professor Paul Higgs, including Cultures of ageing: self, citizen and the 
body (Pearson, 2000); Contexts of ageing: class, cohort and community (Polity 
Press, 2005); Ageing, corporeality & embodiment (Anthem Press, 2013); and 
Rethinking old age: theorising the fourth age (Palgrave Macmillan, 2015).

Contributors
Timo Anttila, PhD, is an Academy of Finland Research Fellow at the University 
of Jyväskylä, Finland. His publications have focused, for example, on chang­
ing working times and time use in 24/7 societies and job quality in comparative 
perspective. His current projects concentrate on the changing organisation of 
work in Europe, time and spaces of work, and long-term consequences of 
social isolation.
Göran Bolin is a Professor in Media & Communication Studies at Södertörn 
University, Stockholm, Sweden. His research spans both media production 
analysis and audience studies, with a special focus on how media produc­
tion and consumption are interrelated in the wake of digitisation. He is the 
author of Value and the media. Production and consumption in digital markets 
(Ashgate, 2011), and most recently, Media generations: experience, identity 
and mediatised social change (Routledge, 2016).
Vesna Dolničar, PhD, is an Assistant Professor at the Faculty of Social Sciences, 
University of Ljubljana, Slovenia. She has been involved in numerous (inter)
national research projects (e.g. FP6, COST Actions, LLP, Erasmus+, Interreg, 
EC tenders) related to the fields of digital inequalities and ICTs for active age­
ing. She is a leader of the project financed by the Slovenian Research Agency 
and Si.mobil entitled Digital Inclusion and Active Ageing. She has (co)authored 
several scientific papers, monographs and chapters in the monographs of dis­
tinguished publishers (Wiley, Greenwood, Peter Lang, Springer).
Leopoldina Fortunati, PhD, is a Professor of Sociology of Communication and 
the director of the doctoral programme in Multimedia Communication and of the 
research laboratory NuMe at the University of Udine, Italy. She has conducted 
several research projects in the field of gender studies, cultural processes, and 
communication and information technologies. She is the author and editor of 
many books, associate editor of the journal The Information Society and serves 
as referee for many outstanding journals. Her research interests include the topic 
of generations seen through the lens of the use of technology. Her works have 
been published in 12 languages.

List of contributors  xi
Carla Ganito, PhD, is an Assistant Professor and Coordinator of Postgraduate 
Studies and Advanced Training at the Faculty of Human Sciences, the Catholic 
University of Portugal. Her PhD in Communication Sciences tackled the gen­
dering of the mobile phone. Her main research and teaching interests are: 
new media, mobile communications, gender and technology, education and 
technology, and digital reading. She is an MC member of the COST Action 
IS1404 – Evolution of reading in the age of digitisation (E-READ). Her most 
recent publications appear in journals such as Feminist Media Studies and 
International Journal of Cyber Ethics in Education.
Leslie Haddon, PhD, is a Senior Researcher and a Visiting Lecturer in the 
Department of Media and Communications at the London School of 
Economics, UK. His research over the past decades has focused on the social 
shaping and consumption of ICTs, especially in studies of domestication. In 
recent years, he was involved in the EU Kids Online and Net Children Go 
Mobile projects and is currently examining how very young children use 
smartphones and tablets. Together with Eugene Loos and Enid Mante-Meijer 
he edited the book Generational use of new media for Ashgate in 2012.
Helena Hirvonen, PhD, is a Postdoctoral Researcher and a University Lecturer 
of Social and Public Policy at the Department of Social Sciences, University 
of Eastern Finland. Her research areas include welfare state restructur­
ing, gendered structures, and professional and organisational practices in 
the labour market. Besides authoring several peer-reviewed articles, she has 
recently co-edited the book Interpersonal violence: differences and connec­
tions (Routledge, 2017) and published a chapter in the book Professionalism, 
managerialism and reform in higher education and the health services: the 
European welfare state and rise of the knowledge society (Palgrave, 2015).
Tiia Kekäläinen is a postgraduate student in the Gerontology Research Center, 
Department of Health Sciences, at University of Jyväskylä, Finland. She grad­
uated in August 2015 as a Master of Health Sciences with gerontology as a 
major and psychology as a minor. Her Master’s thesis (2015) researched per­
sonality and muscle strength in midlife. She is currently involved in a work 
package related to life-span development that forms part of a multidisciplinary 
project called Digi50+. Her research interests include personality, leisure and 
well-being, especially among middle-aged and older adults.
Tiina Kemppainen is a doctoral student in Marketing at the School of Business 
and Economics, University of Jyväskylä, Finland. She is currently working in 
a Digi50+ project and writing her dissertation on customer experience in the 
context of different servicescapes.
Katja Kokko, PhD, is a Research Director at the Gerontology Research Center, 
Department of Health Sciences, University of Jyväskylä, Finland. Since 2013, 
she has been the principal investigator of the Jyväskylä Longitudinal Study 

xii  List of contributors
of Personality and Social Development. Her main research areas include 
personality, mental well-being and working/career in a life-span perspec­
tive, adult development, and ageing. Katja Kokko has analysed these areas 
in collaboration with experts from various disciplines (e.g. psychology, eco­
nomics, gerontology and statistics), and published around 63 international 
peer-reviewed articles in scientific journals, as well as book chapters, and has 
given dozens of presentations in international congresses.
Sanna-Mari Kuoppamäki is a doctoral student of sociology in the Department 
of Social Sciences and Philosophy at the University of Jyväskylä, Finland. 
Her research interests include consumption, life course, age and digitalising 
technologies. She studies values, attitudes and lifestyles of late middle-
aged consumers in digitalising environments in the project Digi50+ Mature 
consumers, customer experience and value creation in digital and physical 
environments.
Andraž Petrovčič, PhD, is an Assistant Professor and a Research Fellow at the 
Centre for Social Informatics, the Faculty of Social Science, University of 
Ljubljana, Slovenia. His main research fields relate to the uses of ICTs for 
social support exchange and interpersonal communication, the sense of online 
community, and psychological empowerment in online health communities. 
He has published several book chapters and articles in journals such as Quality 
& Quantity, European Journal of Communication, Online Information Review, 
Computers in Human Behaviour, The Information Society, and Telematics & 
Informatics. He is a co-editor of Interacting with broadband society (Peter 
Lang, 2010).
Mia Tammelin, PhD, is an Adjunct Professor and an Academy of Finland 
Research Fellow at the University of Jyväskylä, Finland. Her publications 
have concentrated on work, families and time, as well as 24-hour economy 
and family life. Her present, five-year project ‘FamilyTies’, concentrates on 
paid work, time, family relations and ICTs.
Sirpa Tenhunen, PhD, is an anthropologist currently working as an Interim 
Professor and University Lecturer at the University of Jyväskylä, Finland. She 
has also taught anthropology at the University of Helsinki and worked as a 
researcher at the Academy of Finland. In addition to new media, her research 
interests cover gender, work and politics in India.
Outi Uusitalo, PhD, is a Professor of Marketing at the University of Jyväskylä’s 
School of Business and Economics, Finland. Her research interests include 
consumer behaviour, services marketing management, customer–service firm 
interaction, places and spaces of consumption, and responsible consumption 
and marketing. She has authored research articles that have been published in 
journals such as Journal of Consumer Culture, Journal of Consumer Behaviour, 
International Journal of Consumer Studies, European Journal of Marketing, 
Journal of Business and Industrial Marketing, and Journal of Business Ethics.

List of contributors  xiii
Jane Vincent, PhD, is a Senior Researcher and holds Visiting Fellow and 
Guest Teacher positions at the London School of Economics and Media and 
Communications Department and with University of Surrey, UK’s Digital 
World Research Centre. Prior to her academic career, she spent two decades 
developing and implementing mobile communications in Europe, heading up 
marketing and strategy teams, and negotiating 2G and 3G technologies in 
GSM standards and policy forums. She participates in COST Action IS1402 
www.notageism.com and is an affiliate of the University of Udine, Italy’s 
NuMe Research Group. Her publications on electronic emotions, social 
robots, children and mobile phones are at http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/.

Acknowledgements
Despite the numerous benefits of today’s digital communication technologies, this 
book would not have come about without regular meetings with local co-workers, 
periodic face-to-face get-togethers with foreign colleagues and unexpected encoun­
ters with new people sharing the same scholarly interests. In Autumn 2015, the first 
two editors and a group of local colleagues realised they were running several par­
allel projects all dealing with the issue of digitalisation from one angle or another. 
Although the projects were thematically diverse, some dealing with working life 
and family relations, others with consumption and media usage, all shared a com­
mon interest in the adoption and use of digital technology at different phases of the 
life course, and especially in later life.
In November 2015, the project leaders jointly organised the International 
Workshop on Generations, the Life Course and Digital Technologies (GOLDEN) 
at the University of Jyväskylä, Finland. The workshop brought together a number of 
local and international experts, whose contributions have been incorporated in this 
book. After the workshop, digital technologies themselves played a major role ena­
bling the constant exchange of messages between the editors, contributing authors, 
proofreader and publishers. It is fair to say that the book was born out of locally 
embodied connections, but was finally woven together digitally from a distance.
The editors want to express their gratitude to the University of Jyväskylä, Finland 
for funding the workshop, and to Ms. Armi Korhonen who assisted in many organi­
sational matters. The sponsors of the projects that have presented some of their key 
findings in the book also deserve a special mention: the Academy of Finland who 
funded the project Intergenerational Relations in Broadband Societies (iGRIB), 
and the TEKES who funded the project Digi50+ Mature consumers, customer 
experience and value creation in digital and physical environments. In addition, we 
would like to especially thank all those independent reviewers for providing truly 
valuable and constructive feedback that helped the authors improve their contribu­
tions. Dr. Bidemi Coker’s painstaking reading and language editing has made the 
book more coherent and polished much of its style. Last, but not least, we would 
like to thank Ms. Claire Jarvis, Senior Commissioning Editor of Ashgate (later part 
of informa group), as well Ms. Lianne Sherlock, Editor for Health and Social Care, 
Ms. Shannon Kneis and Ms. Georgia Priestley, both, Editorial Assistants, all from 
Routledge, who have gently guided us through the publishing process.
Let the life course of the book be long and eventful – as in print, so in digital.
December, 2017
The editors

1	
Introduction
Sakari Taipale, Terhi-Anna Wilska and 
Chris Gilleard
Social generations from the life course perspective
A plunge into the literature reveals that studying digital technologies through 
social generations1 is a well-established practice in social sciences and media 
studies. Many scholars have followed the footsteps of Karl Mannheim (1952), 
who proposed that age cohorts experiencing the same noteworthy historical 
events may develop a shared generational identity. As Mannheim considered 
youth as the main transformative period in fashioning such generational identi­
ties, it is no surprise that the uptake of new technologies – young people often 
as first-adopters – is widely considered a generational question. Several age 
cohorts of technology users have been named according to detected similari­
ties among their members, such as the Net Generation (Tapscott, 1998), Digital 
Natives (Prensky, 2001), Nintendo or MTV generation (Guzdial and Soloway, 
2002), Digital Generation (Buckingham, 2006; Taipale, 2016) or Social Media 
Generation (Huang, 2014). Others have considered such labels to reflect adults’ 
stereotypes and journalists’ shorthand rather than any ‘revolutionary’ changes in 
social structures (Herring, 2008).
Towards the 2010s, the simple division into technologically savvy and tech­
nologically naive generations faced increasing criticism. Such generational 
stereotypes stem from the idea that social generations relate to technological land­
scapes differently, and that technological innovations mark turning points that 
separate one generation from one another (Andò, 2014; Comunello et al., 2016; 
Loos, 2012). This criticism is fuelled by the evident diversification of the media 
landscape, especially the rise of social media, as well as increased ICT profi­
ciency within all age groups. Empirical research carried out in many countries has 
challenged the idea of a homogenous, highly skilled generation of ‘technology 
savvy’ young people, showing instead the great variation that exists in young 
people’s skills and involvement in digital media environments (e.g. Fortunati 
et al., 2017; Helsper and Eynon, 2010; Kennedy et al., 2010; Taipale, 2016). 
To underline the continuity between social groups instead of clear-cut divisions, 
new metaphors such as digital spectrum (Lenhart and Horrigan, 2003) have been 
coined. White and Le Cornu (2011) speak about a continuum between Visitors, 
who consider digital environments as places with ‘untidy gardens’, and Residents, 
who feel at home while being online. What remain under-investigated are the 

2  Sakari Taipale et al.
more nuanced relationships between age, time period, the life course and indi­
vidual life situations and their connection to social generations (Bolin, 2016).
Interestingly, Mannheim acknowledged the meaning of ‘biological rhythm’, 
including a limited life span, for the formation of social generations, but in his 
thinking the importance of social factors superseded biological questions related 
to ageing (Pilcher, 1994). He noted that generational identity is dependent on the 
rhythm of social change (Mannheim, 1952). All people living in the same time 
period do not necessarily share the same experience or understanding of historical 
events, leaving a distinctive generational identity underdeveloped or rendering it 
stratified within a generation. Considering the major socio-technological transfor­
mations that have taken place, both now and in the recent past, it appears evident 
why technology-based distinctions may be increasingly difficult to make between 
different social generations.
When older generations adopted technologies such as radio and television in 
the early and mid twentieth century, a large cohort of people experienced them 
as new technology, a fact that is easily forgotten (Berg et al., 2005). It took many 
years before the next new mass media technologies entered the market (VCRs, CD 
players, etc.), and these technologies remain strong markers of shared generational 
experiences in various developed countries (Bolin, 2016). In contrast, the mark­
edly shorter life span of today’s new digital technologies provides a much more 
fragmented basis for building any generational identity. If the length of a genera­
tion is considered as a thirty-year period, at least in developed countries (Berger, 
1960), each new generation experiences not just one or two epoch-making commu­
nications or media technological developments, but a multiplicity of developments 
across a diverse range of technologies before the next generation is born. Mobile 
communication serves as a great example with the rapid evolution from 1G to 4G 
technology within about three decades (Tondare et al., 2014).
With the constant arrival of new technologies and their applications into daily 
life, a distinct generational consciousness may be difficult to build around any 
particular technologies or even a more general ‘technological revolution’. Time 
is needed to show what kind of a basis today’s extremely diverse and generative 
field of digital technologies can provide in the ‘generationing’ process. As Bolin 
(2016) reminds us, older generations have had more time to develop their ‘we-
sense’, while younger generations have more time and potential to refine their 
self-understanding over their present and future life course.
Taking this as a point of departure, the book argues that the adoption and use of 
digital technologies varies across the life course in non-linear ways, influencing the 
sense of belonging to certain generations in a variety of ways. We take a somewhat 
critical stance towards the Mannheimian tradition, which considers political events 
as the source and youth as the phase of life that determines generation building 
(Corsten, 2011). Our approach to generation is more ‘post-Mannheimian’ since 
we propose that in connection to digital technologies, each stage of life can pro­
vide important building blocks in shaping generational experiences and identities. 
In addition to adoption and actual use, the collective attitudes of a particular age 
group towards and experiences of digital technologies can also serve as potential 

Introduction  3
markers of generational differences, allowing the redrawing of generational lines, 
for example, in the latter half of life.
The shaping of generational identity in families 
and consumption
In addition to changes in technology and media landscapes, there are many socio-
cultural processes that can shape the formation of generations and generational 
identities. The de-standardisation of life course, discontinuities in work and lei­
sure, the declining role of the communities of propinquity, the growth of lifestyle 
politics and the blurring of cultural boundaries imply that people today no longer 
experience the formative influences of entry into the adult world that people did in 
the past. ICT contributes to this diversity of experience, by making people’s lives 
more mobile, more individualised and more networked, and their social connec­
tions no longer organised by either time or place (Elliot and Urry, 2010; Rainie 
and Wellman, 2012).
This book concentrates on two domains of life where digital technologies 
serve as vehicles for defining generational boundaries: family and consumption. 
With these choices, we want to underscore the relative importance of the world 
of ‘home and leisure’ in the ‘generationing’ influence of these new technologies 
(Edmunds and Turner, 2005), compared with the greater role that was played in 
the past by work and labour. Ranging from electrification and cars to fixed phones, 
mobile communication devices and office software, ‘old new technologies’ were 
first and foremost introduced to rationalise and improve the productivity of work, 
hence marking the differences between generations in the labour force who either 
succeeded or failed in their adoption. By contrast, what is characteristic of con­
temporary digital technologies, both hardware and software, is that they blur the 
distinction between home and work. Some are targeted more towards private con­
sumers for use in the home, by families and in people’s free (non-work, non-school) 
time. Tablet computers, e-book readers, social networking sites, online music and 
movie services are just some examples of such consumer commodities. All this 
has been enabled on the back of the strong economic growth that took place after 
World War II and with it, the birth of the mass market. Over time, consumption has 
become an increasingly diverse arena for the reproduction of social distinction that 
on the one hand, strengthens generational distinctions while on the other, fosters 
cross-generational collaborations and shared experiences as almost everyone at 
almost every age, at work or at play, joins in the experience of consumerism.
Technologies in later life stages
While earlier research detected obvious generational differences in technol­
ogy adoption and use (e.g. Carr et al., 2012; Lunt and Livingstone, 1992), the 
patterns of consumption of digital technologies fluctuate over time and across 
the life course (e.g. Spero and Stone, 2004). Later life appears an interesting 
‘new’ life course stage and older consumers are beginning to be targeted as 

4  Sakari Taipale et al.
potential users of new assistive technologies and applications. Older consum­
ers are, however, not just targets of care technology, neither are they always 
dependent on the help of younger users (c.f. Berg et al., 2005). They are 
also independent actors capable of using the new technologies for their own 
ends and to meet their own concerns, which may well be at odds with the 
assumptions anticipated by the developers and manufacturers of ‘assistive 
technologies’ (Neven, 2011). Many older consumers are highly networked, 
although often in different, non-digital ways than younger people. Family 
members and friends provide an important network of support that is benefit­
ted both at home and on the market (Bakardjieva, 2005; Selwyn et al., 2003).
Period effects should not be forgotten. The birth of mass markets and the indi­
vidualisation that is afforded by consumption have contributed to making the 
experience of later life quite distinct from the old age that was institutionalised 
in the first half of the twentieth century (Gilleard and Higgs, 2005, p. 77). Being 
‘successfully aged’ today means not only retaining health and independence but 
also having the ability and the desire to keep up with the technological develop­
ments that signify ‘the new’ and ‘youthfulness’. Some age-related digital gaps are 
relatively short-lived and seem specific to certain periods of time. For example, 
during the first decade of the twenty-first century, age cohorts of 50 years and 
older caught up with younger groups year by year in terms of mobile phone use 
in the United Kingdom (Gilleard et al., 2015). Similar trends have been found 
in other countries such as Finland where internet use has grown more quickly 
among people aged 65 or more than in any other age group (Statistics Finland, 
2015). These findings suggest that generational identity, including that reflected 
in the integration of technology with individual lifestyles during youth, is not set 
in stone but keeps evolving over time and the life course.
The structure of the book
The book brings together contributions from the fields of sociology, social pol­
icy, anthropology, gender studies, communication, psychology and marketing. 
Although the editors made considerable efforts to streamline discipline-specific 
practices of doing research and reporting results, some variation in style is still 
detectable in the book. The chapters revolve mainly around European cultures 
and societies, including Finland, Estonia, Italy, Portugal, Slovenia, Sweden and 
the United Kingdom. We included one chapter from India, as it both highlights 
the limitations of generational research that is confined to the Western hemi­
sphere and demonstrates its applicability to countries and cultures that do not 
provide the bulk of empirical research in this field. Clearly, there is scope for 
much more work from countries other than those in the West. Other characteris­
tics of the countries represented here highlight their dissimilarities. Some of the 
countries have the most rapidly ageing population in the world, such as Italy, 
Finland and Portugal (UN, 2015). Sweden, Finland, the UK and Estonia are 
ranked among the top seven EU countries on The Digital Economy & Society 
Index for 2016, while Portugal is close to the EU28 average, Slovenia slightly 

Introduction  5
below, and Italy placed only 25th. Institutional arrangements to adjust to the 
changes of ageing societies are profoundly different in the studied countries, 
ranging from (still) largely publicly provided welfare services in Finland and 
Sweden to the mixed public-private model of the UK to the family-oriented 
Mediterranean welfare models of Italy and Portugal and post-socialist Estonia 
and Slovenia (e.g. Ferrera and Hemerijck, 2003; Rechel et al., 2013). Hence even 
within the narrow geographical boundaries of Europe, considerable diversity exists.
The book is organised into three parts. The first, Historical, theoreti­
cal and methodological perspectives, situates the book in the wide field of 
generation and life course studies. Chris Gilleard’s chapter considers the con­
fluence between the emergence of the new ICT and changes taking place in 
the nature of later life. It considers changes in later life itself, the penetration 
of technology into the worlds of home and work as part of modernity, and 
the emergence of new social divisions within later life that seem to be replac­
ing those between working life and later life. Göran Bolin elaborates on the 
question of mediatisation from historical and methodological perspectives. He 
presents generational theory combined with interviews and focus groups as 
a methodological solution to clarify the role of the media over the entire life 
course, especially after the alleged formative period of youth. Leslie Haddon 
discusses the relevance of earlier life and ICT experiences for understanding 
current generational differences in the adoption and use of ICTs. Moreover, 
his study sheds light on the applicability of cohort analysis in the future.
The second part, Family generations and ICT, deals with practices that either 
reinforce or bridge generational gaps inside the family. The focus is especially 
on the life stages after youth and the intergenerational relations within families. 
Mia Tammelin and Timo Anttila’s chapter analyses ICT use by late middle-aged 
employees in Finland, the group of people who do not easily fall into any well-
defined social generation. Their ICT use is very varied and strongly determined 
by their life situation, especially as regards children and the nature of their work. 
Sakari Taipale, Andraž Petrovčič and Vesna Dolničar’s chapter makes compari­
sons between Finnish and Slovenian families with regard to the use of ICTs in 
extended families. They argue that normative expectations concerning ICT use 
are higher and intergenerational assistance in ICT use stronger in Slovenia when 
compared with Finland. The latter country seems to blur generational boundaries 
more, intensifying cross-generational interaction within families. Carla Ganito’s 
chapter provides a detailed description of the reasons and ways in which women’s 
mobile phone use varies across the life stages in Portugal. The intensity of and 
reasons for mobile phone usage alter considerably over the life course, primarily 
due to work and family situations. As in Tammelin and Anttila’s chapter, belong­
ing to a certain societal generation or age cohort appears a less decisive factor 
than people’s stage in the life course. Leopoldina Fortunati argues that a new 
form of domestic labour referred to as ‘digital housekeeping’ has been assigned 
for youth, changing the division of immaterial labour in families. She advocates 
the idea of digital housekeeping as an intergenerational practice, bringing the 
generations closer together rather than tearing them apart. Following Fortunati’s 

6  Sakari Taipale et al.
chapter, Helena Hirvonen presents an important theoretical window to the study 
of social relations and ICT from the concept of trust. Using ICTs in elderly care 
provision as an example, she shows how they can work as a nexus between older 
people, their family members and care providers. ICTs can reinforce interaction 
and hence trust between people involved, but this is the case only if ICTs are not 
harnessed simply to serve the needs for efficiency of work and accountability. 
This part ends with Sirpa Tenhunen’s study on mobile phone use in rural India. 
Based on her long-term fieldwork, she describes the limits and the possibilities 
of a classical generational approach in the Indian context, where the caste system 
typically overrides most other mechanisms for social distinction.
The third part, Consumption, lifestyles and markets, investigates the role of the 
market as a source of generation formation. Terhi-Anna Wilska and Sanna-Mari 
Kuoppamäki’s chapter opens this part by studying whether ICTs are regarded 
as necessities by all age cohorts. Based on nationally representative repeated 
cross-sectional survey data, they show how differences between age cohorts have 
largely evened out, while the impact of life course stage and everyday practices 
remain rather pronounced. Sanna-Mari Kuoppamäki, Outi Uusitalo and Tiina 
Kemppainen add to this theme by analysing generational differences in housing 
preferences focusing particularly on domestic technologies and the attitudes and 
experiences of two age groups: young adults and people in late middle-age. Tiia 
Kekäläinen and Katja Kokko raise the question of individual differences in ICT 
use and adoption, bringing to bear the perspective of personality psychology. 
Employing a longitudinal study design, they explicate how different personal­
ity traits predict the use of computers in midlife as part of leisure time use and 
leisure activities. The third part ends with a chapter by Jane Vincent, who, moti­
vated by her remarks on mobile phone marketing activities, examines the nature 
of ‘electronic emotions’ in connection to life stages and transition periods. She 
asks whether the electronic emotions experienced by respondents from different 
generations of ICT users are similar. Her conclusions are qualified, reflecting 
the contingencies that permeate this field of research. Lastly, the editors, Chris 
Gilleard, Terhi-Anna Wilska and Sakari Taipale outline implications for further 
research drawing upon the themes of home, family and the omnivorous market.
Note
1	 We are following here Pilcher’s (1994) distinction between ‘generation’ and ‘social gen­
eration’ where generation refers to kinship-based relationships, and social generation is 
used when referring to the collective experiences of particular birth cohorts.
References
Andò, R., 2014. What does TV actually mean? New consumer experience and generations. 
Participations, 11(2), pp. 156–181.
Bakardjieva, M., 2005. Internet society: the internet in everyday life. London: SAGE.
Berg, E., Mörtberg, C. and Jansson, M., 2005. Emphasizing technology: socio-technical 
implications. Information Technology & People, 18(4), pp. 343–358.

Introduction  7
Berger, B. M., 1960. How long is a generation? The British Journal of Sociology, 11(1), 
pp. 10–23.
Bolin, G., 2016. Media generations: experience, identity and mediatised social change. 
London: Routledge.
Buckingham, D., 2006. Is there a digital generation? In: D. Buckingham and R. Willett, 
eds. Digital generations: children, young people, and new media. London: Routledge, 
pp. 1–17.
Carr, D. J., Gotlieb, M. R., Lee, N. J. and Shah, D. V., 2012. Examining overconsumption, 
competitive consumption and conscious consumption from 1994 to 2004: disentangling 
cohort and period effects. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social 
Science, 664(1), pp. 220–233.
Comunello, F., Ardèvol, M. F., Mulargia, S. and Belotti, F., 2016. Women, youth and 
everything else: age-based and gendered stereotypes in relation to digital technology 
among elderly Italian mobile phone users. Media, Culture & Society. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/0163443716674363.
Corsten, M., 2011. Media as the historical new for young generations. In: F. Colombo and 
L. Fortunati, eds. Broadband society and generational changes. Frankfurt am Main, 
Germany: Peter Lang, pp. 37–49.
Edmunds, J. and Turner, B., 2005. Global generations: social change in the twentieth century. 
The British Journal of Sociology, 56(4), pp. 559–577.
Elliot, A. and Urry, J., 2010. Mobile lives. London: Routledge.
Ferrera, M. and Hemerijck, A., 2003. Recalibrating Europe’s welfare regimes. In: J. Zeitlin 
and D. M. Trubek, eds. Governing work and welfare in a new economy. Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press, pp. 88–128.
Fortunati, L., Taipale, S. and De Luca, F., 2017. Digital generations, but not as we know 
them. Convergence. https://doi.org/10.1177/1354856517692309
Gilleard, C. and Higgs, P., 2005. Contexts of ageing: class, cohort and community. 
Cambridge, UK: Polity.
Gilleard, C., Jones, I. and Higgs, P., 2015. Connectivity in later life: the declining age 
divide in mobile cell phone ownership. Sociological Research Online, 20(2). http://
www.socresonline.org.uk/20/2/3.html.
Guzdial, M. and Soloway, E., 2002. Teaching the Nintendo generation to program. 
Communications of the ACM, 45(4), pp. 17–21.
Helsper, E. J. and Eynon, R., 2010. Digital natives: where is the evidence? British 
Educational Research Journal, 36(3), 503–520.
Herring, S., 2008. Questioning the generational divide: technological exoticism and adult 
constructions of online youth identity. In: D. Buckingham, ed. Youth, identity, and digi­
tal media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 71–92.
Huang, H., 2014. Social media generation in urban China. A study of social media use and 
addiction among adolescents. Berlin: Springer.
Kennedy, G., Judd, T. and Dalgarno, B., 2010. Beyond natives and immigrants: explor­
ing types of Net Generation students. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 
26(5), pp. 332–343.
Lenhart, A. and Horrigan, J. B., 2003. Re-visualising the digital divide as a digital spectrum. 
IT & Society, 5, pp. 23–39.
Loos, E., 2012. Senior citizens: digital immigrants in their own country? Observatorio 
(OBS*), 6(1), pp. 1–23.
Lunt, P. and Livingstone, S., 1992. Mass consumption and personal identity. Milton 
Keynes, UK: Open University Press.

8  Sakari Taipale et al.
Mannheim, K., 1952. The problem of generations. In: K. Mannheim, ed. Essays of the 
sociology of knowledge. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, pp. 276–322
Neven, L., 2011. Representations of the old and ageing in the design of the new and emerg­
ing. Published thesis. Twente, The Netherlands: University of Twente. https://doi.
org/10.3990/1.9789036532242.
Pilcher, J., 1994. Mannheim’s sociology of generations: an undervalued legacy. British 
Journal of Sociology, 45(3), pp. 481–495.
Prensky, M., 2001. Digital natives, digital immigrants. On the Horizon, 9(5), pp. 1–6.
Rainie, L. and Wellman, B., 2012. Networked: the new social operating system. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Rechel, B., Grundy, E., Robine, J. M., Cylus, J., Mackenbach, J. P., Knai, C. and McKee, 
M., 2013. Ageing in the European Union. The Lancet, 381(9874), pp. 1312–1322.
Selwyn, N., Gorard, S., Furlong, J. and Madden, L., 2003. Older adults’ use of informa­
tion and communications technology in everyday life. Ageing and Society, 23(5), 
pp. 561–582.
Spero, I. and Stone, M., 2004. Agents of change: how young consumers are changing 
the world of marketing. Qualitative Market Research: An International Journal, 7(2), 
pp. 153–159.
Statistics Finland, 2015. More mobile internet use, more personal devices. http://tila
stokeskus.fi/til/sutivi/2015/sutivi_2015_2015-11-26_tie_001_en.html.
Taipale, S., 2016. Synchronicity matters: defining the characteristics of digital generations. 
Information, Communication & Society, 19(1), pp. 80–89.
Tapscott, D., 1998. Growing up digital: the rise of the Net Generation. New York: McGraw 
Hill.
Tondare, S., Panchal, S. and Kushnure, D., 2014. Evolutionary steps from 1G to 4.5G. 
International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer and Communication 
Engineering, 3(4), pp. 6163–6166.
UN, 2015. World population ageing. New York, NY: United Nations.
White, D. S. and Le Cornu, A., 2011. Visitors and residents: a new typology for online 
engagement. First Monday, 16(9). http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/
view/3171/3049.

Part I
Historical, theoretical and 
methodological perspectives


2	
The place of age in the 
digital revolution
Chris Gilleard
Introduction
This chapter addresses the confluence between developments in the information 
and communication technologies (ICTs) of the late twentieth century and con­
temporary changes in the social nature of later life. Beginning in the 1980s, an 
expanding array of digital technologies moved the world toward an increasingly 
‘networked’ society (Castells, 1996; Rainie and Wellman, 2012). Communities 
presaged upon regular, face to face encounters – what Calhoun called the old 
‘communities of propinquity’ (Calhoun, 1998) – became less influential as new 
possibilities emerged for families, friends, civic and state actors to maintain con­
tact with each other with little consideration of distance. While traditionally it 
had been assumed that modern technologies were first adopted by and impacted 
upon those with the time and the money to spend on them, changes in technol­
ogy and society in the late twentieth century reduced the influence of particular 
groups or classes in generating distinct lifestyles. Society became progressively 
individualised as everyone ‘connected’ to their own, self-selected community 
(Beck and Beck-Gernsheim, 2001; Rainie and Wellman, 2012). The time when 
modernity created distinct ‘generational’ divides seems to be passing. Now, when 
such divides emerge, almost before they can be crystallised into a distinct genera­
tional field, their boundaries, whether of age, class or life stage, start to dissolve. 
These new transformative powers form the main concern of this chapter. Its aim 
is to examine how, in the context of a different modernity, forms of communica­
tion associated with ‘network society’ affect and impact people at all stages of 
life; how this relates to the ‘destandardisation’ of the life course (Kohli and Rein, 
1991); and how, in particular, this contributes to the refashioning of later life 
(Gergen and Gergen, 2000).
Whether framed as a new, liquid or reflexive modernity, the idea that there 
has been a distinct, ‘post-modern’ change in society has been developed by a 
number of writers (Bauman, 2000; Beck et al., 2003; Giddens, 1991). While 
recognising that these views do not command full acceptance (Atkinson, 2007; 
Outhwaite, 2009) I will draw upon the work of the late Ulrich Beck, particularly 
in his analysis of the ‘post-modernisation’ of society, for the background context 
in understanding this ‘new’ form of modernity (Beck et al., 2003). In a series of 

12  Chris Gilleard
papers, Beck and his colleagues have set out a research programme to distinguish 
those features of what he termed ‘second’ modernity that set it apart from the 
earlier ‘first’ modernity whose contours were explored by sociology’s ‘founding 
fathers’ (Durkheim, 1984; Mannheim, 1997; Tönnies 1958; Weber, 1978).
For Beck, three features exemplify the role of ‘second’ modernity in 
de-standardising the life course. In the first place, the processes of individu­
alisation have hollowed out many of the institutions and structures that once 
defined what it was for a society to be modern – particularly the role once 
played by the systems of production in organising social relations. In the sec­
ond place have come changes in gendered relations and the undermining of the 
previous distinction between productive and reproductive labour that was such a 
dominant feature of industrialisation. Third, has been the expansion of markets 
into ever wider areas of personal life, as consumption has become the major arena 
where identities and lifestyles are realised (Beck and Beck-Gernsheim, 2001; 
Beck and Grande, 2010; Beck and Lau, 2005; Beck et al., 2003).
In earlier analyses of industrial society, concepts such as class, community 
and cohort (generation) were widely deployed as terms or tools for defining and 
understanding modernity (Durkheim, 1984; Mannheim, 1997; Tönnies, 1958; 
Weber, 1978). These analyses underplayed the role of technology, and emphasis 
was placed on work, labour and economic relations. Mass production, class con­
sciousness and the transformation of traditional (folk) into popular (mass) culture 
were, to the founding fathers, key in what constituted ‘modern’ life. Trains, cars 
and aeroplanes, radios, telephones and the cinema were recognised as symbols of 
modern life, but they were still largely viewed as the superstructure, not the deter­
minants of culture and society.1 The divisions of gender and the organisation of the 
life course were regulated by the needs of capital for labour. Technology served 
this cause, enabling people to get to work on time, to have their work organised 
on time and their productivity enhanced over time, through electrification, mecha­
nisation and regulation. Technology symbolised but remained subservient to the 
modernity of mass production.
In second modernity, this pattern began to unravel. Technology expanded 
the number and range of goods and services available outside the work place 
as much as it transformed the workplace (Lunt and Livingstone, 1992; Miles, 
1998). The media became increasingly important in shaping the identities and 
lifestyles of workers and their families. Mass consumption first matched then 
exceeded mass production; mass consumption became mass consumerism. This 
affected life inside and outside of work. The home became as much a site of 
modernity as the workplace. The marketing and sales of white goods such as 
fridge freezers, tumble dryers, vacuum cleaners and washing machines blurred 
the distinctions of class while changing the nature and form of reproductive 
labour. (Benson, 1994; Bowden and Offer, 1994; Lunt and Livingstone, 1992; 
Miles, 1998). The expanding leisure and entertainment industries progressively 
individualised lifestyles, from the communal radio and the gramophone to port­
able record players, cassette and CD players, to digital downloads, from limited 
channel terrestrial TVs to VCRs then DVDs, and from cable TV to online 

Place of age in the digital revolution  13
entertainment systems. While many of these developments have created new 
industries and expanded new systems of production, their greatest impact has 
been on expanding the possibilities of a more individualised consumer life style 
inside and outside the home (Beck and Beck-Gernsheim, 2001).
As the dynamic shifted from a first to a second modernity, so have the organis­
ing principles of work (Beck and Beck-Gernsheim, 2001). The job a man does no 
longer determines his place in the world or that of his family. Men and women are 
equally likely to provide the source of income for the home; the fixed communi­
ties that were associated with factory work or primary industries like farming, 
fishing or mining have become less dominant and the spatial connection between 
home and work attenuated. Working parents’ children are exposed to a diversity of 
influences and role models that exceed by far those once provided by their parents 
and the local school, while household structures are no longer held together in the 
ways they once were by the farm or the factory, the mine or the mill. A plethora of 
influences impinge upon people at all stages of their life, before, during and after 
working life. Consumerism shapes the lives of primary school children and pen­
sioners as much as it does those of ‘working age’ (Jones et al., 2008; Kline, 1994).
Framing this transition as one from first to second modernity provides the gen­
eral context for this chapter. Its particular focus is upon how the changing nature 
of later life is realised by and within the new ‘domestic’ technologies that are an 
increasingly important part of second modernity, and that help realise it as both 
a ‘networked’ society and a society of ‘networked individualism’ (Rainie and 
Wellman, 2012). The aim is to periodise some of the key changes in this process, to 
outline the relevance of these new technologies in these changes and to identify their 
role in contributing to – or in constraining – the ‘post-modernisation’ of later life.
The new ageing: a conceptual framework
The conditions establishing the new ageing can be traced to ‘the long sixties’ 
and its associated consumer revolution (Marwick, 1998). Those born in and 
just after the Second World War are perhaps its vanguard birth cohort, emerg­
ing as the offspring of a cultural revolution that offered access to new media, 
new forms of popular entertainment and the novelty of having, as teenagers, 
discretionary spending power. The post-war economies were expanding and 
new opportunities arose for young people to express their distinctiveness as a 
generation – through music, fashion, hairstyles, clubs and coffee bars. Linked 
to, though distinguishable from this cultural ‘turn’ were changes in lifestyle, the 
celebration of difference, and the embodied identities and practices of ethnicity, 
gender and sexuality (Gilleard and Higgs, 2013).
If the sixties and seventies laid the foundation for such changes, the eighties 
saw them embedded across the life course. Just as the bands of the sixties kept 
on rocking into mid-life, so too did their fans. The marketing of ‘youth’ extended 
beyond the expenditure of young people as issues of consumerist distinction 
moved downwards into childhood and upwards into and beyond middle age. No 
longer youth but youthfulness was bought and sold through an ever-increasing 

14  Chris Gilleard
range of goods and services, part of a ‘rebel sell’ that was beginning to incorpo­
rate not just resistance to the old but liberation from agedness itself (Gilleard and 
Higgs, 2013, p. 31).
As part of this cultural turn, the body became subject to an ever-widening 
range of ‘somatic technologies’ or, in Foucault’s terms, technologies of the 
self (Foucault, 1988). Their points of reference soon outgrew their narrow 
‘commoditisation’ within the 1960s counter-cultures and sub-cultures. No longer 
so carefully policed and bound, as they first were by age and generation, these 
variously expressed forms of ‘appearance management’ (Cahill, 1989), ‘body 
maintenance’ (Featherstone, 1982), or ‘body work’ (Gimlin, 2007) made fash­
ioning and refashioning the body a lifelong enterprise; and, for some, a lifelong 
chore. The greater their penetration into everyday life, the more they undermined 
the stability previously attached to identities that were once embodied as ‘foun­
dationalist’ social forms. The result was a greater individualisation of the body, 
rendering it subject to the processes of ‘lifestyle’ rather than ‘life stage’ fashion­
ing (Lipovetsky, 2002, p. 5), that was without any obvious ending.
Nowhere was this turn from the distinctions of youth to the demonstration of 
youthfulness better marked than by the Jane Fonda body work-out video tapes first 
marketed in the 1980s (Dinnerstein and Weitz, 1994). Here in condensed form 
were the corporate technologies of self, marketed to the baby boomers, in cel­
ebration of the values of choice, autonomy, self-expression and pleasure (Fonda, 
2011, p. 88). Here was the generational divide that had first emerged in 1960s 
youth working its way across the life course. In the process, those approaching 
later life were gradually fashioning (and being fashioned into) a new generational 
field, that of the third age, enacted in front of their TV screens.
The idea of the third age was introduced into the field of ageing studies dur­
ing the late 1980s in Peter Laslett’s book A fresh map of life (Laslett, 1989). 
Representing the third age as a generational field rather than, as Laslett had pro­
posed, a stage of life, was proposed a decade later by Gilleard and Higgs (2002). 
Drawing on the work of Karl Mannheim and Pierre Bourdieu, Gilleard and Higgs 
integrated Bourdieu’s concepts of fields and habitus with Mannheim’s concept of 
a generational unit and generational ‘entelechy’ to construct the idea of the third 
age as a ‘generational field’. United by the logic of mass consumerism and the 
valorisation of choice, autonomy, self-expression and pleasure, they argued that 
the third age emerged as a specific generational field where distinction, identity 
and lifestyle were realised through a combination of rising living standards, pro­
gressive exposure to consumption, the continuing penetration of the system world 
into the life world and the historical legacy of the ‘long sixties’ and its ideology of 
personal and political liberation (Gilleard and Higgs, 2011).
Technological generations, new eras and second modernity
Just as it is possible to chart the emergence of the third age as a generational 
field reflecting the dissolution or destandardisation of the ‘traditional’ institu­
tional structures of industrial society, so it is possible to consider the emergence 

Place of age in the digital revolution  15
of a distinct technological habitus associated with the new ICTs as constituting 
another feature of this emergent cultural field. Over time, each modifies the other 
as technology and lifestyle are slowly fashioned by and adapt to each other at 
different points and in different ways across the life course. Within the changing 
fields of technology and the life course, it is possible to discern a common mod­
ernising process at work, one that first set up and then dissolved the organising 
principles of lives and institutions of first modernity, laying the foundations for its 
emergence in a second, more liquid form (Bauman, 2000, 2005).
Beyond such generalities, it is possible to explore a slightly different periodisa­
tion, contrasting the technological changes that accompanied first modernity, with 
those that democratised and then dissolved it. In keeping with Beck’s dichotomy 
between a ‘first’ and a ‘second’ modernity, the first two periods to be discussed 
may be thought of as corresponding with ‘first’ modernity; the third with ‘second’ 
modernity. But before joining together these periods of social and technological 
change, let us consider the idea that there may be distinct ‘technological’ genera­
tions, not just distinct eras. According to Sackmann and Winkler, ‘the concept 
of technology generations was developed by German sociologists in the early 
1990s’ (Sackmann and Winkler, 2013, p. 493). The term refers not to the tech­
nology itself but to the birth cohorts that adopt it. Its boundaries are determined, 
according to these authors, ‘when a technology reaches a 20 per cent threshold 
in households in the relevant formative years (c. 15–25 years)’ (Sackmann and 
Winkler, 2013, p. 494). In fact, however, much of these authors’ work has con­
centrated on a distinction between the technological habitus of older people born 
before the 1960s, with that of ‘a computer generation’ born in the 1960s/1970s, 
a division that inevitably risks confounding simple age effects with ‘cohort’ or 
‘generational’ effects.
Rather than getting lost in this kind of ‘is it age or is it cohort’ dilemma, it 
may be preferable to focus upon technological change as indicative of general 
period or era effects – that is to acknowledge that distinct technological formats 
or features arise within particular time periods, as a function of both what has 
gone before and what is new – than to define a generation by the technologies 
of its time. The extent to which such changes affect or are adopted by particular 
groups, including particular age groups, is contingent, not subject, to univer­
sal rules. Only the temporality of change is constant. Particular technological 
systems necessarily persist until they are replaced or overtaken by newer ones. 
These changes may affect different age groups, but do so not as a consequence 
of generational cohorts, but because when earlier technologies are superseded 
by later technologies, they not only change the form but expand the range of 
functions that are rendered possible by the newer technologies. This alters access 
and usability, creating new or different groups of potential users, while growing 
familiarity, reduced costs and further adaptations expand the user base. In short, 
technological change may be better viewed as periodised by time, form and func­
tion rather than being associated with a particular cohort class or community.
As far as forms of communication have been enhanced and expanded, and 
notions of community changed by technology, it is possible to discern three 

16  Chris Gilleard
distinct periods that mark the transition from first to second modernity. The emer­
gence of modern communication technology, exemplified by the telephone and 
telegraph, appeared during the late nineteenth century and arguably continued up 
to the 1930s, located very much in the time frame of first modernity. Future devel­
opments beginning just before but extending particularly after the Second World 
War saw the democratisation of this electrical technology, when between 1930 
and 1975 more homes were connected and telephones and radios became part of 
the household furniture for the majority of the population. The third era is exem­
plified by the transition from electrical to electronic technologies. This period, 
from the late 1960s/early 1970s onward, witnessed the arrival of the transistor 
and the semi-conductor, the integrated circuit, the microprocessor and the rapid 
evolution of electronic machine language. This new technological era was built 
upon the already democratised systems of first modernity that had ensured elec­
trical power supplies in most homes and widespread access to radios, televisions 
and telephones. Developments in electronics witnessed a range of new portable, 
personalised devices such as the cell phone, the microcomputer and the internet. 
This development helped define the transition into a second modernity, permitting 
further individualisation, rendering communities more liquid and more mobile, 
and pervasively ‘in touch’ (Chen, 2012).
Technological eras, generational divisions and age divides
This no doubt over-simplified picture of technological change can be sum­
marised by stating that the rise of mass society – with its democratisation of 
consumer culture, politics of liberation and securitisation of a degree at least of 
disposable income for all – created the conditions for its unravelling. The pro­
cess of securitisation and the accompanying standardisation of the life course 
into youth, working life and retirement, like much else in modernity, was 
achieved by and largely for the interests of white, heterosexual males, via the 
male breadwinner model of the modern economy. This achievement enabled a 
second, less solid type of modernity to emerge which has replaced the structures 
of first modernity. The old solidarities have dissolved as neglected minorities 
have acquired the beginnings, at least, of a voice that challenges the ‘old’ cer­
tainties established by first modernity (Bauman, 2000, 2005). From a widening 
range of sources, and spurred on by the expansion of the market into ever more 
aspects of the life world, more diverse, multi-directional modernities have been 
fashioned. Whereas once, the dynamic driving these new social movements 
was articulated primarily by the young and the old were left behind, later life 
has acquired, in modernity two, a new place for itself; not in the old shape of 
pensioners quietly secure in their relative poverty, but within the diverse com­
munities and later lifestyles that constitute the cultures of a third age.
As the retired population continues to grow in size and in cultural and 
social salience, the diversity as well as the divisions within this community 
are becoming more apparent. The old divisions of modernity that were associ­
ated with occupational class and place are increasingly challenged by the new 

Place of age in the digital revolution  17
more unstable divisions of identity and lifestyle that ebb and flow past those 
old divisions. The distinctions and divisions of the third age are captured by 
the market rather than secured by the state. Catch up has seen a new rhetoric of 
active, healthy, productive, ‘successful’ ageing that is now framed not just as 
a market segment but as a target for the new governmentality of later life that 
jostles with the earlier rhetoric of care, dependency and need. Not that the former 
political discourse has replaced the latter; but within the revived neo-liberal state, 
it is fast overtaking it (Macnicol, 2015).
But though the distinctions of the old life course have become less salient 
and less solid, new divides seem to be emerging that are of particular relevance 
to the digital era: that between a third and a fourth age. The old life stages 
divide between ‘student’, ‘worker’ and ‘pensioner’ has lessened much like that 
between ‘working’ and ‘middle’ class. In their place is a new divide that sepa­
rates an age denying, age defying cohort and community who shop, chat and 
travel relatively freely and at relative ease with the new technosphere, from 
another, inescapably aged population. The latter have, in many ways, become 
more isolated and more excluded from contemporary culture than the pension­
ers of the past, trapped within what has been termed the social imaginary of the 
fourth age (Gilleard and Higgs, 2010).
The social imaginary of the fourth age can be seen as one of the unintended 
consequences of the emergence of the third age. Rejecting ‘old’ and ‘agedness’, 
the cultures of the third age have inadvertently rendered old age darker and 
more undesirable; as an ‘imaginary’ of a real old age the fear of a fourth age 
acts as a spur toward new desires, new opportunities and new imperatives to 
stay young, keep fit and be forever functional (Marshall and Katz, 2002). Unlike 
the realisation of the various cultures and lifestyles that mark out the cultural 
field of the third age, including those determined by the new ICT, the fourth age 
functions less as a social space or ‘actor network’, but operates, in Castoriadis’ 
terms,2 as an imaginary whose malignant significations exceed the confines of 
any old age associated practice or institution (Gilleard and Higgs, 2013; Higgs 
and Gilleard, 2015).
This divide is recreated within the cultural and social relations marked by 
contemporary ICT. The third age Skypes, joins online communities, shops and 
networks online and travels into the unknown with a smart phone in hand, active 
and evolving participants in the cultures of the third age. The fourth age does 
none of these. Instead, they are regarded primarily as potential candidates for 
various so-called adaptive digital technologies – technologies that are more 
clever and more capable than they. This division is not just a digital divide – 
though it can be seen to map onto such models – neither is it reducible to the 
difference between two cohorts sharing different habitus or products of differ­
ent ‘generational technologies’. In second modernity, such divides soon lessen 
(Gilleard et al., 2015). More than anything else, it is a division between those 
who can and those who cannot participate, share and help realise an identity and 
a lifestyle within and by means of the material resources and cultural capital that 
have been generated by second modernity.

18  Chris Gilleard
Technological frames for the third age and the fourth age
This leads me to consider, in this final section of the chapter, some of the direct 
consequences that link this critical distinction between third age cultures and a 
fourth age imaginary, and the use and application of the new ICT. How do the 
new divides of modernity two influence later life and the place of the new tech­
nologies in contributing to – or constraining – this fracturing of old age? One set 
of studies that might be considered a research programme for technology and 
third age studies might seek to discover what consumerist habitus distinguishes 
adopters and non-adopters of new technologies within or between age cohorts or 
groups of retired people varying in their style and extent of consumerism. Such 
research might seek to explore, for example, what distinguishes later life ‘play­
ers’ and later life ‘communicators’ from those who remain mostly ‘watchers’ or 
‘listeners’ (e.g. those using old style mobile phones to keep in touch or for ‘emer­
gencies’ vs. those using smart phones to play, shop or travel). Similarly, useful 
research may explore how many grandparents are bought digital technology by 
their grandchildren and how these particular grandparents differ from those who 
buy new digital technology for themselves and their grandchildren.
Likewise, within the same ‘third age’ framework, one might want to inquire 
into patterns of recycling and upgrading. Who and how many make the upgrade 
from mobile to smart phone; from using mobile phones for communication only 
to using them to conduct online banking, play games or go surfing the supermar­
ket online? Who learns how to Skype, how do they learn and why? Who acquires 
technological expertise from their peers, from friends, partners and colleagues, 
and who does so via the vertical relationships of kith and kin? Likewise, for social 
media, who learns to book Facetime and how do they learn? These examples can 
be multiplied over and over, but the point remains the same – the need to promote 
research presaged upon the role of the new technology in extending, expanding 
and shaping the cultures of the third age, including expanding the ways of having 
fun online (e.g. Marston and Graner Ray, 2016; Rogers et al., 2014).
Such research seems much rarer than that conducted to assist or help older people 
use ICT (Arthanata et al., 2016), ‘adapt’ the technology for ‘older people’ (Díaz-
Bossini and Moreno, 2014) or discover whether using the new technology is ‘good 
for them’ (Bobillier Chaumon et al., 2014); for example, if it ‘prevents dementia’ 
(Kenigsberg et al., 2016) or if it reduces depression (Elliot et al., 2014). This way 
lies the social imaginary of old age. The fourth age and fourth age studies in digital 
technology have a very different agenda to the sort of questions posed earlier. A 
kind of shift can be observed from what appear to be ‘third’ age concerns based on 
‘enablement’ but presaged upon disablement (preventing dementia with memory 
games; mind fitness training, etc.) to frankly fourth age pre-occupations, such as 
the use of mobile and smart phones as alarm bracelets, or memory and orientation 
aides, or the development of information systems to monitor the older person at risk, 
or to support and enhance the work of human ‘care’ providers through ‘robotic’ 
aides (Angelini et al., 2013; De San Miguel and Lewin, 2008; Granat et al., 2013; 
Gschwind et al., 2015; Schneider and Henneberger, 2014).

Place of age in the digital revolution  19
By examining the development of different ‘gerontechnologies’ it is possible 
to discern how far digital technology researchers – as well as the technologies 
themselves – prevent, and how far they bring about, the ‘frailing’ of old age. Just 
as the visibly prominent hearing aid marks out the wearer as ‘deaf’, or the push­
chair style wheelchair marks its passenger as ‘immobile’, so the necklace with 
the alarm or the electronic care plan in the kitchen mark out the householder or 
resident as impaired; as having something ‘wrong’ with them. The challenge is 
one that researchers in disability studies have been engaged with for some time, 
namely how and in what ways it is possible to design technologies that mark the 
person or user as ‘enhanced’ or ‘augmented’ rather than made less or belittled 
by their use. Reflexively viewing the changing concepts of modernity and the 
changes that have taken place in the organisation and experience of later life from 
‘first’ to ‘second’ modernity, it is possible to develop a more critical analysis of 
the role of ICTs in fashioning the kind of later life that our present and future age­
ing societies are on the point of realising. Recognising that these processes not 
only create new potentials but also present new pitfalls, it is important to retain 
that mix of optimism of the will and pessimism of the intellect when judging the 
future of ageing and technology and their complex, evolving relationship.
Notes
1	 An exception could be made for the writing of Georg Simmel whose fascination for the 
cultural aspects of modernity set him apart from “the sociology taking shape in the late 
nineteenth and early twentieth century” (Connor, 1996, p. 341).
2	 Castoriadis’ use of the term ‘imaginary’ and ‘social imaginary significations’ are out­
lined in detail in his book, The Imaginary Institution of Society (Castoriadis, 1987).
References
Angelini, L., Caon, M., Carrino, S., Bergeron, L., Nyffeler, N., Jean-Mairet, M. and 
Mugellini, E., 2013, September. Designing a desirable smart bracelet for older 
adults. In: Proceedings of The 2013 ACM Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous 
Computing. Adjunct publication. New York: Association for Computing Machinery, 
pp. 425–434.
Arthanata, S., Vromana, K. G. and Lysackb, C., 2016. A home-based individualized infor­
mation communication technology training program for older adults: a demonstration 
of effectiveness and value. Disability and Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology, 11(4), 
316–324.
Atkinson, W., 2007. Beck, individualization and the death of class: a critique. The British 
Journal of Sociology, 58(3), pp. 349–366.
Bauman, Z., 2000. Liquid modernity. Cambridge, UK: Polity.
Bauman, Z., 2005. Liquid life. Cambridge, UK: Polity.
Beck, U. and Beck-Gernsheim, E., 2001. Individualisation: institutionalised individualism 
and its social and political consequences. Cambridge, UK: Polity.
Beck, U. and Grande, E., 2010. Varieties of second modernity: the cosmopolitan turn 
in social and political theory and research. British Journal of Sociology, 61(3), 
pp. 409–443.

20  Chris Gilleard
Beck, U. and Lau, C., 2005. Second modernity as a research agenda: theoretical and 
empirical explorations in the ‘meta-change’ of modern society. The British Journal of 
Sociology, 56(4), pp. 525–557.
Beck, U., Bonss, W. and Lau, C., 2003. The theory of reflexive modernization problematic, 
hypotheses and research programme. Theory, Culture & Society, 20(2), pp. 1–33.
Benson, J., 1994. The rise of consumer society in Britain, 1880–1980. London: Longman.
Bobillier Chaumon, M. E., Michel, C., Tarpin Bernard, F. and Croisile, B., 2014. Can 
ICT improve the quality of life of elderly adults living in residential home care units? 
From actual impacts to hidden artefacts. Behaviour & Information Technology, 33(6), 
pp. 574–590.
Bowden, S. and Offer, A., 1994. Household appliances and the use of time: The United 
States and Britain since the 1920s. Economic History Review, 47(4), p. 725–748.
Cahill, S. E., 1989. Fashioning males and females: appearance management and the social 
reproduction of gender. Symbolic Interaction, 12(2), pp. 281–298.
Calhoun, C., 1998. Community without propinquity revisited: communications technol­
ogy and the transformation of the urban public sphere. Sociological Inquiry, 68(3), 
pp. 373–397.
Castells, M., 1996. The rise of the network society: Vol. I. The information age: economy, 
society and culture. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Castoriadis, C., 1987. The imaginary institution of society. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Chen, B. 2012. Always on: how the i-phone unlocked the anything-anytime-anywhere 
future. Boston, MA: Da Capo Press.
Connor, S., 1996. Cultural sociology and cultural sciences. In: B. S. Turner, ed. The 
Blackwell companion to social theory. Oxford, UK: Blackwell, pp. 340–368.
De San Miguel, K. and Lewin, G., 2008. Personal emergency alarms: what impact do they 
have on older people’s lives? Australasian Journal on Ageing, 27(2), pp. 103–105.
Díaz-Bossini, J. M. and Moreno, L., 2014. Accessibility to mobile interfaces for older 
people. Procedia Computer Science, 27, pp. 57–66.
Dinnerstein, M. and Weitz, R., 1994. Jane Fonda, Barbara Bush and other aging bodies: 
femininity and the limits of resistance. Feminist Issues, 14(2), pp. 3–24.
Durkheim, E., [1893] 1984. The division of labour in society. Basingstoke, UK: Macmillan.
Elliot, A. J., Mooney, C. J., Douthit, K. Z. and Lynch, M. F., 2014. Predictors of older 
adults’ technology use and its relationship to depressive symptoms and well-being. The 
Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 69(5), 
pp. 667–677.
Featherstone, M., 1982. The body in consumer culture. Theory, Culture & Society, 1(2), 
pp. 18–33.
Fonda, J., 2011. Prime time: making the most of all of your life. London: Vermillion,
Foucault, M., 1988. Technologies of the self. In L. H. Martin, H. Gutman and P. H. Hutton, 
eds. Technologies of the self: a seminar with Michel Foucault. Amherst, MA: University 
of Massachusetts Press, pp. 16–49.
Gergen, K. J. and Gergen, M. M., 2000. The new aging: self construction and social values. 
In: R. W. Schaie and J. Hendricks, eds. The evolution of the aging self: the societal 
impact on the aging process. New York, Springer, pp. 281–306.
Giddens, A., 1991. Modernity and self-identity: self and society in the late modern age. 
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Gilleard, C. and Higgs, P., 2002. The third age: class, cohort or generation. Ageing & 
Society, 22(3), 369–382.

Place of age in the digital revolution  21
Gilleard, C. and Higgs, P., 2010. Ageing without agency: theorising the fourth age. Aging 
& Mental Health, 14(2), pp. 121–128.
Gilleard, C. and Higgs, P., 2011. The third age as a cultural field: In: D. Carr and K. Komp, 
eds. Gerontology in the era of the third age. New York: Springer, pp. 33–50.
Gilleard, C. and Higgs, P., 2013. Ageing, corporeality and embodiment. London: Anthem 
Press.
Gilleard, C., Jones, I. and Higgs, P., 2015. Connectivity in later life: the declining age 
divide in mobile cell phone ownership. Sociological Research Online, 20(2). http://
www.socresonline.org.uk/20/2/3.html. 
Gimlin, D., 2007. What is ‘body work’? A review of the literature. Sociology Compass, 
1(1), pp. 353–70.
Granat, C., Pino, M., Legouverneur, G., Vidal, J. S., Bidaud, P. and Rigaud, A. S., 2013. 
Robot services for elderly with cognitive impairment: testing usability of graphical user 
interfaces. Technological Health Care, 21(3), pp. 217–231.
Gschwind, Y. J., Schoene, D., Lord, S. R., Ejupi, A., Valenzuela, T., Aal, K., Woodbury, 
A. and Delbaere, K., 2015. The effect of sensor-based exercise at home on functional 
performance associated with fall risk in older people: a comparison of two exergame 
interventions. European Review of Aging and Physical Activity, 12(11). https://doi.
org/10.5817/CP2012-2-3.
Higgs, P. and Gilleard, C., 2015. Fitness and consumerism in later life. In: E. Tulle and 
C. Phoenix, eds. Physical activity and sport in later life: critical perspectives. London: 
Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 32–42.
Jones, I. R., Hyde, M., Victor, C., Wiggins, R. D., Gilleard, C. and Higgs, P., 2008. Ageing 
in a consumer society: from passive to active consumption in Britain. Bristol, UK: 
Policy Press.
Kenigsberg, P. A., Aquino, J. P., Berard, A., Gzil, F., Andrieu, S., Banerjee, S., Brémond, 
F., Buee, L., Cohen-Mansfield, J., Mangialasche, F. and Platel, H., 2016. Dementia 
beyond 2025: knowledge and uncertainties. Dementia, 15(1), 6–21.
Kline, S., 1994 Toys, socialization and the commodification of play. In: S. Strasser, 
C. McGovern and M. Judt, eds. Getting and spending: European and American con­
sumer societies in the twentieth century. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press, pp. 339–358.
Kohli, M. and Rein, M., 1991. The changing balance of work and retirement. In: M. Kohli, 
M. Rein, A-M. Guillemard and H. M. Gunsteren, eds. Time for retirement: compara­
tive studies of early exit from the labor force. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press, pp. 1–35.
Laslett, P., 1989. A fresh map of life: the emergence of the third age. London: Weidenfeld 
and Nicholson.
Lipovetsky, G., 2002. The empire of fashion: dressing modern democracy. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
Lunt, P. K. and Livingstone, S., 1992. Mass consumption and personal identity: everyday 
economic experience. Buckingham, UK: Open University Press.
Macnicol, J., 2015. Neoliberalising old age. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Mannheim, K., [1952] 1997. On the problem of generation: In M. A. Hardy, ed. 
Studying aging and social change: conceptual and methodological issues. London: 
SAGE, pp. 22–65.
Marshall, B. and Katz, S., 2002. Forever functional: sexual fitness and the aging male 
body. Body & Society, 8(4), pp. 43–70.

22  Chris Gilleard
Marston, H. R. and Graner Ray, S., 2016. Older women on the game: understanding digi­
tal game perspectives from an ageing cohort. In: E. Domínguez-Rué and L. Nierling, 
eds. Ageing and technology: perspectives from the social sciences. Bielefeld, Germany: 
Transcript-Verlag, pp. 67–91.
Marwick, A., 1998. The sixties: cultural revolution in Britain, France, Italy, and the United 
States, c. 1958–c. 1974. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Miles, S., 1998. Consumerism as a way of life. London: SAGE.
Outhwaite, W., 2009. Canon formation in late 20th-century British sociology. Sociology, 
43(6), pp. 1029–1045.
Rainie, L. and Wellman, B., 2012. Networked: the new social operating system. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Rogers, Y., Paay, J., Brereton, M., Vaisutis, K. L., Marsden, G. and Vetere, F., 2014. 
Never too old: engaging retired people inventing the future with MaKey MaKey. In: 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
ACM, pp. 3913–3922.
Sackmann, R. and Winkler, O., 2013. Technology generations revisited: the internet 
generation. Gerontechnology, 11(4), 493–503.
Schneider, C. and Henneberger, S., 2014. Electronic spatial assistance for people with 
dementia: choosing the right device. Technologies, 2(2), 96–114.
Tönnies, F., [1886] 1958. Community and association. London: C. P. Loomis, Routledge 
and Kegan Paul.
Weber, M., [1922] 1978. Economy and society. Berkeley, CA: University of California 
Press.

3	
Generational analysis as a 
methodological approach to 
study mediatised social change
Göran Bolin
Introduction
Time and again, it is said that we are living in an era of rapid technological 
change, or even one of increased acceleration (Rosa, 2013 [2005]). This idea of 
accelerating technological change, especially that involving media technologies, 
also serves as a basis for contemporary theories of ‘media generations’. These 
theories argue that in contrast to previous generations who were socialised into 
print media culture, those born over the past 50−60 years have seen a much more 
rapid transformation of technologies, impacting more strongly on the formation of 
generational identity. According to Gary Gumpert and Robert Cathcart, the faster 
pace of technological change leads to the formation of distinct media generations.
Prior to the late nineteenth century media explosion, generations came and 
went, all exposed to and acquiring the same print grammar. Thus media 
seemed to have little bearing on human time relationships. Though we still 
think of people as related, or separated in chronological generation time, the 
rapid advent of new media and the acquisition of new media grammars implies 
new alignments, shorter and more diverse than those based on generations.
(Gumpert and Cathcart, 1985, p. 31)
Theories of generation were formulated first in the early 1900s by theorists such 
as Spanish philosopher José Ortega y Gasset (1931 [1923]) and German sociolo­
gist Karl Mannheim (1952 [1928]) in order to understand why and how societies 
change. In a more general sense, it could be argued that the theory of generations 
is a theory of time; trying to come to grips with ‘the rhythm of ages’ (Ortega y 
Gasset, 1931 [1923], p. 18; cf. Ricoeur, 1990 [1985]; Bolin, 2016b). Although 
generational theory has been refined and developed in the wake of Mannheim, 
Ortega y Gassett and others within sociology (e.g. Kertzer, 1983; Pilcher, 1998; 
Corsten, 1999), and also in media studies (Gumpert and Cathcart, 1985; Colombo 
and Fortunati, 2011), general methodological principles for how to analyse gen­
erations, and thus media-related social change, have been less discussed.
Media-related social change is at the heart of theories on mediatisation. The con­
cept of mediatisation has been developed to address these changes and understand 

24  Göran Bolin
how media technologies have come to play an increasingly important role in every­
day life (e.g. Lundby, 2009; Hjarvard, 2013). In its institutional conceptualisation, 
it has been argued that the media impact on other societal institutions (Hjarvard, 
2013), making them adjust to the logics of the media (Altheide and Snow, 1979). 
In a social-constructionist version of this theory, the media is presented as a more 
general ‘moulding force’ (Hepp, 2013), while in semiotic or structuralist accounts 
the media are seen as becoming increasingly influential for the signifying systems 
by which human communication occurs (Bolin, 2014a).
While the concept of mediatisation has been met with enthusiasm, it also has 
its critics. One criticism concerns the relative lack of temporal perspectives. The 
concept of mediatisation like other ‘-isation’ concepts, such as globalisation, indi­
vidualisation and commercialisation, suggests historical change, but as Deacon 
and Stanyer (2014) have pointed out ‘much mediatization research depends on a 
presumption rather than the demonstration of historical change, projecting back­
wards from contemporary case studies rather than carefully designed temporal 
comparisons’ (Deacon and Stanyer, 2014, p. 1037).
In this chapter I suggest that an analytical perspective that focuses upon 
generations can work as an aid in studying historical change, and that it can 
help provide empirical substance to mediatisation theory. The chapter draws on 
empirical material from a project on generations, media and historical change that 
was carried out in Sweden and Estonia between 2002 and 2012. Data collected 
using quantitative survey methodology have been combined with qualitative 
focus group interviews to address various opportunities and obstacles that a such 
multi-method approach entails for the analysis of generations.1
By coupling this methodological approach with a comparative intergenera­
tional analysis, the chapter shows how media memories from childhood and from 
the formative years of youth reveal specific traits in the historical process, and 
on how the role of the media has changed over time in the minds of different 
generations. The chapter explains how the passage of calendar time gradually 
forms generations in what may be termed a ‘generationing’ process (Siibak and 
Vittadini, 2012). Analysing this process, it is argued here, is also to analyse social 
change, including its media-related dimensions. Elsewhere, I have discussed this 
in terms of a specific generational ‘rhythm of ages’, where the theoretical under­
pinnings of my argument are developed (Bolin, 2016a). Here, I have focused upon 
a more elaborate discussion of analytical approaches and empirical implications. 
I have also played down the cross-cultural comparisons that were made in the 
larger project in order to focus more specifically on the issue of social change. 
The cross-cultural dimension is more elaborated in Bolin (2016b).
The chapter is organised in four sections. First, the theory of generations is elabo­
rated on to establish a general framework for the study. Second, a specific analytical 
approach is presented. Third, the benefits and drawbacks of these methodological 
choices are discussed, and the method is critically evaluated, and in the final sec­
tion the methodological opportunities and challenges that a generational perspective 
allows for in the study of mediatised social change are then summarised.

Mediatised social change  25
Generation theory and time
Following Karl Mannheim’s seminal paper (Mannheim, 1952) a founding idea in 
generational theory is that generations are formed through the common experi­
ences of coevals, located in the same place in the historical process. The relation 
to the historical context is important, and Mannheim made a major distinction 
between generation as ‘location’ and as ‘actuality’. In an analogy with Marx’s the­
ory of class, Mannheim defined generation as “the certain ‘location’ (Lagerung) 
certain individuals hold in the economic and power structure of a given society” 
(Mannheim, 1952, p. 289). The basis for this generational location is year of 
birth, where all people born in the same year have a “common location in the 
historical dimension of the social process” (Mannheim, 1952, p. 290). However, 
location in time is not enough since it would reduce a generation to being nothing 
more than an age cohort. To explain the basis of generations in common experi­
ence, Mannheim introduced the concept of generation as actuality, that is, when 
people born around the same time have similar experiences and also perceive 
themselves as thereby constituting a generation. The process of acquiring such 
a ‘generational consciousness’ is termed ‘generationing’ (Siibak and Vittadini, 
2012). This alludes to “the result of the interaction between contextual and fixed 
traits (such as historical, cultural and social events and experiences) and a cul­
tural process of identity formation developed over time (including narratives, 
performances and rituals)” (Siibak and Vittadini, 2012, p. 3; Siibak et al., 2014). 
According to this perspective, people are not born into a generation, but form 
their generational identity over time. Hence it is easier to detect clear-cut gen­
erational formations among older generations who have lived longer than those 
whose identity is only emerging (Bolin, 2016a, pp. 124ff).
Mannheim argued that the most important experiences that bring a generational 
formation together are those that are acquired during the formative years of youth. 
Making ‘fresh contact’ with specific phenomena binds people together in their 
common experiences and makes them act in relation to these things or phenom­
ena in similar ways. Their responses to societal events need not be the same and 
may produce different generational units (for example, men and women might 
react differently), but they are all triggered by major societal events. Mannheim 
thought of such events as wars, famine, uprisings and major catastrophes, but 
later research has proposed that the media can also be an important source in the 
development of generational consciousness (see the earlier quote from Gumpert 
and Cathcart, 1985).
Whether change occurs, and if so at what speed and with what consequences, 
can of course be debated. Furthermore, as Marshall Berman (1988 [1982]) points 
out, change is itself the dominant mode of experience in modernity. Although 
most people perceive their specific era as the most revolutionary in human his­
tory when it comes to change, there are qualitative differences related to different 
(media) technologies, depending on the level that one enters into the analysis. If 
we agree with Marshall McLuhan (1964) that “the medium is the message”, it 
will indeed matter to this message which specific medium provokes the change.

26  Göran Bolin
Generations are thus formed in relation to the experience of various phenom­
ena in society. Among these is the range of media technologies, media contents 
and the media’s capacity to provide people with the means to communicate 
with one another. Individual subjects react to and act against these structures, 
much depending on how the subjects perceive them. This produces the subjec­
tive apprehension of the ‘objective’ structure. It is a commonly shared subjective 
apprehension that lies at the bottom of the generational experience, and which can 
result in the actualisation of a generational consciousness.
The generational theory of Mannheim and others focuses on coevals, people 
born around the same time. As a result of having similar experiences, a specific 
generational consciousness is formed that renders such a generation as a social 
formation. However, people do not confront media technologies, content or ser­
vices in the same way. Individuals make fresh contact with the media landscape 
at different ages and from the vantage point of different life-phases and situations. 
Being confronted with the Beatles at the age of 16 in the midst of the teenage 
years means something entirely different from having been introduced to them as 
a 45-year-old parent (cf. Corsten, 1999). There is thus a need for coupling the syn­
chronic approach of Mannheim and his followers, with the diachronic approach 
of, for example, Margaret Mead (1970), who emphasised intergenerational rela­
tions, that is, how younger and older generations relate to one another, with the 
potential of such relations producing a ‘generation gap’. Such gaps can stem from 
such differences in life situation and age, which may inform the ways in which 
one appreciates the media, and which may influence the type of impact this meet­
ing may have on one’s generational self-perception. Life phase, life situation and 
age thus need to be related to the generationing process. In order to capture this 
process, a particular methodological approach was developed.
Analytical approach
One way of analysing generationing as a temporal process, as the meeting 
between a social collective and a techno-cultural structure, is to adopt a cross-
generational comparative approach, whereby different generational formations 
can stand out against each other. In this case, the background to such a compara­
tive analysis came from a larger project, initiated with colleagues at Södertörn 
University, Sweden, and Tartu University, Estonia, in 2001. Its aim was to study 
the processes of mediatised change, for which the comparison between Sweden 
and Estonia was considered fitting. The point of departure, described in more 
detail in Bolin (2003, 2005), was that while the developments in media technol­
ogies were similar in both cultural contexts (i.e. media technologies arrived and 
were established at approximately the same time), the historical and geopolitical 
context for that encounter was dramatically different in the two media land­
scapes. There were also varieties in contents between the two cultural contexts. 
The basic hypothesis was that these differences should have made an impact 
on the ways in which media were adopted and used in each of these national 
settings. However, the aim was not to establish if this was the case or not, but 

Mediatised social change  27
rather to specify variations in the ways in which the media were ‘domesticated’ 
in each country and what relations citizens in both countries had with the media. 
Our conception of ‘the media’ was broad, and included all kinds of communica­
tion technologies from books, records, the traditional mass media and the digital 
media of the present.
As James Beniger (1992) pointed out, all research in the social sciences is 
comparative, and thus the comparative dimension of research is more a matter of 
specifying exactly how such comparisons are made. I have discussed the benefits 
of adopting a comparative perspective at length in Bolin (2016a, pp. 15ff), so 
for this context I will simply point out that in this specific case, the comparative 
approach aimed to identify on which occasions we could recognise the impact of 
different cultural-historic circumstances.
The concept of media landscape was chosen for the ‘objective’ structure of 
technologies, contents and communication opportunities, over similar compet­
ing concepts such as ‘media ecology’, or ‘media environment’, which, although 
having their specific merits, through their biological connotations point to devel­
opments of an organic nature. The concept of landscape, on the contrary, points 
to the constructedness of the media as a specific combination of technologies 
and contents, formed socially and used and appropriated socially (Bolin, 2003, 
2006). It points to the ensemble of media that is present at any one point in time 
in a society. It is the technological and symbolic media structure, the amount of 
technologies and contents (signs, messages) that an individual can react to, act 
against, or ignore. Some of these technologies and semiotic structures are more 
accessible than others, and, depending on the individual trajectory that people 
have through these landscapes and the experiences they have acquired, the land­
scape will privilege certain types of approaches over others.
The metaphor of media landscape thus refers to the mediatised space in which 
people live and act. It is a spatial metaphor that indicates a phenomenological 
‘world’ perspective. It first appeared as a technical term for painters and was thus 
connected to representational practices (Adams, 1994). But so too are geographi­
cal landscapes – these are also formed by individual or collective subjects, acting 
on the surrounding physical environment. Thus, both the symbolic and the physi­
cal landscape are (re)presented for us (Casey, 2004), are shaped by someone, for 
some purpose, and are cultivated into different shapes and forms. It is thus both 
something constructed for us by, for example, a landscape artist, representing 
the world for us in painted form, but also it is a space shaped by the hands of a 
landscape gardener, where we can act individually as well as socially. Our actions 
in a landscape also impact on it. People may not always follow the paths through 
a garden, for example, but make short-cuts over the lawn, producing a path that 
was not foreseen or intended by the landscape gardener. Eventually, such actions 
impact on the landscape itself. This metaphor of landscape, in short, allows for 
thinking about the media in ways that transgress the structure-agency dichotomy 
and make it possible to see actions structured by frameworks that were produced 
by previous social actions, by preceding others. Those structures, however, never 
determine the scope of individual action.

28  Göran Bolin
Empirical approach
In line with Henri Lefebvre (1991), we can think of time as movement in space. 
The trajectory of a social formation through the spatial unit that is the media land­
scape thus produces time, both in its linear conception as calendar time and also in 
its sense of punctual time, that is, time that is defined by its specific quality. While 
individuals move about in the technological and symbolic landscape of the media, 
their movements give both this space and this time a unique quality that would not 
have been there had it not been for the social actions of these individuals. But time 
is not produced solely through movement in space; it is also formed in our dis­
cursive constructions of the past, in relation to the present. This apprehension of 
time is relatively freed from the cosmic time of the calendar, since it can produce 
prosthetic memories (Landsberg, 1995), things that have not actually happened, 
or that have happened in another way than that in which it is remembered.
The empirical material of this study consists of both quantitative and qualita­
tive data. For the quantitative part, biennial surveys were made from 2002 to 
2012, initially together with researchers at the Department of Journalism and 
Communication at Tartu University. Questions focused on access and use of 
media, as well as attitudes to media use. The survey included themes concern­
ing both traditional mass media but had a slight bias towards digital media. The 
sample was national in Estonia, and regional in Sweden, restricted to the South 
Stockholm region of Södertörn.2 The aim was not to compare countries, but to 
analyse processes of change, framed by historical circumstance and occurring in a 
specific cultural context. This context includes differences in political and cultural 
autonomy, where change in Estonia was framed by its short history of national 
sovereignty, having been under Soviet rule since World War II. However, the con­
text also includes differences in living standards, especially historically, for the 
older age groups. Although this is clearly insufficient for laying bare long-term, 
generationally formed patterns of media usage (and general social behaviour), it 
can reveal if there are consistencies among cohorts over the period of one decade. 
It can also be used to identify ‘break points’ between age cohorts. Regarding the 
first point, the research material allows for following specific age cohorts over 
a ten-year period, trying to look for consistency in these cohorts’ media behav­
iour. In terms of the cross-cultural inquiry, such national consistencies can also 
be explored, but these have not been emphasised so much here (see more, Bolin, 
2016a, 2016b).
Most cross-generational analysis that uses statistical methods divides gen­
erational cohorts along a continuum, where each cohort starts the year after 
the older one ends. A common such generational typology is built on Zukin 
et al.’s (2006) division of US political generations into people born pre-1945 
(‘the dutifuls’), those born after World War II, 1946–64 (‘the baby-boomers’), 
those born between 1965–76 (‘generation X’) and those born in 1977 and after 
(‘the dotnets’). Such a conceptualisation of generations warrants an elaborate 
discussion about why someone born in December 1945 would have a dramati­
cally different experience of societal events compared with someone born in 
January 1946, or, for that matter, why someone born in 1946 would share the 

Mediatised social change  29
same experiences of societal and cultural events with someone born almost two 
decades later, in 1964. If for no other reason than for analytical clarity, it might 
be better to work with people born within a more delimited period and also to 
separate generational cohorts statistically. One such attempt at the construction 
of discrete generational cohorts is shown in Figure 3.1, represented by people 
born in 1931–1937, 1951–1957 and 1981–1987.
As can be seen from Figure 3.1, older generation cohorts use each of the func­
tions on the mobile phone less than the younger ones, and even if all cohorts increase 
their use over the years, the increase is similar in relation to the other two cohorts. 
One can therefore conclude there are clear generational patterns of use. If we reflect 
further on the age group distinction made in Figure 3.1, we can of course claim that 
this construction of cohorts is also arbitrary. Although the goal of analytical clarity 
might be achieved with this separation of cohorts, the differences in user patterns 
are not really indicative of any differences in generational experience, but just pre­
sent generations as a location, situated in a similar position in the historical process. 
This locatedness does, admittedly, result in different responses to the introduction 
and establishment of the mobile phone (or whatever medium or phenomenon one 
measures in relation to the cohorts), but this is hardly evidence of the existence of 
a self-perceived social formation that considers itself as a generation – that is, of a 
generation as actuality. So, in order to grasp this experiential dimension, a series of 
focus group interviews in each country was organised.
From the statistical material, in conjunction with an historical analysis that aimed 
to identify major societal events including media events (Dayan and Katz, 1992), 
Figure 3.1  Generation as location: three Swedish age cohorts and their use of three 
functions of the mobile phone 2003–2013 (%). Adapted from the national 
SOM Institute.
Note: Statistics from the national SOM Institute surveys 2003–2013. Use defined as several times per 
month or more often.

30  Göran Bolin
four age groups were outlined, where one could identify changes, albeit modest, in 
media behaviour. Media behaviour focused specifically on differences in the read­
ing of news in print and in online forms. This was coupled with an analysis of the 
different historical circumstances, especially as related to media, in the two coun­
tries. Based on this analysis, it was decided to construct focus groups of people 
born in the early 1940s, early 1960s, late 1970s and early 1990s. Some of these age 
groups were wider age-wise than others (see Table 3.1).
The basic idea for forming these focus groups was to see if participants had 
common shared experiences and, if so, how this would be articulated in the inter­
views. The focus group discussions were structured around thematic areas such 
as early media memories, contemporary media use, mobile media use, news con­
sumption, print vs. online media, and specific media events around the time of 
the interview.3 In order to capture these potentially shared experiences that would 
bind people together in a generation as actuality, each focus group discussion was 
introduced through such prompting questions as “Which media did you have in 
your home as a child? Can you tell us about your earliest media memories?” This 
proved an effective start to the conversation, and in most groups resulted in some­
one mentioning certain media content from their early years.
Michael:	
Well, if we jump very far back . . . what I remember actually, and 
if we are talking media, then it’s the moon landing. This is per­
haps the first when it comes to media, the memories that remain. 
That it was so special, that thing.
John:	
Sixtynine.
Michael:	
Yes, sixtynine, yes.
Anne:	
That it was live transmission?
Michael:	
Live transmission, exactly.
(Focus group born 1962–1964, Sweden)
From the turn-taking in the quote (anonymised and slightly edited for readability 
here, as they spoke over each other) we can see that there is a shared expe­
rience of this media event. Interestingly enough, a few moments later, in the 
Table 3.1  Focus group composition in Sweden and Estonia.
Sweden
Estonia
Early 1940s
1940–1945 (N=4)
1939–1946 (N=5)
Early 1960s
1962–1964 (N=4)
1959–1966 (N=8)
Late 1970s
1977–1981 (N=4)
1976–1980 (N=5)
Early 1990s
1991–1995 (N=5)
1990–1995 (N=5)
Notes
a	
Interviews made in late 2011 (Estonia) and early 2012 (Sweden).
b	 N in parenthesis indicates the number of participants in each focus group. All groups were bal­
anced when it comes to the gender mix, except the Estonian early 1960s group, which consisted of 
seven females and only one male.

Mediatised social change  31
same interview, it was revealed that Anne had grown up without a television 
set, as her parents were stationed in an African country during her earliest years. 
Nonetheless, the moon landing as a media event was also a reference point for 
her, although she had no first-hand experience of it. Note, for example, that she 
emphasises the liveness quality of the situation, although she explicitly stated 
later that she had not seen it. The moon landing was a media event (Dayan and 
Katz, 1992) in the capacity of not only cutting across all mass media (radio, 
television, press), but also appearing as a theme in the general popular culture.
Michael:	
Well, it was all the things around . . . in magazines, I remember 
there were these plastic stickers you could rub onto things, to 
build a scenario for a moon landing yourself, and a lot of such 
stuff around the whole thing.
(Focus group born 1962–1964, Sweden)
Such media events impact on those who did not explicitly watch the live broadcast. 
Media events of this magnitude seem to set their mark on all individuals within a 
certain society. For example, the interviewees who lived in remote areas where 
television arrived several years later compared their experiences with those who 
lived in the cities. Of course, interviewees who lived in the geographical periphery 
knew about the medium, and thus it also affected them. This resonates perfectly 
with McLuhan’s (1964) famous dictum that “the medium is the message”.
The focus group quoted above consisted of four people, three of whom were 
born in 1962 and one in 1964. Karin, who was the youngest, was very silent dur­
ing the discussion of the moonlanding, and in fact admitted that she remembered 
nothing of it. She was two years younger than the other three in the group, who 
all vividly remembered and discussed it. The interesting issue here is the ways in 
which media events stretch out, transcending any single medium to define experi­
ence in a broader way. The combination of the actual live transmission, and its 
reporting in the press and radio, combined with its reference points in popular 
culture (the stickers) produced a context in which people of approximately the 
same age are included in a common experience. But as the discussion in the focus 
group also reveals, it does not reach everybody. Karin actually showed signs of 
being embarrassed for not being able to be included in the common experience, 
and even excused herself for having such a low interest in the media.
The commonality described above is produced through what I have called indi­
rect generational relations, as there are no specific or direct distinctions towards, or 
reference to, other generations. The commonality consists of the confirmations of the 
experience of other individuals, present in the situation at hand. In fact, we could 
argue that this is one of many moments in which a generation becomes realised or 
actualised, in common understanding and the acknowledgement of shared experience. 
The situation here was a focus group interview, but it could just as well have been a 
family or school-class reunion, meeting a friend one hasn’t met for a long time, look­
ing through a family photo album, etc. For each and every one of these occasions, the 
generationing process deepens, and a generational identity accumulates.

32  Göran Bolin
This may be why research seems to find it easier to track generational 
identities among baby-boomers than among people of younger groups. The 
baby-boomers have rehearsed their identity over the years, and have seen it 
represented in newspaper features, in academic analyses, etc. (e.g. Jamison and 
Eyerman, 1994; Bristow, 2015). They are constantly reminded of their position 
in the historical process and have gradually internalised this knowledge into 
their generational consciousness.
Besides such indirect generational references, there are, quite naturally, also 
direct generational distinctions made between other generations in the interviews. 
When interviewees referred to older or younger generations by comparison, they 
would single out traits among these other generations that differ from their own 
generation. Thus, one could talk about the lack of digital competences among the 
older generations, but also point to how superficial younger generations are in 
their digital habits. The two quotes below illustrate these two positions.
Our generation seems to have quite a lot of similarities in their media use. 
When you look at people who are 10–15 years younger, they are many times 
more superficial. It’s another world actually.
(Focus group, Estonia, born 1976–1980)
Kajsa:	 What I remember is when my sister and I went up north to see my 
mother, when she had . . . my sister had gotten herself a mobile 
phone. And mum, she just couldn’t understand how she could . . . We 
were in a grocery store and then my sister called her husband to ask 
if there was anything specific she should buy, and she said: “But can 
she really talk with Kjell here in the store? Don’t we have to get back 
home first?” It was really difficult for her to grasp that this telephone 
could connect from wherever you were.
Leif:	
It was the same with the television. Many believed that the TV signal 
came through the electric wall socket.
(Focus group, Sweden, born 1940–1945)
Where the first excerpt illustrates the relation to younger generations, the second 
quote captures the way in which many relate to the older parent generation. Both 
quotes are examples of constructing one’s own generational belonging in relation 
to competences that are considered lacking among other generations, that is a kind 
of generational consciousness forming by way of negation.
Anne:	 Today they just sit online, and on Spotify, and I get totally confused, 
because I’m there myself, and I think . . . God, I can download any­
thing and listen to it. And that stresses me out, because you somehow 
lose your grip on . . . And there they are online all the time, and all 
of this with three hundred friends on Facebook, or you have a whole 
world on your computer, and what not.
(Focus group, Sweden, born 1962–1964)

Mediatised social change  33
The interesting thing with this quote is the way in which the interviewee Anne 
related her own use of Spotify to that of younger generations, here partly rep­
resented by her two sons who were in their early twenties at the time of the 
interview, and acknowledged the difference in approach between her and younger 
generations. She admittedly uses both streaming services like Spotify and social 
networking sites such as Facebook, but she realised that her use differed from that 
of younger users, in both quantitative and qualitative terms. Her use was more 
instrumental, and since she grew up in a foreign country and her childhood and 
teenage friends are scattered all over the world, so Facebook provides her with a 
tool for keeping in contact with them.
Anne:	
Yes, I’m on Facebook and LinkedIn and I am very provoked 
by the fact that Facebook somehow uses your profile for 
sending ads to you, adjusted to your interests . . . that sud­
denly pop up, and then you feel . . . Well, I don’t really like 
that. But to me it is a very important channel, because I have 
recreated contacts with my childhood friends, so to me it 
is very nice to be able to chat with people in England and 
the USA . . . well in other countries, that I haven’t . . . that 
type of contact was not possible before. So, I found a lot of 
childhood friends thanks to Facebook, so to me it’s . . . really 
important. For the rest part . . . I hide certain friends because 
I do not want to see these meaningless posts.
(Focus group, Sweden, born 1962–1964)
By meaningless posts, Anne meant posts of what people had for breakfast or 
lunch and other, more ‘phatic’ functions of social networking media. This indi­
cates her more instrumental approach to the medium. Of course, this was partly 
triggered by the interview situation where you do not readily admit to engaging 
in meaningless activities, but construct each action as meaningful and therefore 
justifiable. Nonetheless, even if in the interview situation she emphasised her 
rational behaviour, there is nothing indicating that she does not have that side 
to her usage. The direct intergenerational references also reveal what could be 
called a pre-figurative cultural form of learning, where “young people every­
where share a kind of experience that none of the elders ever have had or will 
have” (Mead, 1970, p. 64):
Interviewer:	 Do you sometimes watch together with siblings or parents?
Eva:	
Yes, I do. I mostly watch with my sister. But also with daddy. 
I have taught him how to connect the laptop to the TV so we 
can watch SVT Play on the TV.
Interviewer:	 OK, so you watch on a larger screen?
Eva:	
Yes, and then it is like watching in the ordinary way. Then I 
watch with him.
(Focus group, Sweden, born 1991–1995)

34  Göran Bolin
The ‘generation gap’, as theorised by Margaret Mead (1970), is produced by the 
fact that from around World War II, generational change has been more dramatic 
due to the depth and pace of the changes in society. Although one could argue 
that her analysis was exaggerated in that she saw an abrupt change in the direc­
tion of learning, it is nonetheless illustrative of the smaller reversals of learning 
related to new media technologies that we can see from the earlier quote. Such 
changes, quite naturally, sensitise those involved to the passing of time, and reveal 
how past habits have become outdated in orienting people towards the new media 
landscape. The combination of the synchronic generation as social formation in the 
Mannheimian sense, with generation as succession in Mead’s analysis where it is 
the intergenerational relations that are the focus, are instructive for this analysis.
Conclusions: generation theory and social change
Above I have described a model for studying generational relations and by doing 
so have tried to say something about the nature of time and social change. In these 
last paragraphs, I will summarise my main arguments.
First, I have illustrated the value, indeed the necessity, of analysing generation 
both in its synchronic and its diachronic senses, as the combination of a social 
formation moving with time, and the meeting between different generations in 
the succession order. The argument of this chapter is that generational theory, 
combined with historically oriented focus group interviews and longitudinal, quan­
titative data, provides one suggested methodological solution to the problem of 
studying long-term social and cultural change, and the process of mediatisation. 
Where quantitative data can say something about the ways in which age groups, 
or cohorts, respond to changes (or stability) in the media landscapes, the qualita­
tive material can say something about how this landscape is perceived, and reveal 
responses based on the actual experience of these landscapes.
Second, I have provided some methodological examples of how empirically 
to approach generations through the use of focus group interviews, with a spe­
cific focus on media use over the life course. The prompting question used to 
open the focus group interviews proved to be valuable for how the interviews 
then unfolded. In most interviews the discussion took off in a lively manner, and 
early memories provoked discussions where the interviewees confirmed their 
shared memories. Quite naturally, the distinctions between the generations – 
both younger and older – were an effect of the focus group setting, and one could 
hypothesise that a mixed age composition in the focus groups might not have 
warranted what I called the making of direct generational distinctions. Thus, 
the methodology privileged the respective focus groups to look for similarities 
inwards, among themselves, and distinctions outwards with other age groups. 
This is, however, not an indication that the generation identities revealed were 
merely a fabrication of the focus group setting, but that the focus group context 
served more as a trigger of the hibernating generational identity.
Third, and relatedly, the generationing process makes older generations stand 
out more clearly in the qualitative material, since this group of interviewees 

Mediatised social change  35
has had more occasions to rehearse its generational identity, having been faced 
over the years with descriptions of themselves as baby-boomers, distinct from 
other (earlier) generations, not least in the media (films, features in the press and 
academic writing), but also through various social occasions such as class reun­
ions, or in reconnecting with older friends on social networking media, or being 
confronted with other generations’ media use. This confrontation produces the 
self-awareness that is needed for a generation as location to become a generation 
as actuality, that is, for the self-understanding of oneself as belonging to a genera­
tion with a common understanding of the media landscape. On all these occasions 
a generational identity is activated, and where present is further strengthened and 
brought to the surface in the analysis of social change.
Notes
1	 The project was funded by The Baltic Sea Foundation, and carried out together with 
Signe Opermann, who wrote her PhD thesis within the project (Opermann, 2014).
2	 The Södertörn region includes 9 municipalities, including Stockholm. For more detailed 
information on sampling procedures in both countries, see Bolin (2005). On the general, 
response rates were satisfactory, and similar to larger surveys (e.g. the national surveys 
by the SOM Institute in Sweden).
3	 Interviews were made by Bolin in Sweden, and Signe Opermann in Estonia, recorded 
and transcribed and in the case of the Estonian interviews translated to English.
References
Adams, A. J., 1994. Seventeenth-century Dutch landscape painting. In: W. J. Thomas 
Mitchell, ed. Landscape and power. Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press, pp. 35–76.
Altheide, D. L. and Snow R. P., 1979. Media logic. Beverly Hills, CA: SAGE.
Beniger, J. R., 1992. Comparison, yes, but – the case of technological and cultural change. 
In: J. Blumler, J. M. McLeod and K. E. Rosengren, eds. Comparatively speaking: 
communication and culture across space and time. London: SAGE, pp. 35–50.
Berman, M., 1988 [1982]. All that is solid melts into air: the experience of modernity. New 
York: Penguin.
Bolin, G., 2003. Variations, media landscapes, history. Frameworks for an analysis of 
contemporary media landscapes. Huddinge, Sweden: MKV.
Bolin, G., ed., 2005. The media landscape of Södertörn 2002: media use, values and 
everyday life in southern Stockholm. Huddinge, Sweden: MKV.
Bolin, G., 2006. Electronic geographies: media landscapes as technological and symbolic 
environments. In: J. Falkheimer and A. Jansson, eds. Geographies of communication: 
the spatial turn in media studies. Gothenburg, Sweden: Nordicom, pp. 67–86.
Bolin, G., 2014a. Institution, technology, world: relationships between the media, culture 
and society. In: K. Lundby, ed. Mediatization of communication. Berlin and Boston, 
MA: De Gruyter Mouton, pp. 175–197.
Bolin, G., 2014b. Generationsskiftningar i mobillandskapet. In: A. Bergström and H. Oscarsson, 
eds. Mittfåra & marginal. Gothenburg, Sweden: SOM-Institutet, pp. 229–237.
Bolin, G., 2016a. Media generations: experience, identity and mediatised social change. 
London and New York: Routledge.
Bolin, G., 2016b. The rhythm of ages: analyzing mediatization through the lens of genera­
tions across nations. International Journal of Communication, 10, pp. 5252–5269.

36  Göran Bolin
Bristow, J., 2015. Baby boomers and generational conflict. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Casey, E. S., 2004. Mapping the world in works of art. In: B. V. Folz and R. Frodeman, 
eds. Rethinking nature: essays in environmental philosophy. Bloomington, IN: Indiana 
University Press, pp. 260–269.
Colombo, F. and Fortunati, L., eds., 2011. Broadband society and generational changes. 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany: Peter Lang.
Corsten, M., 1999. The time of generations. Time & Society, 8(2), pp. 249–272.
Dayan, D. and Katz, E., 1992. Media events: the live broadcasting of history. Cambridge, 
MA and London: Harvard University Press.
Deacon, D. and Stanyer, S., 2014. Mediatization: key concept or conceptual bandwagon? 
Media, Culture & Society, 36(7), pp. 1032–1044.
Gumpert, G. and Cathcart, R., 1985. Media grammars, generations and media gaps’. 
Critical Studies in Mass Communication, 2(1), pp. 23–35.
Hepp, A., 2013. Cultures of mediatization. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Hjarvard, S., 2013. The mediatization of culture and society. London: Routledge.
Jamison, A. and Eyerman, R., 1994. Seeds of the sixties. Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press.
Kertzer, D. I., 1983. Generation as a sociological problem. Annual Review of Sociology, 
9(1), pp. 25–149.
Landsberg, A., 1995. Prosthetic memory: total recall and blade runner. In: M. Featherstone 
and R. Burrows, eds. Cyberspace/cyberbodies/cyberpunk: cultures of technological 
embodiment. London: SAGE, pp. 175–190.
Lefebvre, H., 1991 [1974]. The production of space. Oxford and Cambridge, UK: 
Blackwell.
Lundby, K., ed., 2009. Mediatization: concept, changes, consequences. New York: Peter 
Lang.
Mannheim, K., 1952 [1928]. The problem of generations. In: K. Mannheim, ed. Essays in 
the sociology of knowledge. London: Routledge & Keegan Paul, pp. 276–320.
McLuhan, M., 1964. Understanding media: the extensions of man. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Mead, M., 1970. Culture and commitment: a study of the generation gap. Garden City, 
NY: Doubleday.
Opermann, S., 2014. Generational use of news media in Estonia: media access, spatial 
orientations and discursive characteristics of the news media. Huddinge, Sweden: 
Södertörn University.
Ortega y Gasset, J., 1931 [1923]. The modern theme. London: The C. W. Daniel Company.
Pilcher, J., 1998. Women of their time: generation, gender issues and feminism. Aldershot, 
UK: Ashgate.
Ricoeur, P., 1990 [1985]. Time and narrative. Vol. 3. Chicago, IL and London: The 
University of Chicago Press.
Rosa, H., 2013 [2005]. Social acceleration: a new theory of modernity. New York: 
Columbia University Press.
Siibak, A., and Vittadini, N., 2012. Introducing four empirical examples of the ‘generationing’ 
process. Cyberpsychology, 6(2), pp. 1–10.
Siibak, A., Vittadini, N. and Nimrod, G., 2014. Generations as media audiences: an intro­
duction. Participations, 11(2), pp. 100–107.
Zukin, C., Keeter, S., Andolina, M., Jenkins, K. and Delli Carpini, M. X., 2006. A new 
engagement?: political participation, civic life, and the changing American citizen. 
New York: Oxford University Press.

4	
Generational analysis of people’s 
experience of ICTs
Leslie Haddon
Introduction
In the last 10 to 15 years, there has been revival of interest in generational analysis 
(Aroldi, 2011), including how it can be applied to the experience of information 
and communication technologies (ICTs). This chapter first outlines some of the 
different guises in which various types of generational and cohort research have 
appeared and then examines some of the general considerations that ICT research­
ers might take into account if they consider using this perspective. It then looks 
at some examples of how generational analysis has been employed in relation 
to ICTs before demonstrating the dimensions researchers could explore through 
a case study of how cohort analysis was used in a study of those people who 
counted as being young elderly in the mid-90s.
The origins of generation and cohort analysis
Originating in the nineteenth century, the idea of a social generation referred 
to people born in the same age range who had similar cultural experiences. 
Social generation was used in the context of a generation experiencing a degree 
of change in society (e.g. industrialisation) or events (e.g. wars). The specific 
sociological origins of the term can be traced to Mannheim’s essay ‘The prob­
lem of generations’ (1952 [1923]). Mannheim, like some others had done in the 
nineteenth century, focused in particular on youth as a formative period, where 
experiences at this age stage could influence future social and political outlooks 
throughout life.
Anticipating this chapter’s later discussions of the role of ICTs, it is worth add­
ing a note about two developments of Mannheim’s work. The first, picked up in 
a more recent revival of interest in generations, concerns generational conscious­
ness, a sense of belonging to a generation and of having a ‘common destiny’. For 
Mannheim, some generations could see themselves as being distinct in this sense. 
Later writers discuss whether a sense of generation informs political action, the 
most cited example being the 1968 student protests across Europe. But of inter­
est in this chapter is the fact that these subsequent writers discuss in more detail 
the process of a generation gaining a sense of cultural identity, or becoming self-
conscious as a generation, and the role of collective memory, institutionalised via 

38  Leslie Haddon
shared rituals and memories (Edmunds and Turner, 2002, 2005; Eyerman and 
Turner, 1998; all discussed in Aroldi and Colombo, 2013). In fact, this issue of 
how people who live through the same circumstances become aware of themselves 
as being a generation, how they develop a ‘we-sense’ (Corsten, 2011) has become 
a topic in its own right, including, of relevance for ICT analysis, reflections on the 
different roles that media can play in this process (Aroldi, 2011).
The second development relates to discussions of whether processes of globali­
sation have created international generations, the first and perhaps main example 
of which is taken to be the 1960s generation. While this global consciousness of 
being a distinct generation has multiple causes, such as the ease of travel, and was 
experienced somewhat differently in different countries, one contributory factor 
cited is developments in communication and in particular, once again, the role of 
the media and mediated experiences (Edmunds and Turner, 2005).
In contrast to the concept of generation, the term cohort has its origins in 
demographics. As in the, more cited, literature on generations, as birth cohorts 
age, their members experience the same societal changes and events (e.g. eco­
nomic change, social change, events such as wars), and as with generations, 
some of the analysts using the term cohort stress how these factors are more 
important in late adolescence/early adulthood. Apart from living through the 
same events, cohort members also experience the same social structures (e.g. 
the age of completing education, the nature of the labour market at a certain 
point in time; see Ryder, 1965). Some have even argued for using the word 
cohort rather than generation precisely because it avoids the element of genera­
tional consciousness that others embrace (Kertzer, 1983).
Contemporary generational analysis
Probably the most high-profile use of generational analysis in recent years was 
the literature, both popular and academic, contrasting the orientations of different 
cohorts in the post-war period. Most significant were the Baby Boomers, born 
in the 1940s–1960s, whose older members were youth during the 1960s. The 
subsequent generations were Generation X (born in the 1960s–1980s) and then 
Millennials (otherwise known as Generation Y – born in the 1980s–early 2000s). 
Older Western generations include the Lost Generation (born 1880s–1900s, many 
of whom fought in World War I), the G.I. Generation (born 1900s–1920s, who 
were young during the Great Depression and fought in World War II) and the 
Silent Generation (born 1920s–1940s, some of whom fought in World War II, 
Korea and Vietnam). These generations are broadly 20 years apart and so relate 
to family generations (e.g. parent-child). One typology even traces such genera­
tions back to the first US settlers (Strauss and Howe, 1991), according to which 
Generation X is the 13th generation. As with Mannheim’s approach and that 
of cohort analysis, these more recent forms of generational analysis often posit 
that generations have particular shared social orientations, attitudes and beliefs. 
Some analyses emphasise the ‘generation gap’, i.e. the differences (and conflicts) 
between generations.

People’s experience of ICTs  39
Generational/cohort analysis has been employed in a variety of disciplines, for 
example in politics where there is the issue of whether generational experiences 
affect socio-political orientation (e.g. Cutler, 1977, cited in Gilleard and Higgs, 
2005; Putnam, 2000). In the sociology of work, the question has been posed as to 
whether there are generational differences in work values and attitudes between 
Baby Boomers and Generation X-ers (Smola and Sutton, 2002). Furthermore, in 
ageing studies, there is the issue of how generational experiences might affect the 
orientation to old age (Gilleard and Higgs, 2005). It is worth adding that outside 
of academia the concept of generations has been taken up (sometimes enthusi­
astically) by consultancies and in some media coverage, part of the attraction 
being that it has been used to explain consumer behaviour. Hence, this has been 
referred to (and criticised for its simplifications) as the ‘generational marketing 
approach’ (Colombo, 2011). In general, generational analysis has not necessarily 
been helped by more popular writings that make strong claims about generational 
influences of Generation X-ers and Millennials. This led some analysts to lament 
“Triumphant in popular culture, the cohort generation has been confined by 
experts to the shadow world of unproven hypothesis” (Strauss and Howe, 1991, 
cited in Giancola, 2006, p. 33).
Challenges for generation and cohort analysis
There are a number of difficulties in defining generations and in applying labels 
such as those above. For one thing, there is not necessarily an agreement on the 
start and end dates of these generations, e.g. the Baby Boomer generation has been 
reported by different researchers to start between 1940 and 1946. Generation X-ers 
start somewhere in the early 1960s, but according to different authors end in 1975, 
1980, 1981 and 1982 (Smola and Sutton, 2002). Neither is there always agree­
ment about what constitutes a generation, e.g. some see the Swing Generation 
(born 1934–1945) as being a subgroup of the Silent Generation (Mitchell, 2003). 
Other possible sub-generations from different researchers include World War 
II-ers (born 1902–1933), Traditionals (born 1909–1940) and Matures (born 
1925–1942) (Smola and Sutton, 2002). Then there is the question of overlap 
between generations. Those born near the beginning or end of a particular genera­
tion can have more experiences akin to those in the next or previous generations 
(Wellner, 2000, cited in Giancola, 2006). One further problem is the generational 
interval is so wide that people within it may experience societal events differently. 
For example, although the Baby Boomers are often associated with late 1960s 
anti-Vietnam war protests, some of its young members were only in pre-school 
at that time (Hughs and Rand, 2005, in Giancola 2006). One last, but important, 
key issue is that the emphasis on what generations or cohorts share can underplay 
differences within them (e.g. in terms of class, gender, race). More careful writers 
note this heterogeneity (e.g. Ryder, 1965), but some writers do not.
Apart from these questions about definitional issues and the potential to 
overstress generations, there are also empirical challenges. For example, some 
research on work orientations found limited shared generation orientations and 

40  Leslie Haddon
few generation gaps (Giancola, 2006; Mackay et al., 2008). Other research com­
paring a whole range of different cohorts found it was difficult to say that they 
had unique values distinguishing them from each other (Noble and Schewe, 
2003). Thus, generational differences may simply be greater for some generations 
than for others. For example, a study of sexual attitudes, personal responsibility, 
respect for parents and a range of other orientations found that the gap between 
Baby Boomers and their parents was greater than between Baby Boomers and 
their own children, leading some to talk about ‘the vanishing generation gap’ 
(Giancola, 2006).
While there are clearly challenges in conducting cohort or generational analy­
sis, there are some studies that outline a more careful historical analysis. Gilleard 
and Higgs (2005) acknowledge the issues about drawing the boundaries around a 
generation, yet viewing these as a social construction, one can make an argument 
about where to draw them. Like some others, they make a link to Bourdieu’s dis­
cussion of ‘generational dispositions’, which, according to Bourdieu, are ‘habitus 
which have been produced by different modes of generation . . . which . . . can 
cause one group to experience as natural and reasonable practices or aspirations 
which another group finds unthinkable or scandalous’ (1977, p. 78). Gilleard and 
Higgs note that people may vary in the degree to which they engage in such gener­
ational ‘cultural fields’ and some ‘cultural fields’ are more important than others, 
e.g. the 1950s/1960s youth culture. They argue that this youth culture was not 
just created by commercial interests, but involved an engagement by this cohort 
and their sense of generational identity. The authors then examine the circum­
stances of cohorts born from the 1880s and underline the continuities between 
them in contrast to those Baby Boomers who were involved in early youth culture 
as youths. In their analysis, Gilleard and Higgs observe the national differences 
between the US and the UK, and look at all experiences across the life course, not 
just when the Baby Boomer generation was young. They explore how the cohort 
now entering old age experienced this stage in their lives.
In sum, these authors are aware of the issues facing generational analysis but 
find merit in it. Differences between cohorts are sometimes more and sometimes 
less salient. The analysis is sensitive to national variation, gender differences and 
experiences after youth. Like the case study discussed later in this chapter, the 
authors focus on the cohort dimension as only part of the picture, given that they 
also look at this historical period through the lenses of class and changes in the 
experience of community.
Generations and ICTs
The various forms of cohort analysis noted above have had a limited amount to 
say about generational experiences of ICTs, one exception being Putnam’s (2000) 
discussion of the decline in various forms of civic participation (voting, volun­
teering, religious observance) in the US since the 1950s. Although Putnam’s main 
focus is on the difference between the values of the generation who lived through 
World War II and their successors, the Baby Boomers, he considers the role of 

People’s experience of ICTs  41
factors such as suburbanisation and, of interest in this chapter, the widespread 
adoption of television that contributed to a move towards a more family-oriented, 
less communal, lifestyle.
One of the more prominent and controversial uses of cohort analysis has 
been in attempts to define a generation of children as being distinctive primar­
ily by virtue of technological experiences. This was captured in discussions 
nearly 20 years ago of a ‘Net Generation’ (Tapscott, 1998) and of children 
as being ‘digital natives’ (Prensky, 2001) because they have grown up with 
ICTs as opposed to their parents, ‘digital immigrants’, who encountered them 
later in life.1 For some of its critics, this discussion is seen as a step too far, 
one that simply gives too much weight to the influence of technology, and 
that is too technologically determinist (Buckingham, 2009). Just as in the 
critique of overstressing the role of generations in general, various writers 
have argued that referring to all children as being digital natives certainly 
does not do justice to the diversity among children in terms of technical capa­
bilities and engagement with the digital world (boyd, 2014; Holmes, 2011). 
Thus, many commentators find the digital native claim to be an exaggeration 
(Selwyn, 2009), or an exotic representation of children that does not capture 
their mundane online practices (Stern, 2008). In general, it is a vast oversim­
plification that ignores many of the aspects of generational analysis discussed 
earlier (Aroldi, 2011). But such criticisms of the ‘web generation discourse’ 
(Hartmann, 2003) have not stopped Prensky especially, from being often cited 
within academic writings, being used by market researchers and appearing in 
the literature of organisations like the OECD (Aroldi, 2011).
The strong criticisms of these particular representations of a cohort of chil­
dren (who by the time of writing this chapter would be young adults), does not 
mean that there is no place for considering the influence of ICTs in genera­
tional analysis. Taking a more cautious approach is the work that speculates 
about the extent to which there is a ‘digital global generation’. In developing 
a theme explored in Edmunds and Turner (2005), Aroldi and Colombo (2013) 
return to the globalising influence of media, but taken a stage further by the 
rise of the internet. They stress both shared transnational experiences of the 
online world and the role of the internet itself in helping to create a genera­
tional consciousness, for example “bursting with websites and places dedicated 
to generational self-assertion” (Aroldi and Colombo, 2013, p. 185). However, 
the authors note that there might be limits to any shared international genera­
tional awareness, including citing an empirical study of Italian and Portuguese 
generational experiences that showed some shared generational consciousness 
across countries, but only among those with higher educational backgrounds 
(Aroldi and Ponte, 2012).
A case study
This last section considers other ways in which some of the themes from cohort 
or generational analysis can be used in the study of ICTs, by looking at a 

42  Leslie Haddon
domestication research conducted in the 1990s, but which is still pertinent 
(Haddon and Silverstone, 1996). The concept of domestication was first for­
mulated in the 1990s in the UK (Silverstone et al., 1992; for its subsequent 
history see Haddon, 2016). Although there had been an empirical dimension to 
the original project in which the framework was developed, funding was found 
for an additional three years (1993–1996) to explore the processes of domesti­
cation in a variety of different circumstances, including teleworking and lone 
parent households. The third study in this three-year project was of the young 
elderly at that time, roughly defined as being 60–75 years old (hence born in 
1920–1935). This group was chosen for a variety of reasons: as a strategic age 
group to explore the domestication of very early ICTs (e.g. early TV, the phone), 
to examine the longer-term careers of ICTs in households, to evaluate ageing 
effects on ICT use and adoption (e.g. declining mobility), and what cohort analy­
sis could contribute to our understanding of ICT use. In terms of the generational 
typology, this group overlaps with what was called the Silent Generation, but 
since the cohort dimension was only one consideration among several, the choice 
of age range did not come from the writings about generations – if anything the 
ageing/age stage literature was more influential in this respect.
The young elderly research took place in 1994–1995 and involved interviews 
conducted in 20 households (both couples and singles). It mainly investigated 
how these people had domesticated a range of ICTs,2 taking into account the 
past and current situation of the household. Classic domestication analysis tries 
to make sense of ICT experiences by asking about the social context in which 
these occur, which could include such elements as the financial context, social 
networks, values and aspirations. Over the years, researchers have added further 
elements of the social context that can be considered in domestication analysis, 
through empirical analysis but also through argument. For example, a study of 
domestication in China showed different ways in which the national context 
affects domestication processes (Lim, 2006). At the time of this research, the 
previous generational experience of this young elderly group was simply seen 
as being one more type of social context to consider in order to make sense of 
the group’s behaviour and orientation. Although only the cohort aspects are 
reported here, generational analysis was clearly not the main aim and sole starting 
point of this study.
Financial circumstances and orientation to consumption
Turning now to the findings, apart from shaping attitudes towards technologies, 
the previous experiences of cohort members during their working life affected 
their later financial circumstances (e.g. pension) and hence ability to afford ICTs 
in later life. Those who were originally middle class or who had moved into 
middle-class jobs felt that they had become wealthier over the course of their 
lives, as did some working-class interviewees. But for some of this cohort, the 
lack of pension systems when they were younger had a bearing on the limited 
retirement income they had now.

People’s experience of ICTs  43
Ray Englefield:	 You see, moving around so much when I was younger, 
I wasn’t on a pension scheme. They didn’t have pension 
schemes in those days so my pension was fairly small. 
So I don’t have a great income now I’ve retired. I haven’t 
enough money to indulge in some of the more fanciful 
aspects of retirement. So basically it’s odd jobs, reading, 
occasional holidays, visiting people.
It has been noted elsewhere that the life experiences of cohorts can affect the 
development of their specific consumption habits (Aroldi, 2011). In this young 
elderly study, many participants whose early lives were lived in austerity felt that 
habits of careful spending stayed with them in later life. As young adults, some of 
this cohort had experienced social mobility and had earned more both during their 
working lives and later as pensioners. Because of that shared background, both 
working- and middle-class participants spontaneously referred to ‘our generation’ 
in the interview (i.e. in this respect they had a generational awareness) and talked 
about that cohort ‘knowing the value of money’.
George Williams:	
I think probably our generation always needs to be able 
to justify. You know, even if you can afford something 
you think “Well, do I really need it?”
Dorothy Williams:	 So we’ve always been reasonably, as you say, cautious 
with money and you feel you’ve got to justify what 
you buy.
This was relevant for (and referred to by participants in) subsequent discussions 
of purchase decisions: a technology had to be seen as being useful to justify 
acquiring it. By implication, it was more difficult to acquire technologies and 
services that might involve experimentation to see if they were useful. Even when 
younger, these interviewees had not automatically embraced innovations sim­
ply because they were new. For example, many had gone to see what television 
looked like in someone else’s house when the first sets appeared in order to help 
them decide if it was worthwhile for them to have one.
Joanne Englefield:	 I can always remember a colleague of yours had one 
and you arranged for you, me and [daughter] Christine 
to go down and have a look at it. Do you remember we 
sat there and solemnly looked at this television?
In fact, when discussing current ICTs generally, the age group often used the 
language of necessity: do we need something rather than do we desire it.
Vera Wellman:	
I’m sure, you know, that these things are wonderful 
for people of 20 who are coming up but quite honestly 
we’ve lived all our lives without them and I don’t find 
they’re necessary at all.

44  Leslie Haddon
The relevance of ICTs and the timing of their appearance 
in relation to life stage
When looking at specific ICTs, few of these young elderly had been brought 
up in homes with telephones when they were themselves children. Most became 
familiar with phones (sometimes through work) and acquired landlines during 
adulthood. Some talked about the difficulty of getting used to phones at first, 
but after many years most were confident users. But some interviewees who had 
never needed to use a phone in their working lives still found it difficult to hold 
a phone conversation. In other words, early experiences, or in this case a lack 
of them, could have a bearing upon the extent to which people felt at ease when 
using technologies:
Eddy Evans:	
I can’t hold a conversation [on the phone]. My sister gets 
on there [and I say], “Oh you want Gwen” [his wife], and 
that’s it.
Some young elderly had by this stage in their lives acquired several handsets 
because they thought they were ‘useful’; for example, with declining physical 
mobility it was a benefit to have a handset in each room. However, most had never 
used other services that had appeared over many years of their lives, often citing 
‘no need’.
Rosie Aldridge:	
I like the phone, you know . . . if I am in and lonely I have 
to get on the phone to someone . . . but other than that I 
wouldn’t want to really go into anything more than just 
the phone.
Fewer than half of the participants used the phone memories and features such as 
re-dial even if they were present in the handset. Many said they could not be bothered 
to find out how they worked. And only 2 out of the 20 households had answering 
machines, one commenting on how they had wanted only a very basic machine.
Stuart Robbie:	
We just want something simple. Something the dog could 
work, you know.
At the time of the study, 1994–1995, no-one had a mobile phone. A few thought 
that this innovation might be useful for providing a sense of security when they 
were out of the home, but at the time of the interviews most considered these new 
mobile phones to be irrelevant.
As regards computers, for those in white-collar work office automation came 
into their lives late or not at all since they had retired by the time PCs arrived.3 
A few of the younger participants from this cohort had used PCs at work, but 
others had actively tried to avoid learning how to use computers so late in their 
working lives.

People’s experience of ICTs  45
Roger Summers:	
The firm was [getting computerised] but I wasn’t. I was 
still using my slide rule. I couldn’t at that age assimi­
late it. It was completely foreign and quite beyond me. 
I wouldn’t have known the first thing about them.
And:
Ray Englefield:	
Yes, I was interested in the technicalities. I was quite 
intrigued as to how the thing worked . . . I could do a 
little bit of programming. I knew what they all meant 
but towards the end the pace of computerisation was 
quite fast and I was then in my 60s and I just couldn’t 
be bothered to keep up with it.
Joanne Englefield:	 Well I suppose if I had been that much younger and 
therefore thinking in terms of staying out at work that 
much longer and I really put my thoughts to it, I prob­
ably would [have managed to cope] . . . No . . . It’s bad 
enough as you get older and find out all the things you 
can’t do without trying to do new things and finding out 
you can’t do those as well.
In other words, one question one can ask in cohort analysis is about the circum­
stances of people at the time a certain technology appeared or became widespread. 
To take another example of this, one common route by which PCs entered the 
home from the mid-1980s was as a resource for children (Haddon and Skinner, 
1991). However, the children of this cohort were the ‘wrong’ age when com­
puters became popular. The children of many of these interviewees were either 
already adults or in their late teens when computers arrived in school or were first 
embraced enthusiastically for games-playing in the 1980s – mostly by slightly 
younger children than the children of this generation (Haddon, 1988). Of the two 
households that were exceptions – they had and used a PC in the mid-1990s – one 
husband was a technology enthusiast and had even built the first computer kits 
when they were introduced, and the other couple had younger teenage children at 
home in the 1980s (when they were in their mid-fifties).
Most had in the past not been able to see how a PC would be useful to them, 
and when interviewed in the 1990s they still could not:
Ray Englefield:	
We looked into it when Lawrence was at university. He 
was keen for us to have one . . . and I couldn’t really 
think of a reason for having it . . . I remember my son 
saying: “Well you can keep your bank statements on it, 
Dad”. I said: “Well I’ve got a bank to do that”.
As regards television, most of those interviewed used teletext and had done so 
for years before retirement. Most had VCRs – some had them before retirement, 
some had accepted them as gifts from children, or they were suggested by children. 

46  Leslie Haddon
Either way, the interviewees noted how at the time they could see how VCRs were 
useful innovations, i.e. they fitted in with that broader approach to consumption 
discussed earlier.
At the time of the study, morning TV had been launched, but most did not watch 
it – some referred to the fact that they had not watched TV at that time of day when 
they were younger and justified that decision as a habit carried over from their 
earlier lives. Although a few watched the recently arrived daytime TV, they also 
sometimes felt guilty about watching TV outside the traditional evening slot.
Earlier experiences and the perception of media
Some of the generational studies reviewed commented on the role of the media 
in helping to create a sense of generational identity, and television researchers 
had also noted the significance of reminiscing where TV touches on people’s 
previous experiences (Willis, 1995) and connects with generational memory 
(Tulloch, 1989). For many of the young elderly interviewees in this research, TV 
programmes about the war period raised particular memories.
George Williams:	
It was mainly about how people lived in those days.
Dorothy Williams:	 Yes, well it was something we knew about because we’d 
done it, we were there, sort of attitude, and remember it. 
We were saying “Oh, do you remember we used to do 
this?” and we used to queue up at the Odeon, Leicester 
Square and things like that.
And:
Sam Waters:	
It’s like Dad’s Army.4 I knew that. We knew about the 
Home Guard and one or two funny people like . . . 
similar to that. My father wouldn’t let me join the Home 
Guard because I was only 17 or so.
LH:	
So when you see Dad’s Army, it rings true to some extent?
Sam Waters:	
It’s nostalgic and the officer in that, we knew a chap . . . 
he reminds us of him.
And:
Elsie Davey:	
I like war films. I think because we were in our teens it 
made a lasting impression. You used to go to the pictures 
and you used to get it on the news . . . like in the picture 
on the newsreel, wasn’t it, all the soldiers . . . and I think 
when you’re in your teens you’re very impressionable.
Neither was it only programmes relating to the war that were particularly 
meaningful. Some young elderly also referred to historical dramas relating to 
the era of their childhood:

People’s experience of ICTs  47
Muriel Cifonelli:	 I think that’s partly because of the styles, it reminded 
us of childhood as well . . . the war films and the war 
programmes have been repeated so many times and 
they’re so well documented. But things like the late 
1920s, they’re not so well documented. So just to see 
the fashions and the cars and go back to that kind of 
thing – the old-fashioned prams and things, that was 
more interesting.
The interviewees commented not only on the content but also the style of televi­
sion. Previous writers have already noted elderly people’s very critical reaction to 
sex, violence and bad language in the earlier TV viewing experience of this cohort 
(Bliese, 1986; Randall, 1995; Willis, 1995). The young elderly interviewees in 
this study frequently observed how TV had changed (mostly for the worse) since 
the TV they had first watched.
Solomon:	
There is a lot of violence (on TV now) and I don’t like 
it. Perhaps in earlier times I never thought about it as 
violence.
Eva Solomon:	
I think the violence is different. The violence used to be 
much more of the western type.
LH:	
But how do you think the violence has changed? What’s it 
like now?
Eva Solomon:	
More realistic, I think. The western was a remote sort of 
violence. Now it is the ordinary street violence. It’s peo­
ple doing things in our environment whereas the western 
is dressed up.
Sam Waters:	
The sexual act is something private and intimate between 
two people and it didn’t ought to be displayed on the tel­
evision for all to see. But it seems to me that every copper, 
whoever comes on the television, has to jump into bed 
with somebody. And they swear so much. I know in life 
they do swear quite a lot but I do believe that the televi­
sion could do a great deal for the nation by stopping the 
swearing instead of making it the normal word.
Lucy Griffith compared current TV to when her daughter was young.
Lucy Griffith:	
Things were a bit different then. I can’t remember having 
a programme on that I wouldn’t let her watch. So, I think 
television was different then. The programmes you get on 
today there’s such a lot of swearing and things like that. I 
mean I wouldn’t let any child watch it.
Bernie Griffith:	
You turned it off one night, didn’t you?

48  Leslie Haddon
Lucy Griffith:	
Oh I turned it off. Oh dear, the language . . . I said “I’ve 
had enough of this”. I said “My goodness! Good job it’s 
late at night”. It really was bad and, you know, I can’t 
remember television (being) like that.
The above quotations show that earlier life experiences of a generation can affect 
not only how they adopt and use ICTs but also how they perceive them.
Dimensions of cohort analysis of ICTs
In sum, the case study shows a variety of different ways in which the earlier 
experiences of a cohort may affect their encounter with ICTs. The financial 
circumstances of earlier years can have a bearing not only on what ICTs people 
can afford but, perhaps more importantly, on their orientation to consumption 
in general. The evaluation of specific ICTs can reflect the timing of when they 
appeared in relation to their life stage, and have a bearing not only on decisions 
to acquire or not to acquire them but also on what facilities to use or not use 
on the equipment and services available. Furthermore, earlier experiences can 
have an influence on how at ease people feel in using particular technologies, how 
they feel some technologies, like television, have changed over the years, as well 
as how they appreciate the way specific content relates to generational identities.
Conclusions
There are some observations to be made about the case study. One concerns how 
these findings were derived. Some insights come from the young elderly as inform­
ants, explaining, for instance, the timing of office automation in their lives. However, 
the analyses are in part based on the background knowledge of the researcher, as in 
the example of the significance of the age of the participants’ children when PCs 
first appeared. At other points, the potential cohort dimension appears in language 
used by the participants. For example, after the young elderly had commented on 
their general approach to consumption, the language of whether particular innova­
tions were ‘needed’ or ‘useful’ (or not) spontaneously occurred again and again 
when discussing a range of ICTs. But it is also important to appreciate that whether 
overtly referring to the orientation of ‘their generation’ choosing what to talk about 
when accounting for their actions (not adopting PCs) or their preferences and per­
ceptions (in relation to contemporary TV), the participants were themselves drawing 
on a form of generational analysis to explain their actions. In other words, they were 
making sense of their choices in terms of their past experiences, often with the 
implication that many of those experiences were shared by people of their age.
This particular case study is now old, so what those young elderly described 
was their behaviour and evaluations at that point in their lives, and in relation 
to ICTs that were sometimes only recently available. For example, at the time 
of the study, morning and daytime TV were relatively new and in terms of their 
lifestyle, a number of the participants engaged in alternative activities when many 

People’s experience of ICTs  49
declined to watch these programmes. At the time they explained this decision in 
terms of older viewing habits. If interviewed now, 20 years later, when morning 
and daytime TV are more established, and when, as an older elderly cohort, their 
other activity options may have diminished in part because of declining mobility, 
they might watch TV outside of the evening slots. That does not mean that their 
justification of their behaviour by reference to habits from their earlier life was 
misleading. It just means that it is only a consideration, and if the social world 
(the establishment of morning and daytime) and personal circumstances change, 
so can habits.
While acknowledging that various factors relating to the period of the inter­
view may have had a bearing on particular answers, the case study in this chapter 
is useful in terms of suggesting lines of investigation one could follow up if add­
ing a cohort dimension to research. The review at the start of the chapter set the 
scene by outlining a range of generational studies, where the focus on the cohort 
is often the central form of analysis. In contrast, the aim of citing the case study 
of the young elderly and ICTs is somewhat different. It indicates how the gen­
erational dimension might be examined alongside other forms of analysis if the 
researcher suspects that previous shared experiences might have some bearing, 
among other factors, on how people adopt, use and perceive ICTs.
Notes
1	 Subsequently a whole range of terms in a similar spirit have emerged to describe genera­
tions of children: Internet Generation, Nintendo Generation, Avatar Generation, N-gen, 
Wired Generation, Echo Boomers, Google Generation, the iPods, iGeneration, Facebook 
Generation, born digital, homo-zappiens and net-savvy youth (Colombo, 2011; Hardey, 
2011; Selwyn, 2009)
2	 This did not include the internet, which at that time was not widespread.
3	 A simpler point is raised in a Swedish study by Hagberg, 2012.
4	 A popular comedy programme in the 1990s about the Home Guard, a group of those too 
old and too young the serve in the army, whose role was mainly to act as a last line of 
defence in the case of invasion.
References
Aroldi, P., 2011. Generational belonging between media audiences and ICT users. In: 
F. Colombo and L. Fortunati, eds. Broadband society and generational changes. 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany: Peter Lang, pp. 51–67.
Aroldi, P. and Colombo, F., 2013. Questioning digital global generations: a critical 
approach. Northern Lights, 11, pp. 175–190.
Aroldi, P. and Ponte, C., 2012. Adolescents of the 1960s and 1970s: an Italian-Portuguese 
comparison between two generations of audiences. Cyberpsychology: Journal of 
Psychosocial Research on Cyberspace, 6(2). https://doi.org/10.5817/CP2012-2-3.
Bliese, N., 1986. Media in the rocking chair: media uses and functions among the elderly. 
In: G. Gumpert and R. Cathcart, R, eds. Intermedia. Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press, pp. 573–582.
Bourdieu, P., 1977. Outline of a theory of practice. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press.

50  Leslie Haddon
boyd, d., 2014. It’s complicated: the social lives of networked teens. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press.
Buckingham, D., 2009. Introducing identity. In: D. Buckingham, ed. Youth, identity and 
digital media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 1–22.
Colombo, F., 2011. The long wave of generations. In: F. Colombo and L. Fortunati, eds. 
Broadband society and generational changes. Frankfurt am Main, Germany: Peter 
Lang, pp. 19–35.
Corsten, M., 2011. Media as the “historical new” for young generations. In: F. Colombo 
and L. Fortunati, eds. Broadband society and generational changes. Frankfurt am 
Main, Germany: Peter Lang, pp. 37–49.
Cutler, N., 1977. Political socialization research as generational analysis: the cohort 
approach versus the lineage approach. In: S. Renshon, ed. Handbook of political 
socialization. New York: Free Press, pp. 294–326.
Edmunds, J. and Turner, B. S., 2002. Generations, culture and society. Buckingham, UK 
and Philadelphia, PA: Open University Press.
Edmunds, J. and Turner, B. S., 2005. Global generations: social change in the twentieth 
century. The British Journal of Sociology, 56(4), pp. 559–577.
Eyerman, R. and Turner, B., 1998. Outline of a theory of generations. European Journal of 
Social Theory, 1(1), pp. 91–106.
Giancola, F., 2006. The generation gap: more myth than reality. Human Resource Planning, 
24(4), pp. 32–37.
Gilleard, C. and Higgs, P., 2005. Contexts of ageing: class, cohort and community. 
Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Haddon, L., 1988. The home computer: the making of a consumer electronic. Science as 
Culture, 2, pp. 7–51. http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/64559/.
Haddon, L., 2016. Domestication and the media. In: P. Rössler, ed. The international 
encyclopedia about media effects. London: John Wiley and Sons. http://eprints.lse.
ac.uk/64848/.
Haddon, L. and Silverstone, R., 1996. Information and communication technologies and 
the young elderly. University of Sussex, Falmer: SPRU/CICT Report Series. http://
eprints.lse.ac.uk/62450/.
Haddon, L. and Skinner, D., 1991. The enigma of the micro: lessons from the British home 
computer boom. Social Science Computer Review, 9(3), pp. 435–449.
Hagberg, J.-E., 2012. Being the oldest old in a shifting technology landscape. In: E. Loos, 
L. Haddon and E. Mante-Meijer, eds. Generational use of new media. Aldershot, UK: 
Ashgate, pp. 89–106.
Hardey, M., 2011. ICTs and generations: constantly connected lives. In: F. Colombo and 
L. Fortunati, eds. Broadband society and generational changes. Frankfurt am Main, 
Germany: Peter Lang, pp. 97–108.
Hartmann, M., 2003. The web generation? The (de)construction of users, morals and 
consumption. Brussels: SMIT-VUB, Free University of Brussels.
Holmes, J., 2011. Cyberkids or divided generations? Characterising young people’s inter­
net use in the UK with generic, continuum or typological models. New Media and 
Society, 13(7), pp. 1104–1122.
Hughs, M. and Rand, A., 2005. The lives and times of the Baby Boomers. In: R. Farley 
and C. Haaga, eds. The American people. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 
pp. 224–255.
Kertzer, D., 1983. Generation as a sociological problem. Annual Review of Sociology, 9, 
pp. 125–149.

People’s experience of ICTs  51
Lim, S. S., 2006. From cultural to information revolution: ICT domestication by middle-
class Chinese families. In: T. Berker, M. Hartmann, Y. Punie and K. Ward, eds. 
Domestication of media and technologies. Maidenhead, UK: Open University Press, 
pp. 185–204.
Mackay, K., Garden, D. and Forsyth, S., 2008. Generational differences at work: introduc­
tion and overview. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 23(8), pp. 857–861.
Mannheim, K., 1952 [1923]. The problem of generations. In: K. Mannheim, ed. Essays on 
the sociology of knowledge. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, pp. 276–320.
Mitchell, S., 2003. American generations: who they are, how they live, what they think. 
Ithaca, NY: New Strategist Publications, Inc.
Noble, S. and Schewe, C., 2003. Cohort segmentation: an exploration of its validity. 
Journal of Business Research, 56(12), pp. 979–987.
Prensky, M., 2001. Digital natives, digital immigrants. On the Horizon, 9(5), pp. 1–6.
Putnam, R., 2000. Bowling alone: the crumbling and revival of American community. 
New York: Simon and Schuster.
Randall, E., 1995. Switching on at 60-plus. In: D. Petrie and J. Willis, eds. Television and 
the household. London: BFI, pp. 49–64.
Ryder, N., 1965. The cohort as a concept in the study of social change. American 
Sociological Review, 30(6), pp. 843–861.
Selwyn, N., 2009. The digital native – myth and reality. Aslib proceedings: new information 
perspective, 61(4), pp. 364–378.
Silverstone, R., Hirsch, E. and Morley, D., 1992. Information and communication tech­
nologies and the moral economy of the household. In: R. Silverstone and E. Hirsch, eds. 
Consuming technologies. London: Routledge, pp. 15–31.
Smola, K. and Sutton, C., 2002. Generational differences: revisiting generational work val­
ues for the new millennium. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 23(4), pp. 363–382.
Stern, S., 2008. Questioning the generational divide: technological exoticism and adult 
constructions of online youth identity. In: D. Buckingham, ed. Youth, Identity and 
Digital Media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 95–118.
Strauss, W. and Howe, N., 1991. Generations: the history of America’s future, 1584 to 
2069. New York: William Morrow and Company.
Tapscott, D., 1998. Growing up digital: the rise of the Net Generation. New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
Tulloch, J., 1989. Approaching the audience: the elderly, In: E. Seiter, H. Borchers, 
G. Kreutzner and E.-M. Warth, eds. Remote control: television, audience and cultural 
power. London: Routledge, pp. 180–203.
Wellner, A., 2000. Generation divide: are traditional methods of classifying in general 
still meaningful in a diverse and changing nation? American Demographics, 22(10), 
pp. 52–58.
Willis, J., 1995. Staying in touch: television and the over seventies. In: D. Petrie and 
J. Willis, eds. Television and the household. London: BFI, pp. 32–48.


Part II
Family generations and ICT


5	
Mobile life of middle-aged 
employees
Fragmented time and softer 
schedules
Mia Tammelin and Timo Anttila
Technology and time-space compression: always online?
Technological innovations and information and communications technology 
(ICT) have many complex implications for social life. Technology changes 
the nature and meaning of everyday tasks and results in new cultural practices 
(Wajcman, 2008). One important aspect of ICT is that it changes the relation 
of time and place and has consequences for social relationships. In this chap­
ter, we concentrate on patterns of ICT use among middle-aged employees in 
demanding knowledge work, i.e. workers with high levels of education working 
in expert positions. We discuss particularly how these people, aged 34–55, use 
ICTs to manage, coordinate and cope with the various schedules of family, work 
and free time. We show that regardless of belonging to the same broad social 
generation, they do not share the same patterns in their use of mobile technol­
ogy; instead, their orientations to ICTs and practices vary. Therefore, it seems it 
is not generation as such that defines the use and orientation to ICT among this 
social group, but rather that there are differences between people, their work 
and family situations that influence ICT use.
The group in our focus, middle-aged employees, constantly have to con­
front the idea that time is a limited resource. Knowledge workers in particular 
experience hurriedness and have to synchronise their individual schedules and 
agendas both in work and within a family. Perhaps more than ever, people con­
trol and manage time (Adam, 1995; Hochschild, 1997) to obtain an increased 
agency on time (Daly, 2001). This is a result of modernisation, which has 
increased the pace of life and augmented the pressure to perform many tasks 
and roles simultaneously. This has created a new social problem: the lack of 
time (Garhammer, 2002; Southerton, 2003).
Wajcman (2008, 2015) links the sense of lack of time to the accelerating pace 
of technological change, as new ICTs heighten expectations on efficient use of 
time. Mobile technology is used to solve time-related problems, such as hurried­
ness, and to organise daily life, but it also seems to increase time fragmentation 
that can be a source of time-related problems. In addition, coordinating activi­
ties and time are essential aspects of everyday life, especially for families with 
children who have many schedules and activities tied together.

56  Mia Tammelin, Timo Anttila
ICT plays a central role for and within time management strategies of middle-
aged employees, and we propose that it changes their conception of time and 
scheduling of daily tasks such that time and schedules become fluid and flexible. 
Our focus on time and ICTs is based on the observation that time is a fundamen­
tal element of the orchestration and synchronisation of social life (Daly, 2001) 
and needs to be discussed along with ICTs. The main research questions of our 
study concerns the role of ICTs, particularly mobile communication technology, 
in organising daily schedules.
First, we analyse the role of ICTs in the accelerated pace of life and the pos­
sibilities portable technologies bring along for the middle-aged to deal with this 
faster pace. Second, we discuss if and how the conception of time is changing 
because of the widespread use of ICTs. We argue that middle-aged employees in 
demanding work form a generation with particular time management strategies 
characterised by increased fragmentation of time and the multiplication of time 
coordination practices. These time management strategies are being transformed 
with the affordances provided by ICTs, which add to fragmentation and enable 
the avoidance of time contamination. ICT also engenders new time management 
strategies, making it possible to multitask using technology. As a result, the con­
ception of time changes among the study’s group of middle-aged knowledge 
workers, and their ties to clock time and to societal rhythms loosen, although 
these ties do not disappear.
Accelerating pace of life and ICT-facilitated time strategies
Time is popularly identified with ‘famine’, ‘squeeze’ and accelerated ICT use 
(Hochschild, 1997; Robinson and Godbey, 1999; Florida, 2002; Garhammer, 
2002; Rosa, 2003; Wajcman, 2015). Earlier studies indicate the lack of time as 
a common experience among the working population. On the one hand, hurried­
ness is explained by increasing requirements of work life (Green, 2006) and by 
the changing nature of work (Sennet, 1998). Along with the faster pace of paid 
work, the value of free time is emphasised and this leads to increasing consumer 
expectations (which take time) and consequent changes in the density of leisure 
time (Linder, 1970; Gershuny, 2005).
On the other hand, feelings of time scarcity or haste may relate to fast tech­
nological changes (Castells, 2000). The intervention of digital technologies 
is thought to speed up everyday life and the entire culture to an unprecedented 
degree (Lash, 2002). In addition, rapidly diffused new ICTs have shaped time-
space relations in the realms of work and family in multiple ways. The time-space 
compression thesis (Harvey, 1989; Wajcman, 2015) is widely applied in the soci­
ology of time and technology, to describe technology-driven transformations 
in time and space. Along with technological change, simultaneity and instan­
taneousness have increasingly become constitutive features of human activity. 
In mainstream sociology, Castells’ (2000) concepts of timeless time and space 
of flows are widely utilised to describe transformations in the spatial-temporal 
organisation of everyday life.

Mobile life of middle-aged employees  57
In this chapter, we do not analyse hurriedness as such, but the accelerated pace 
of life serves as a background to this study in which we discuss the paradoxical 
nature of ICTs to time. We argue that ICT both fragments time through accel­
eration and serves as a tool to manage and coordinate time among middle-aged 
employees, who juggle with simultaneous time-demanding activities.
Data and method
We explore these themes using interview data from 21 employees in Finland (see 
Table 5.1). All interviewees are highly educated, are particularly prone to prob­
lems of hurriedness and use ICTs in their daily work. The interviewees work in 
both the public and private sectors in fields such as education, research and social 
services, and some are in supervisory positions. Interviewees are middle-aged, 
ranging between 34 and 55 years. Data were gathered in spring 2015 in vari­
ous parts of Finland via 4 face-to-face interviews and 17 phone interviews. The 
semi-structured interviews included questions of work–life balance, time use and 
organisation of work.
We followed the principles of content analysis (Hsieh and Shannon, 2005) 
to systematically analyse the data. All interviews were read first from the view 
Table 5.1  Characteristics of interviewees.
Age
Occupation
Spouse
Children (No/yes, number & age)*
  1
34
Specialist
Yes
No
  2
35
Research manager
Yes
No
  3
36
Educational designer
Yes
Yes, 2, both under school age
  4
50
Civil servant
Yes
Yes, 3, one school age, two adults 
  5
53
Project coordinator
No
Yes, 4, one school age, three adults
  6
42
Head of development
Yes
Yes, 2, both school age
  7
40
Senior researcher
No
No
  8
48
Civil servant
Yes
Yes, 3, two school age, one adult 
  9
47
Head of educational design
Yes
Yes, 2, both adult
10
35
NGO instructor
Yes
Yes, 2, both under school age
11
49
Head of design
Yes
Yes, 2, both school age
12
40
Project manager
Yes
Yes, 2, one under school age, one 
school age
13
39
Development designer
No
No
14
37
Researcher
Yes
Yes, 2, one under school age, one 
school age
15
55
Development designer
Yes
Yes, 5, one school age, 4 adults
16
53
Director
No
Yes, 2, both adults 
17
40
Researcher
No
Yes, 2, one under school age, one 
school age
18
51
Programme director
No
Yes, 2, adults
19
55
Editor
Yes
Yes, 2, adults
20
43
Researcher
Yes
Yes, 2, both school age
21
47
Recreational instructor
Yes
Yes, 2, both under school age
Note: *Age of children: under school age (0–7 years), school age (7–17) and adult 18+ years.

58  Mia Tammelin, Timo Anttila
of time, ICT and pace of life and then we analysed themes that occurred in the 
interviews. Some themes were theory-based, such as multitasking, time coordi­
nation and intergenerational relations, and others emerged from the interviews, 
such as the social costs of staying outside social media and the emphasis on 
synchronised communication.
The sample of our study was drawn from Finland, in which the feelings of hur­
riedness are considerably high. According to the European Working Conditions 
surveys (Parent-Thirion et al., 2007) Finland is among the top countries where 
people, especially women, experience self-reported hurriedness. This is explained 
by full-time work practices for both men and women, while women still remain in 
charge of household duties. Hurriedness is not equally distributed but is most evi­
dent among highly educated, white-collar workers in Finland, as has been reported 
elsewhere (Anttila et al., 2009). Our sample consists of highly educated employ­
ees working in knowledge work; therefore, we expect that these employees in 
particular would suffer from the accelerated pace of life. Overall, participants 
described being busy and having many schedules that needed to be tied together, 
yet busyness was mostly concentrated in the world of work compared to free time 
or time away from work. In presenting our analysis and results in the following 
sections, we use pseudonyms to ensure the anonymity of the interviewees.
Feeling hurried: example of the Eklund family
Next, we present an empirical example of the hurried family that illustrates 
demands of daily time management that stem from the need to reconcile mul­
tiple schedules. Susanna is in her late thirties and has a university degree. She 
works as project manager, and her work is characterised by unanticipated dead­
lines and a heavy workload. Still, for the most part, she has control over her 
work hours. Susanna typically works about eight hours a day, and she is active 
in non-governmental organisations (NGOs) that include evening and weekend 
activities. Her husband, Leo, does shift work with scattered hours. Susanna and 
Leo have a daughter, Emilia, age 4, and a son, Noel, age 11. Emilia is in the 
kindergarten, and Noel goes to school near their home.
In the interview, Susanna said that particularly life outside work is hurried. 
With her husband’s irregular shift work, she is mostly responsible for the children 
but persists with her own hobbies as well. She says: “Like I said, I am active in 
various NGOs with responsibilities (I’m a treasurer and vice-president), but that 
is a hobby. This hobby requires a lot of foot work, but it motivates me because I 
can help other people”.
When asked what hurriedness means to her, she replied with laughter: 
“Hurriedness is when you don’t go to your sitting room for a week, although that 
is right next to the kitchen”. Susanna explains further that now Noel is older and 
has hobbies, she feels hurried because they live in the countryside, which means 
that parents have to take children to their hobbies. Thus, commuting to work in 
the morning and to hobbies in the evening gives her many activities to take care 
of and a feeling of hurriedness.

Mobile life of middle-aged employees  59
Susanna has a very practical orientation to hurriedness which involves ‘doing 
less’ and relocating some domestic activities, such as having a meal, outside the 
house. She said:
We only do what is necessary. That is, we go with minimal effort around the 
house, and we can take food with us, if we feel like it. Children can have their 
evening meal in the car . . . I feel that we have moved time elsewhere from 
the sitting room . . . You just need to plan everything carefully.
Her orientation to hurriedness is paradoxical. She first says that their life is busy 
and she has no time to do shopping, yet in the end she concludes that it is not has­
tened life but just ‘life’. Susanna’s strategy to cope with hurriedness involves very 
explicit orientation to using ICTs and resisting consumerism. She said:
I order everything through internet. I have consciously reduced that time 
spent on shopping. There is no point in going shopping with your family. 
Children don’t need that; they don’t enjoy it. Once a year we can go to buy 
new shoes. Otherwise I order from the internet, and they are usually fine.
This illustrates that she is using ICTs to compress time and cope with hurriedness. 
In the following section, we describe time-related strategies related to ICTs.
Fragmentation increases time contamination: ICT both 
a reason and a solution
Wajcman and Bittman (2000) state that the contemporary view of increased time 
pressure may have more to do with the fragmentation of time than with any meas­
urable reduction in primary leisure time. Hence, hurriedness appears as a result of 
more fragmented time. When time is fragmented, it is ‘contaminated’. Roughly 
speaking, this means that time devoted to a single task is scarce; more and more 
activities penetrate a one single moment and we must constantly decide how to 
deal with them. This inevitably fragments time.
Fragmentation of time has many consequences. Wajcman (2008) notes that 
perpetual contact can disturb the boundary between the private and public 
realms, and she argues for the redefinition of ‘public time’ (or shared time) 
and ‘private time’ into ‘on time’ and ‘off time’. Furthermore, Licoppe (2004) 
argues that ‘connected presence’ is blurring absence and presence for people. 
Before mobile technology, time was shared within families in face-to-face 
relationships, whereas now time also can be shared in technology-mediated 
communication. Social bonds are giving way to transient communication 
bonds that are immediate and accelerated, yet distant, forms of sociality 
(Wajcman, 2008).
Within families, women’s free time is often fragmented due to distracting 
accompanying activities, such as preparing meals and caring for children. Women 
are found to have less free time, and what free time they have is often fragmented 

60  Mia Tammelin, Timo Anttila
by other activities or the presence of children (Mattingly and Blanchi, 2003; 
Mattingly and Sayer, 2006).
We propose that ICT is one such source of time fragmentation, which is illus­
trated through the example of online parenting and time at work. Because of this 
fragmentation, individuals develop specific strategies to deal with the problem. 
Our analysis reveals that the interviewees use at least two ICT-related time 
strategies to manage time. Hence, first we discuss how technology increases 
the fragmentation of time but can be used to avoid it, and second, we discuss 
attempts to save time by multitasking.
Does online parenting contaminate time?
The working parents interviewed explained how parents take advantage of port­
able technologies to be in constant touch with their children. Online parenting 
might generate more time contamination, yet it is typical for working parents 
of young children who want to keep in touch with their school children while 
at work.
Brannen and colleagues (2013) argue that increased simultaneity – individuals 
occupying different social domains concurrently – is a constant in family life. For 
example, while parents (particularly mothers) are at work, they remain responsi­
ble for children. This means that time is even more fragmented; one’s presence is 
torn between off- and online time. Ganito (2012) shows that women use mobile 
phones to coordinate and control their various roles – in many cases they are 
always ‘on call’ – and thus minimise temporal disorganisation (Southerton and 
Tomlinson, 2005). This creates a paradox in which mobile phones enable better 
coordination and lower anxiety, yet increase the need for multitasking and the 
emotional burden of managing multiple roles.
In our data, some parents show an explicit orientation to being available for chil­
dren during work days. Anna, a mother of three children, said that “It might be that 
you are in a meeting when the child calls, but it does not matter. I think, children can 
call you whenever, if they need to. It does not disturb me”. The same was repeated 
by a father of two who said that he and his wife had taught their children that they 
can always call their parents after school. Furthermore, another mother, Emma, said 
that work should not be so important that you cannot answer your child.
Yet not all parents believe family matters should be allowed to penetrate work. 
Those with teenage children said that they need to secure time for work and do 
not allow these interruptions that fragment time at work. These parents work as 
professionals where they have the possibility of being online but suffer from 
hurriedness. Therefore, as a strategy to control time at work, they only receive 
messages and get back to children when it suits their work schedule.
As family and life situations and orientation to online parenting differs, the 
different styles of maintaining intergenerational relations crash at the workplace. 
Some people, regardless of whether they are parents or not, feel there is no need 
to constantly communicate with children or spouses, while others like to maintain 
online relations while at work. Laura, who works in a small office space, said she 

Mobile life of middle-aged employees  61
finds constant phone calls disturbing and that they should be replaced with silent 
messaging. She explained:
It is rare with my husband and children . . . One colleague here she/he calls 
with her children all the time. That disturbs me because then the phone rings 
here also. We have a small office here, like WhatsApp would be useful there, 
when questions are “Can I stay on the playground after school?”, like they 
talk “Can I?”, “No, you can’t”, and “Are you wearing a coat?”, and these 
petty things. This continues into longer discussions, easily.
All in all, it seems portable technology fragments time as it is possible to stay 
in touch with family members regardless of where you are, and this potential is 
used unnecessarily. It is somewhat surprising that some parents are always online 
for their children while at work. This not only contaminates their time but that 
of others. Therefore, workplaces are melting pots for varying parenting practices 
because not all share the same orientation to the use of ICTs.
Avoidance of time contamination
It is also justified to ask if there are practices of time management and con­
trol that are used to resist time contamination that inevitably cause feelings of 
hurriedness. Our interviews show that people use various means to actively 
resist time contamination.
A central theme in the interviews was the use of strategies to avoid contamina­
tion of time at home. Because of pressures arising from work, many employees 
did work-related tasks at home. ICTs have made this possible, together with the 
changing nature of work; documents can be reached from home, and emails are 
read regardless of time and place. Consequently, some parents actively avoided 
work taking over home life, and interviewees described explicitly resisting 
technology to protect home time and space.
Maria, a mother of three, said that she decided not to get internet access at 
home so that time at home would not be fragmented. She further explained that as 
she had small children at home for almost a decade, she knows that sitting at the 
computer around the home is impossible. “Computers are tempting to children”, 
she said. By not having an internet connection to be able to work at home, she is 
able to restrict work to the workplace and “to secure [a] hygienic home”, as she 
explained. Time contamination at home is thus actively resisted.
Besides resigning oneself to not having the required technological devices, 
another strategy to resist contamination of time was refusing to use social media 
such as Facebook or LinkedIn. Social media in particular was seen as a polluter 
or time-eater to be avoided because of lack of available time. Silvia explained 
that “I feel that I don’t have the time to update those. I try to avoid those kinds 
of time-eaters, and I feel that I have much more time”.
Not being part of social media networks is a clear time-related strategy that has 
social costs, however (Raynes-Goldie, 2010). Anna explained the consequences 

62  Mia Tammelin, Timo Anttila
of staying outside social media like this: “Social life suffers from it. I feel con­
stantly that I should follow Facebook, I really should, but then – I don’t have 
time. I feel like I have kind of mental peace when I only have this daily life here”. 
Referring to not wanting to contaminate the time of daily life, she said that staying 
outside social media not only saves time but secures “a peace of mind”.
This prevention of contamination leads to a lack of information and staying 
outside social relationships. Using Wajcman’s (2008) conceptualisation, this 
is how we secure personal time off, rather than being online constantly. Silvia 
described friends and colleagues commenting on her desire to stay outside social 
media, asking her, for example, to check her Facebook once in a while to learn of 
the birth of babies in the work community or of previous colleagues. “People get 
upset when I dare to ask how is an old friend doing? . . . I admit that I miss out 
sometimes on baby news and such”.
We expected to find discussion on the contamination of time and how ICTs 
affect it, yet it was somewhat surprising how explicitly informants told us of stay­
ing outside, the polluting effects of ICTs, and particularly that of social media. 
Due to hurriedness, they have to deal with time demands in one way or another 
so ICTs not only cause hurriedness but can serve as tools to deal with it. Another 
recurring time strategy related to ICTs was multitasking.
Mobile technology and multitasking
In addition to their constraining and time-fragmenting nature, ICTs may also 
have a time saving, controlling and coordinating role. In an attempt to control 
and save time, we perform many activities at the same time; that is to say, we 
multitask (Wajcman, 2015). In our analysis, we concentrated on the role of 
mobile technology. We do not discuss the role of so-called old technology, such 
as washing machines, which have – without question – enabled us to do things 
at the same time.
Portable phones and computers are tools for using social media applications, and 
based on our interviews as well as previous research (Rice and Hagen, 2010), it 
seems social media in particular are a central way to multitask and save time. Pauliina 
explained that the greatest benefit of social media and groups is that you do not have 
to be in touch with everyone separately but can reach everyone at the same time:
I feel that what is best in WhatsApp and Facebook Messenger is that you can 
reach groups. That you don’t have to individually contact everyone. That is 
the greatest benefit. When there is a big group of people, it is easier to do it 
this way, reach everyone at the same time.
Still, not everyone is part of the same social media application, so the possibilities 
to multitask may be lost because of the need to repeat the same activity through 
several channels. Eva in particular wondered if technology and social media 
groups cause duplicate messaging and, in the end, cause us to have more activi­
ties to perform. She also pointed out that part of the package of agreeing to social 

Mobile life of middle-aged employees  63
events with friends is to do it ‘ridiculously’ early. This implies that busy schedules 
require advanced planning and coordination of schedules. Eva explained like this:
Those things that we organise with a big group we organise with Facebook 
and WhatsApp. With some friends, we have these Facebook groups. And 
then one group of friends to which I belong, it is funny; even when we have 
this Facebook group we still have a WhatsApp group. We use both. Then my 
mobile phone keeps vibrating when those WhatsApp messages come through. 
Typically it is like “Yes, we will meet in half a year in a summer cottage”, 
or something. We have to plan really early in advance. It is ridiculous really.
In conclusion, the pace of life is accelerated because we have more to do and 
more feeds to deal with within a single moment. ICTs are both a cause and a 
solution for the contamination of time that follows from this change (see Rice and 
Hagen, 2010). We discussed online parenting as an example of these practices 
that cause fragmentation, which narrow the borders between various life spheres. 
Individuals have to decide whether they are online or offline. One strategy that 
interviewees used to deal with the fragmentation was to avoid it either at home 
or work or to avoid certain applications, such as social media networks. Another 
strategy was to do more at the same time; this was done especially using social 
media that enable more contacts at one time. Yet, social networks are not ‘water­
proof’ as not everyone is part of the same applications, groups or networks. This 
results in doing the same activity repeatedly. These varying processes and ways of 
managing time led us to think: do ICTs change the conception of time?
Changing conception of time
One central element of everyday life is the coordination of various activities and 
time frames. Although time frames of social life might be loosening, there are 
still a great number of time institutions. Opening hours of shops and schools and 
hours at work, for example, define the schedules of family members. Integrating 
these schedules into family life and with the wider social network requires coor­
dination. Mobile technology enables the coordination of such activities that are 
not fixed but can be done flexibly throughout the day. Ling’s (2004; Ling and 
Lai, 2016) concept of micro-coordination best describes the ways the informants 
explained the relationship between mobile technology and scheduling activities 
(Townsend, 2000; Cooper et al., 2002; Ling and Haddon, 2003). Research shows 
that mobile technologies are softening schedules; clear time markers of schedules 
are breaking down and the conception of time is changing.
Coordinating increasingly softer schedules
Technology-assisted coordination can be divided into micro- and hyper-
coordination that differ in their nature (Ling and Yttri, 1999, 2002). 
Micro-coordinating refers to organising activities in time and space, i.e. for 

64  Mia Tammelin, Timo Anttila
logistical purposes, whereas hyper-coordination refers to using technology as 
a means of self-presentation and personal expression. It has been suggested 
that mobile phones, in particular, are vital for performing coordinating activi­
ties, particularly micro-coordinating (Wajcman, 2015). Mobile technology 
was an important tool for one family in our study. Susan, a mother of two 
children, told how she and her partner micro-coordinate when fixing the daily 
routine. She explained:
Yes, for example, today I just sent a message [to him] asking which child – 
or both – I should collect from care, and then he [her partner] said that he 
will take care of the son because of his practice, and then I will collect our 
daughter. And then he reminded me that we have to buy food [for] the day 
care centre, because it is a private crèche, therefore we take turns in buying 
food there. And then I replied that, good, this is good because now I have 
time to do this: first to pick up the list, second to go do the groceries and 
third to pick up our daughter.
Susan vividly explained the exchange of messages; there was not one but several 
messages between the partners that concerned organising family life and particu­
larly the care of their children. This micro-coordination seems laborious but was 
not necessarily perceived as disturbing. “It is like [a] smooth exchange of infor­
mation. Sometimes it might disturb the work day if it doesn’t match your work 
schedules but better to know anyway”. Others agreed that continuous messaging 
and micro-coordinating are laborious and fragment time.
Hyper-coordination means that technology is used for sharing emotions and 
social behaviour such as joking or showing emotional support. Our informants 
explained that hyper-coordination occurred between spouses or between a par­
ent and a child. For example, Susanna said: “With my partner, we can tell [talk 
about] work-related news, or, for example, if you know that the other one has 
had an important presentation or something like that, then you can ask after that 
‘how was it’?”
Some explained that they used applications, particularly WhatsApp, to share 
their own emotions, saying, for example, “I had an inspiring meeting” or “I had 
a very difficult meeting”. Furthermore, some used social media to cheer up their 
spouses, with no actual content but to get in touch with the other. Our data do not 
explain in more detail what the consequences of hyper-coordination are. In the 
interviews, we did not ask if there were misunderstandings, for example, or if 
hyper-coordination resulted in changing plans on how to use time.
Another theme that needs to be discussed is the way scheduling is transform­
ing because of the possibility of a continuous online presence. It seems evident 
that mobile technologies have been softening schedules (Ling and Yttri, 2002). 
Softening schedules refers to schedule arrangements that are not fixed but agreed 
upon close to the activity itself. This amplifies coordination, or the work that is 
needed to order and arrange activities. Thus, ICTs are tools used to undertake the 
temporal and spatial arrangements (Ling, 2004).

Mobile life of middle-aged employees  65
Taking children to hobbies was a recurring theme among the interviewed that 
was related to time coordination. For example, Susanna explained they use online 
messaging with their son to coordinate commuting to hobbies. When she is ready 
to leave work to pick up her son for his hobby, they get in touch using WhatsApp. 
“Last year we started to use WhatsApp. There I might write to my son, that ‘ten 
minutes to go’, then he knows when to be ready”. This quote is a good example of 
how schedules are softening and how, with the enabling features of technology, 
schedules are not fixed but left open to negotiation and reordering.
Softening schedules also have far-reaching consequences beyond changing 
scheduling; they also affect how we perceive schedules, time and activities. Our 
perspectives have become less rigid and are now subject to negotiation and reor­
dering. Furthermore, it seems there is a paradox linked to softening schedules: 
to cope with softening schedules, interviewees said they returned to using old 
technology as messages can get lost in timeless time. Informants clearly favoured 
simultaneous communication through old technology, such as telephones, to 
make sure that the message has been received. For example, Matilda said that if 
there are changes to fixed schedules, she calls her partner rather than sending an 
email or using Facebook. This way she is sure that the message reaches her part­
ner in time. But for activities that are further away and do not require immediate 
attention, communication can be done through email.
Discussion
This chapter draws from research concerned with how various forms of ICTs 
change the relation of time and implications for social relationships. The chapter 
began by noting the growing academic and public focus on ICTs as a fundamental 
domain of daily life that accelerates the pace of life and results in new forms of 
social interaction.
Our study focused particularly on questions of fragmentation of time and time 
coordination that are seen as key dilemmas in a modern society. The emergence 
of the 24/7 society has eroded collective temporal rhythms, and the spread of new 
ICTs has far-reaching implications in various spheres of life. Simultaneity and 
instantaneousness have become constitutive features of human activity and involve 
time strategies of doing things faster, multitasking or employing more detailed 
interpersonal time-planning. It seems that increasingly, more effort is needed to 
coordinate schedules and to maintain interpersonal relations. We are always online.
Demographic characteristics also can be proxies for families’ time processes. 
Gender, life course and age of children represent constraints that shape differ­
ential temporal experiences. The need for time coordination varies especially 
with children’s activities as the more activities and schedules they have, the more 
coordination is necessary. In addition, having small children requires more coor­
dination to manage all family routines. Therefore, the importance of the life course 
is highlighted. Demanding work further underlines the challenge to juggle with 
simultaneous and instantaneous tasks and, at the same time, to think and manage 
the boundaries of public and private spheres. Our study does not support the idea 

66  Mia Tammelin, Timo Anttila
that the strategies these middle-aged time jugglers employ are shared among the 
whole generation. Although their pressures from work and family life seem to be 
similar, we found distinct and partly controversial strategies to manage time.
ICTs also produce their own temporal demands, and we propose that it seems 
to change the way we orient ourselves to time and schedules. ICTs tend to colonise 
time slots and to take on habitual and routine forms. Many of our interviewees 
were conscious and worried of the time-eating routines produced by ICTs. We 
found distinct boundary management strategies to safeguard the home sphere and 
(children’s) leisure from the contaminating and time-eating role of ICTs at home. 
Interviewees explicitly described their practices to resist technology.
Finally, another interesting conversion is taking place, that of softening sched­
ules. This refers to the perception of how fixed scheduling is seen and performed. 
The orientation that it is always possible to rearrange, reallocate and redesign 
daily schedules transforms the process of scheduling into a fluid and transforma­
tive one. Mobile technology enables people to stay online and makes it possible to 
govern daily schedules in detail – waiting becomes a waste of mind.
The study brings up some new themes for further research. Our study con­
centrated only on highly educated knowledge workers. It would be interesting 
to gather more information on workers in different positions, such as blue-collar 
workers with more fixed working hours, for example. An interesting question is, 
does a fixed work schedule allow a softening of schedules?
As discussed in this chapter, our proposition is that technology is changing the 
conception of time, besides the actual use of time. This theme should be explored 
in more detail since some people seem to rely more on routines and fixed sched­
ules, while others allow daily fluctuations and prefer softer schedules. It remains 
unanswered why these differences exist. Is it because of individual or family pref­
erences, or are the explanations rooted in structural matters, such as schedules of 
work and hobbies? Another interesting topic is to analyse gender differences in 
this regard, and in particular among families with small children: can we identify 
conversions of gender roles – or do women’s roles as coordinators prevail?
References
Adam, B., 1995. Time watch. The Social Analysis of Time. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Anttila, T., Oinas, T. and Nätti, J., 2009. Predictors of time famine among Finnish employ­
ees: work, family or leisure? Electronic International Journal of Time Use Research, 
6(1), pp. 73–91.
Brannen, J., O’Connell, R. and Mooney, A., 2013. Families, meals and synchronicity: 
eating together in British dual earner families. Community, Work & Family, 16(4), 
pp. 417–434.
Castells, M., 2000. The rise of the network society. The information age: economy, society 
and culture. Vol. I. Malden, MA: John Wiley & Sons.
Cooper, G., Green, N., Murtagh, G. and Harper, R., 2002. “Mobile society”: technology, 
distance, and presence. In: S. Woolgar, ed. Virtual society? Technology, cyberbole, 
reality. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, pp. 286–301.

Mobile life of middle-aged employees  67
Daly, K. J., 2001. Deconstructing family time: from ideology to lived experience. Journal 
of Marriage and Family, 63(2), pp. 283–294.
Florida, R., 2002. The rise of the creative class. And how it’s transforming work, leisure, 
community and everyday life. New York: Basic Books.
Ganito, C., 2012. Moving time and juggling spheres. Feminist Media Studies, 12(4), 
pp. 570–579.
Garhammer, M., 2002. Pace of life and enjoyment of life. Journal of Happiness Studies, 
3(3), pp. 217–256.
Gershuny, J., 2005. Busyness as the badge of honor for the new superordinate working 
class. Social Research, 72(2), pp. 287–314.
Green, F., 2006. Demanding work. The paradox of job quality in the affluent economy. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Harvey, D., 1989. The condition of postmodernity. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Hsieh, H-S. and Shannon, S., 2005. Three approaches to qualitative content analysis. 
Qualitative Health Research, 15(9), pp. 1277–1288.
Hochschild, A. R., 1997. The time bind. When work becomes home and home becomes 
work. New York: Metropolitan Books.
Lash, S., 2002. Critique of information. London: SAGE.
Licoppe, C., 2004. Connected presence: the emergence of a new repertoire for manag­
ing social relationships in a changing communication technospace. Environment and 
Planning D: Society and Space, 22(1), pp. 135–156.
Linder, S., 1970. The harried leisure class. New York: Columbia University Press.
Ling, R., 2004. The mobile connection: the cell phone’s impact on society. San Francisco, 
CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Ling, R. and Haddon, H., 2003. Mobile telephony, mobility, and the coordination of every­
day life. In: J. Katz, ed. Machines that become us: the social context of communication 
technology. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, pp. 245–266.
Ling, R. and Lai, C.-H., 2016. Microcoordination 2.0: social coordination in the age of 
smartphones and messaging apps. Journal of Communication, 66(5), pp. 834–856.
Ling, R. and Yttri, B., 1999. Nobody sits at home and waits for the telephone to ring: micro 
and hyper-coordination through the use of the mobile telephone. Telenor Research and 
Development. Report 30/99.
Ling, R. and Yttri, B., 2002. Hyper-coordination via mobile phones in Norway. In: J. Katz 
and M. Aakhus, eds. Perpetual contact: mobile communication, private talk, public 
performance. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, pp. 139–169.
Mattingly, M. J. and Blanchi, S. M., 2003. Gender differences in the quantity and quality 
of free time: the U.S. experience. Social Forces, 81(3), pp. 999–1030.
Mattingly, M. J. and Sayer, L. C., 2006. Under pressure: gender differences in the rela­
tionship between free time and feeling rushed. Journal of Marriage and Family, 
68(1), pp. 205–221.
Parent-Thirion, A., Fernández Macías, E., Hurley, J. and Vermeylen, G., 2007. Fourth 
European Working Conditions survey. Dublin: Office for Official Publications of the 
European Communities.
Raynes-Goldie, K., 2010. Aliases, creeping, and wall cleaning: Understanding privacy in 
the age of Facebook. First Monday, 15(1). https://doi.org/10.5210/fm.v15i1.2775.
Rice, R. and Hagen I., 2010. Young adults’ perpetual contact, social connectivity, and 
social control through the internet and mobile phones. Communication Yearbook 34, 34. 
New York: Routledge, pp. 2–39.

68  Mia Tammelin, Timo Anttila
Robinson, J. and Godbey, G., 1999. Time for life: the surprising ways Americans use 
their time. University Park, PA: The Pennsylvania State University Press.
Rosa, H., 2003. Social acceleration: ethical and political consequences of a desynchronised 
high-speed society. Constellations, 10(1), pp. 3–33.
Sennet, R., 1998. The corrosion of character: the personal consequences of work in the 
new capitalism. New York: W.W. Norton & Company.
Southerton, D., 2003. Squeezing time: allocating practices, coordinating networks and 
scheduling society. Time & Society, 12(1), pp. 5–25.
Southerton, D. and Tomlinson, M., 2005. “Pressed for time”: the differential impacts of a 
“time squeeze”. The Sociological Review, 53(2), pp. 215–239.
Townsend, A., 2000. Life in the real-time city: mobile telephones and urban metabolism. 
Journal of Urban Technology, 7(2), pp. 85–104.
Wajcman, J., 2008. Life in the fast lane? Towards a sociology of technology and time. The 
British Journal of Sociology, 59(1), pp. 59–77.
Wajcman, J., 2015. Pressed for time: the acceleration of life in digital capitalism. 
Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Wajcman, J. and Bittman, M., 2000. The rush hour: the character of leisure time and gender 
equity. Social Forces, 79(1), pp. 165–189.

6	
Intergenerational solidarity 
and ICT usage
Empirical insights from Finnish 
and Slovenian families
Sakari Taipale, Andraž Petrovčič and 
Vesna Dolničar
Introduction
Since the 1990s, it has been argued that social relations have individualised due 
to the increasing use of personal networking technologies (Rainie and Wellman, 
2012). For instance, Kennedy and Wellman (2007) purport that individuals, 
rather than family solidarities, have become the principal unit of household con­
nectivity as the daily agendas of family members diverge from one another. 
Supposedly, families are kept together ever more through ICT-mediated com­
munication (Rainie and Wellman, 2012, p. 159). However, digital competencies 
and practices within families and between family generations may vary consider­
ably, which makes it difficult to communicate similarly with all family members 
through ICTs. Also, states across Europe today enhance the importance of inter­
generational solidarity within families rather than promote individualised lifestyle 
by providing publicly funded services and benefits (e.g. Hammarström, 2005; 
Garattini and Prendergast, 2015).
In this chapter, we suggest that recent advancements in the use of ICTs, on 
the one hand, and the life course perspective, on the other, can clarify these 
seemingly contradictory developments. For instance, while mobile phones 
transformed family communication from place-to-place to person-to-person 
(Rainie and Wellman, 2012, p. 164), at present smart phones and social media 
are making one-to-many communication within (and beyond) families possi­
ble (Hänninen et al., forthcoming). We will also present here that such ICTs 
are differently engaged with and used in families across life stages, reflecting 
technological, personal and societal changes in a contemporary society (e.g. 
Haddon, 2011).
The chapter is inspired by the notion of intergenerational solidarity in the 
context of ICT use within contemporary families. The aim of the study is to 
investigate to what extent ICT usage is intertwined with different forms of 
intergenerational family solidarity. The families investigated are so-called 
(modified) extended families (Litwak, 1960) that consist of family members 
representing two or more generations, who may live in the same or differ­
ent locations, and who stay in contact with one another by means of ICTs. 

70  Sakari Taipale et al.
The chapter also investigates potential country differences between Finland and 
Slovenia in terms of the relationship between the use of ICTs and forms of inter­
generational family solidarity. We anticipate that country differences in family 
makeup, housing arrangements and in the appropriation of ICTs in everyday life 
are reflected in the communication needs and practices of families and, thus, in 
the forms of family solidarity that are enhanced through the use of ICTs. For 
example, the percentage of multi-generational households (13.7 per cent vs. 
0.6 per cent in 2007) (EuroStat, 2010) and of young adults (aged 18–34) living 
with their parents (60.8 per cent vs. 20.1 per cent) (EuroStat, 2016) is consider­
ably higher in Slovenia in comparison with Finland. Although both countries 
rank highly in the ICT Development Index, Finland is a step further in terms 
of its population’s ICT skills and access to the internet (ITU, 2015). Also, the 
difference in problem solving skills in technology-rich environments is consid­
erable between the countries, Slovenia (23rd) ranking far behind Finland (3rd) 
in a recent comparison of 29 countries (OECD, 2016).
Theoretical background
Intergenerational family solidarity
Bengtson and Roberts (1991) presented the intergenerational solidarity model in 
the early 1990s. It stems from the assumption that the importance of intergenera­
tional relations is primarily defined through its contribution to common social 
cohesion in the family (Lüscher et al., 2015). Later, a large corpus of studies has 
built upon this model, investigating family relations between old parents, their 
adult children and grandchildren (Hammarström, 2005, p. 34). The model draws 
from the theories of social organisation, underlining the importance of group 
norms and functional independence in behaviour, while also being premised on 
socio-psychological theories of sentiments and interactions.
The model consists of six solidarity types, each representing a dialectic 
dimension. Associational solidarity (integration and isolation) refers to the 
frequency and patterns of interaction connecting members of a lineage to one 
another. The modes of interaction may vary from formal to informal, including 
both ritual and spontaneous communications. Affectual solidarity (intimacy and 
distance) alludes to sentiments exchanged in intergenerational family relation­
ships, such as warmth, understanding, respect and trust. Functional solidarity 
(dependence and autonomy) refers to the idea of help exchange, covering a 
range of activities from financial assistance to immaterial help. Normative 
solidarity (familism and individualism) indicates the endorsement of familial 
obligations, while consensual solidarity (agreement and dissent) refers to the 
degree of consensus in beliefs, values or life orientations. The last dimension of 
the model is structural solidarity (opportunities and barriers) which implies the 
existence of an opportunity structure such as availability of family members that 
is reliant on physical proximity, morbidity, mortality and fecundity (Bengtson 
and Roberts, 1991; Bengtson et al., 2002; Hammarström, 2005).

Intergenerational solidarity and ICT usage  71
The model is most suitable for the study of ‘idealistic’ family relations 
(Bengtson and Roberts, 1991), and it captures the positive aspects of intergenera­
tional relations and assumes the absence of conflicts between family generations 
(Bengtson et al., 1996). In fact, the term solidarity in itself puts emphasis on 
consensus, rather than on conflict or ambivalence. Due to these limitations, the 
model was later extended to the idea of conflicts that coexist with solidarities both 
between and within generations (e.g. Bengtson et al., 1996, 2002; Silverstein and 
Bengtson, 1997).
The concept of intergenerational ambivalence presented by Lüscher and 
Pillemer (1998) points out contradictions that exist between parents and 
their offspring but which cannot always be reconciled. They suggest that 
such contradictions stem from an individual’s location in the social structure 
(structural ambivalence) and from an individual’s sentiments when faced 
with structural ambivalence. Connidis and McMullin (2002) go further to claim 
that socially structured ambivalence is manifested in social interactions. 
Hence, agency, through which ambivalences are negotiated and privileged 
groups are formed, should be studied.
Confronted with criticism, Bengtson et al. (2002) conclude that the ambiva­
lence approach complements and expands the family solidarity model rather 
than competes with it. They argue that the ambivalence brings into the dis­
cussion structural and institutional processes (e.g. policy, cultural, economy) 
that intersect with family life, and which are still a separate approach to fam­
ily solidarity. In terms of methodology, Bengtson et al. (2002, p. 572) suggest 
that idiographic methods focusing on individual cases are perhaps more appro­
priate when studying negotiations that result in particular family forms and 
relations. Hence, qualitative methods might be more appropriate than nomo­
thetic statistical approaches to investigate the ways in which various forms of 
intergenerational family solidarity are discussed vis-à-vis ICT usage and how 
possible contradictory expectations within families and between family genera­
tions are negotiated.
ICT and intergenerational family relations
ICTs contribute to domestic meta-work, such as managing schedules, availabil­
ity and communication, as well as serving immaterial needs of families, ranging 
from entertainment and social networking to the feeling of security (e.g. Ling and 
Haddon, 2003; Madden, 2010; Zickuhr and Madden, 2012; Fortunati and Taipale, 
2014; Zickuhr, 2014). Sayago et al. (2013) identified strategies that older people 
adopt in order to become successful ICT learners. These include linking learn­
ing to real-life needs (e.g. in order to be able to communicate with their children 
through Skype) and learning collaboratively.
The greatest motivator for older adults to get online and use social network­
ing sites is communication with family and friends (Zickuhr and Madden, 2012; 
Zickuhr 2014). ICT equipment (e.g. tablet computer) are often gifted to them 
by younger family members (Piper et al., 2016), who also help them to buy and 

72  Sakari Taipale et al.
set up a computer and go online (Selwyn, 2004; Zickuhr and Madden, 2012; 
Zickuhr, 2014). Previous studies show a rather consistent pattern of households 
with children being more likely to use and adopt computers, the internet and 
mobile phones than other household arrangements (Kennedy et al., 2008; Mori 
and Harada, 2010; Lin et al., 2012; Luijkx et al., 2015).
Several survey studies explore ICT use and uptake in families by analysing 
the characteristics of individual family members, as more nuanced and knotty 
intra-family relationships are difficult to quantify (Eynon and Helsper, 2015). 
Another common feature in prior studies is that they contrast the concern over 
decreased family time with privatised solo use of new personal technologies 
(e.g. Livingstone, 2009; Oblak Črnič, 2009). Here we pay more attention 
to a range of new intergenerational relations of help, care and intimacy that 
take place in online environments and which are negotiated through ICTs 
(Valentine, 2006).
Research on the relationship between ICT use and intergenerational family 
relations is still scant in Finland and Slovenia. One of the few Finnish studies 
explored the associations between ICT use, and peer and parent relations among 
10- to 13-year-old children in Finland (Punamäki et al., 2007). It found that 
intensive ICT use for entertainment (digital games and internet surfing) and 
communication was related to poor parent–child relations. These relations were 
also gendered as digital gaming was specifically associated with poor mother–
daughter and poor father–son relations. Another study investigated the use of 
old and new means of communication with a particular focus on geographical 
distance between grandchildren and their grandparents (Hurme et al., 2010). 
It was found that there are fewer in-person, landline and mobile phone con­
tacts between the two generations the farther away they live from each other. 
Conversely, the use of letters and/or cards increased with geographical distance. 
The social networks of older people, especially including grandchildren, play 
an essential role in their adoption and use of ICTs (Kilpeläinen and Seppänen, 
2014; Rasi and Kilpeläinen, 2015). Some studies have also cast light on the 
use of ICT in families from the perspective of time use. Based on the data 
from Finnish time-use surveys, it is maintained that while computer and internet 
use are largely solitary activities in households, television programmes are still 
watched more with family members than with friends (Repo and Nätti, 2015).
Some relevant empirical studies were also conducted in Slovenia. The first 
analysed how the availability of emotional and social support is associated with 
proxy internet use. A survey study showed that internet non-users with larger 
social networks and stronger intergenerational support (e.g. a higher proportion 
of (grand)children in the social support network) are more likely to ask others 
to do things online for them (Dolničar et al., 2013). The other study, based on 
interviews with parents and their children, shows that in Slovenian families the 
computer has several controversial roles depending on the generation that the 
user belongs to: from being ‘an intruder’, ‘destroyer of personal relationships’ 
or a ‘comforter’ to a ‘multi-tool for every occasion’. While young people per­
ceived computer technology as a bridge between various structures of everyday 

Intergenerational solidarity and ICT usage  73
life, their parents often considered the same technology as a source of family 
disintegration (Oblak Črnič, 2009).
Method
Participants
Our empirical data consists of 45 student reports based on extended group inter­
views and observations collected from Finland and Slovenia.1 College students 
served as key informants of the study. In Finland, the key informants were social 
sciences and communications studies students at the University of Jyväskylä, who 
completed the assignment between December 2014 and March 2015. The recruit­
ment of the key informants was conducted through university emailing lists. The 
total number of informants in this study is 133, including the 22 key informants. 
Nineteen of the key informants are females and three males. Their ages range 
from 20 to 38, being 28 on average. The key informants interviewed and observed 
altogether were 61 female and 50 male family members, who geographically rep­
resent the whole country. On average, the interviewed mothers and fathers (N=36) 
lived 150 km, sisters and brothers 317 km (N=26) and grandmothers 239 km 
(N=10) away from the key informant.
In Slovenia, the key informants were students of the Social Informatics gradu­
ate programme at the University of Ljubljana. The students completed exactly the 
same assignment as the Finnish students, but as a compulsory course assignment 
between November and December 2014. The total number of Slovenian inform­
ants is 139, including the 23 key informants, of whom 15 were female and 8 male. 
The age of key informants varied between 23 and 30, being 28 on average just like 
in Finland. In Slovenia, the key informants interviewed and observed included, 
altogether, 61 female and 54 male family members. On average, the interviewed 
mothers and fathers (N=42) lived 58 km, sisters and brothers 141 km (N=27) and 
grandparents 90 km (N=22) away from the key informant.
Besides the longer geographical distances between family members in Finland, 
the main differences between the two countries’ data relate to the age of inter­
viewed family members. In Slovenia, the interviewed mothers were, on average, 
three years and grandparents four years younger than in Finland. In contrast, the 
siblings of the key informants interviewed for the study were about five years 
younger in Finland.
Procedure
The data collection method applied is called the Extended Group Interview (EGI) 
(Hänninen et al., forthcoming). The EGI was designed to study intergenerational 
relations among a relatively large number of family members. The EGI is grounded 
on the collaborative nature of the ethnographic enquiry and new methodological 
ambitions concerning family group interviews (Reczek, 2014). ‘Extended’ refers 
to the many attributes of the method. First, it highlights that the method allows 

74  Sakari Taipale et al.
the study of (modified) extended families instead of nuclear families. Second, 
‘extended’ refers to various methods of conducting interviews ranging from in-
person to technology-mediated interviews (via phone, Skype, etc.), and third, the 
EGI allows us to reach a large number of family members by extending the inter­
views from one specific place and time into a series of interviews.
The combination of EGI and observation has a collaborative element between 
the key informants and the researcher, providing all family members with a possi­
bility to express their own voice freely (Rappaport, 2008; Lassiter and Campbell, 
2010). Also, dissenting voices were well reported by the key informants. Despite 
these strengths of the EGI, it is obvious that the preconceptions of key informants 
influence their observation and interviews (e.g. Marshall, 1996). Also, the double 
role as a researcher and as an informant may complicate key informants’ interac­
tions with other family members.
The key informants were given the assignment to observe ICT-related com­
munication in their families for one week and then interview at least five of their 
family members on their ICT use. Based on the fieldwork, the key informants 
wrote three essays, with a minimum of 300 words each, in which they were asked 
to describe: (1) what ICT tools and applications were used to stay in touch with 
family members; (2) how the key informants consider their ICT skills in rela­
tion to one another; and (3) how ICT shapes the roles within their family. ICT 
was defined broadly as different kinds of digital communication devices or ser­
vices that are used to stay in contact and communicate with family members (e.g. 
mobile phones, emails, Facebook, Twitter, WhatsApp, Instagram).
The key informants were instructed to interview at least one of their parents 
and one grandparent, if that was possible. They were free to determine the three 
remaining interviewees provided they were of different ages. Some key inform­
ants extended the interviews to their cousins, children and spouse’s relatives. 
In addition to the reports, key informants gathered background information on 
each interviewee (e.g. gender, age, relationship with the key informant and the 
geographical distance if the key informant and the informant did not share a 
household). The modes of data collection used with different informants were 
also reported.
Analytical technique
The research material is analysed following the principles of a directed approach 
to qualitative content analysis (Hsieh and Shannon, 2005). Using the Bengtson 
and Roberts’ (1991) model, we investigate the ways in which pre-determined 
solidarity dimensions are presented and discussed in the research material. 
Given that the solidarity model was not developed to study intergenerational 
solidarity in relation to ICT use specifically, it is possible that some categories 
are discussed less extensively than others, and the expressions of solidarity that 
match poorly with any or overlap with two or more categories can be identified. 
While reporting results, pseudonyms are used to guarantee the anonymity of 
the informants.

Intergenerational solidarity and ICT usage  75
Results
Associational solidarity
The most salient observation from the key informants’ reports is that ICTs 
facilitate intra-family communication, particularly in Finland. Social media appli­
cations in particular, such as WhatsApp, Facebook, Path and Instagram, have both 
increased and enriched interactions between family members. It is the possibility 
to use not only text and voice, both also photos, videos and voice messages that 
is considered enriching to family communication in Finland (e.g. key informants 
Teresa, Eva).
While none of the Slovenian reports discussed WhatsApp as a platform for 
family communication, two-thirds of the studied Finnish families had created a 
WhatsApp chat group for family. Sofia’s brother Johan summarises the benefits 
of the group as follows: “Thanks to WhatsApp we write and communicated with 
one another more than before”. Similarly, another Finnish key informant Emilia 
maintains that: “We are much more in touch with other family members after 
adopting WhatsApp”. WhatsApp not only makes interaction more regular but it 
increases its volume and enables one-to-many communication.
They [other family members] think that the group and its regular use have 
brought us closer. Now when everybody receives the same messages at the 
same time we can communicate with the family, and not only one-to-one. 
This is especially important for dad, since we otherwise call more to mom, 
but now communication within the family is more balanced.
(Emma, Finland)
The above excerpt discloses another characteristic of associational solidarity in 
Finland. In particular, grandparents who do not use the same communication tech­
nologies as younger family members and often middle-aged fathers too, are either 
not included or they deliberately remain outside ICT-mediated family communi­
cation (e.g. Isabella’s family). As Sara writes:
I send most of my messages [in WhatsApp and Facebook] to my mom, just 
like my brother. Sometimes I send messages to my brother too, but often I 
prefer to make a call. To dad we seldom send messages by WhatsApp, as 
his internet connection is not always on, and he does not notice messages 
immediately.
Other reports further illustrate the limited communications with fathers in Finland. 
The sister of Isabella explains that she “counts . . . [on] her mother conveying the 
news from father”. In some families, the feelings of exclusion are very explicitly 
described. Finnish key informant Julia writes that “Me and my sister have noticed 
that our father thinks that we continuously chat only with mom on the phone, and 
do not give him a ring nearly as often. Which is indeed partly true”.

76  Sakari Taipale et al.
These excerpts reinforce the idea that mothers remain the main moderators 
of family communication in Finland. In some families, it was mother who pro­
posed creating a WhatsApp chat group for the family (e.g. Emma’s family). 
Teresa underlines the role of the mother in Finland, summarising that “WhatsApp 
is used in our family by mother and all children”. Also, Finnish key informant 
Emilia writes that “Mom no longer needs to call once a week, asking [about] news 
from her offspring, as we exchange news everyday (via WhatsApp)”. Besides 
WhatsApp, mothers are connected to their children through other social media 
such as Facebook and Instagram (e.g. Maria’s family, Finland).
Conversely, family and multi-generational housing arrangements in Slovenia 
do not create a similar need for the use of digital technologies for family com­
munication as in Finland. Consequently, ICTs support associational solidarity to 
a lesser degree, as Slovenian key informant Katarina elucidates:
I communicate via my mobile phone with other members of my family 
because such means of communication is sufficient, since we live nearby and 
visit each other regularly, so there is no need to use Skype, Facebook, etc.
Occasionally when a family member travels abroad or a relative resides afar, 
Skype and social media are used to maintain contacts similarly in both countries 
(e.g. the families of Mia and Anton in Slovenia, and the families of Sara, Lucas, 
Maria and Emma in Finland). The geographical separation of families also makes 
older family members realise the associational capacity of new technologies. 
Katarina from Slovenia illustrates this as follows:
Given the fact that my sister (29-year-old) lives in Rome (800 km away), 
they talk to her via the internet, i.e. Skype. Grandfather (82-year-old) has also 
learned how to use Skype in the last six years, as he wishes to communicate 
with his granddaughter, who comes to Slovenia only twice a year to visit.
In summary, country differences in the organisation of family and housing reflect 
in the ways informants describe the role of ICTs in family relationships. While 
geographically scattered extended families in Finland have found the exchange 
of short messages via WhatsApp and Facebook as a channel to perform family 
solidarity from afar, the physical propinquity of family members in Slovenia does 
not bestow a considerable role for the same ICTs in family communication.
Affectual solidarity
There is not much evidence that ICTs would particularly contribute to the 
exchange of positive or negative sentiments. However, the research material does 
reveal that good affectual relationships between children, parents and grandpar­
ents facilitate the uptake of new technologies in both countries. Intergenerational 
reassurance is considered in many families as a way to promote ICT usage among 
older family members. Other family members are encouraged “to try to find a 

Intergenerational solidarity and ICT usage  77
solution on their own” when hands-on teaching in the adoption or use of ICT is 
not enough, as Marija from Slovenia writes. Another Slovenian key informant, 
Petra, writes that: “They [older family members] first need some encouragement”.
Even if the practical and affectual support described above is at times con­
sidered a burden, younger family members appreciate that they are considered 
useful. In Slovenia, Jakob confirms this by writing: “If I may say so, those of 
us who help in such moments feel positive about ourselves because we feel use­
ful and are happy to help”. Likewise, in Finland, younger people try to advise 
their older relatives in the use of digital technologies. Simon puts it as follows: 
“I have noticed that I take a role in encouraging others in technology use. I am 
pleased to give advice and I try to motivate for instance my grandmother in the 
use of Skype”.
The exclusion of certain family members from ICT-mediated family commu­
nication may also stem from the lack of affectual solidarity. This appears to be 
the case especially in Finland, where grown-up children consider their older rela­
tives’ comments on Facebook or Instagram posts embarrassing (e.g. Lisa, sister 
of Maria). Furthermore, the Finnish key informant Rita writes that as “phone calls 
with father are uncomfortable, I [would] rather send him text messages or talk 
face-to-face”. The other side of the coin is that “in some more complicated rela­
tions, social media is a low threshold medium for expressing warm emotions that 
are difficult to express face-to-face or express in words”, as Rita’s fellow citizen 
Laura maintains. These contradictory examples illustrate well that social media 
and other digital technologies are used with careful consideration to serve the 
varied needs of families.
Consensual solidarity
By consensual solidarity we refer to the degree of agreement or dissent in beliefs, 
values or life orientations related to ICT use for family communication. In this 
regard, the key observation is that shared values and beliefs have not been estab­
lished in the studied families, yet some are taking shape while parents follow their 
children’s ICT use. Sometimes the gap between generations in their ICT-related 
skills is regarded as a barrier for the formation of consensual solidarity. Slovenian 
key informant Erika writes about this:
He [father] was not always so confident and technologically educated, but 
with my help and because of my enthusiasm towards new technologies, he 
has become a sort of ‘connoisseur’ of ICT, although he still does not fully 
understand the scope of his knowledge, which can rival mine in some areas.
There is a greater agreement on the growing importance of ICT skills in families 
(e.g. Marija, Tia, Anton in Slovenia) and the consensus is built upon the idea that 
everyone should not even have exactly the same skills, but that skills can com­
plement each other, making the family as a whole stronger. In Slovenia, Marija 
illustrates this as follows:

78  Sakari Taipale et al.
They [father, mother and aunt, all in their sixties or seventies] all stress the 
importance of communication skills, which are very important in everyday 
life, interpersonal interactions and in the use of ICT. They do not compare 
skills directly with each other, as they perceive them to be different catego­
ries of skills, incomparable with each other and which are intertwined, while 
emphasizing that they are all very important for successful and well-integrated 
functioning in everyday life and in the use of ICT tools.
The most obvious dissent, especially in Finland and to a lesser extent in Slovenian 
families, relates to what is considered as proper online communication. Younger 
family members are accustomed to open and straightforward online communication, 
while older people call for cautiousness and linguistic flawlessness. This disagree­
ment between family generations is explicitly reported by Rita from Finland:
My parents are horrified about all that openness that my sister keeps on 
performing on Facebook and in her blog. In turn, my sister hasn’t noticed 
that her openness on these platforms could cause harm for social relations 
or finding a job, for example.
Similarly, Finnish key informant Maria writes that: “My father thinks that parents 
associate some sort of formality to communication, everything is taken more seri­
ously, each thing and saying is considered more carefully. Among the younger 
[generation] interaction is more easy-going and free”. The Slovenian key inform­
ant Veronika also writes about disagreements between generations regarding the 
proper style of communication:
The younger generation also finds it unusual and slightly distracting that the 
older generation writes text messages in the proper register of Slovene. Most 
young people are accustomed to writing messages in colloquial language.
Despite some disagreements, the research material speaks about families’ attempts 
to find consensus and overcome some generation stereotypes. For instance, the 
stepfather of Laura in Finland argues that: “There are ‘jerks’ in every genera­
tion” and he talks about “conflicts, and how it is easier to avoid them in social 
media by leaving the scene”. Such consensus-seeking attitudes are reflected in the 
reports collected from both countries. Consensus is also associated with the idea 
of democratic family, in which everyone has an important, yet different role to 
play. Even if all informants do not agree that family have become democratised, 
family members seem to widely agree (e.g. Marija’s family in Slovenia) that roles 
have somewhat changed. Even if parents may still have the final word, children 
are typically listened to and consulted in technology-related family decisions.
Functional solidarity
Two major themes emerge from the research material concerning functional soli­
darity with regard to ICT use. The first relates to the equity in the exchange of 

Intergenerational solidarity and ICT usage  79
knowledge and resources over the life course. When children are young, parents 
teach them some basic ICT skills, like Marija from Slovenia writes: “When I 
first started using electronic banking a few years ago, my father had already been 
using it (he learned from my brother), and he helped me to learn how to use 
it, which I greatly appreciated”. Sometimes parents and grandparents also teach 
their more mature children, for instance, about the use of domestic technologies 
which are not typically needed when young. Slovenian Veronika mentions an 
electronic blood glucose monitor or a digital meat temperature gauge as exam­
ples. Furthermore, it is generally agreed in both Slovenia and Finland that parents 
can deepen children’s understanding on various issues owing to their life experi­
ences (e.g. Karin in Finland and sister of Natalija in Slovenia). Parents can also 
teach patience in the use of ICTs (Sara and Mary in Finland) and help understand 
the line between formal and informal communication (Mary in Finland). Parents 
also give reminders about online risks and advise on wise ICT usage (e.g. Karin in 
Finland; niece of Tia in Slovenia). But when children grow up, the roles in teach­
ing, especially technical matters, are typically reversed.
The second key observation pertains to the intergenerational provision of help 
by grandchildren. Contrary to Finland, where interaction between grandchildren 
and grandparents is typically limited to short calls and greetings via text messages 
(e.g. families of Sara and Emma), in Slovenia grandchildren have relatively close 
relations with their grandparents, which often means regular assistance in ICT use 
(e.g. families of Katarina, Franc, Veronika, Mia, Tina and Katja). The key inform­
ant Katarina describes this, revealing also the demands of such a relationship in 
the context of email use, as follows:
It is a lengthy process and almost every Sunday when I visit him [grand­
father]. I have to help him with something. I am also bothered by the fact 
that I often do not know what he needs help with . . . [if it is] for example, 
with the use of Outlook (formerly Hotmail), as a Gmail user I am unable 
to understand what he wants.
In Finland, young people do help their own parents in sorting out various 
technical problems, but they are less frequently and intensively in touch with 
grandparents than their Slovenian counterparts. A considerable part of this 
country difference is explained by the greater geographical distances between 
children, their parents and grandparents in Finland; providing assistance in tech­
nological matters from afar is really challenging, in particular when people in 
need of help are technologically less savvy.
Normative solidarity
The research material contains little concrete examples about the existence of 
family norms with regard to ICT usage. Nevertheless, concerning some specific 
issues like data security, family members in both countries seem to agree with 
one another. Like the brother of Finnish key informant Sofia argues: “Parents say: 

80  Sakari Taipale et al.
‘don’t download this and that, even if they would be requisites [for the functioning 
of the programme or similar]’. I mostly do what they say”. Similarly, in Slovenia 
Katarina writes about how her father “is very reticent to publish any personal posts 
and advocates and teaches others not to publish personal information on the web” 
and that her 25-year-old sister “is strongly aware of this, and posts only more gen­
eral things”. However, this norm is shared only by two in Katarina’s family as 
others “do not post a lot of information online, and focus more on looking for infor­
mation”. In fact, it is not always clear how widely these norms are acknowledged, 
shared and/or complied with as there is much variation in ICT usage in families.
In both countries, there are some familial obligations that are entrusted to and 
typically well received by one person, to whom others turn to ask for help (e.g. the 
families of Isabella and Carla in Finland, and the families of Franc and Veronika 
in Slovenia). Borrowing the words of Bakardjieva (2005), these persons can be 
named as ‘warm experts’; they are technically skilled and share the daily life of 
other family members. The latter makes them different from ‘cold experts’, exter­
nal ICT professionals. The following excerpts from Finnish and Slovenian key 
informants, in respective order, illustrate this:
My brother has the main responsibility with regards [to] the functioning of 
communication tools, applications and programmes. I feel it is self-evident 
that he sorts out the problems I detect in devices and programmes. I never 
hesitate to ask help from him either.
(Karin, Finland)
As for teaching others and introducing new ICT, my father (67), my mother 
(54) and my brother (35) unanimously agree that I am responsible for teach­
ing others and ensuring the proper use of technology in our family.
(Tia, Slovenia)
It is the regular provision of help between grandchildren and grandparents, which 
can be considered as a kind of filial duty or a cultural norm, that distinguishes 
Slovenia from Finland. What underscores the normative nature of such grand­
child-grandparent ICT aid is that the interviewees oftentimes take it for granted. 
It is considered as a natural part of family life, as it turns out from the report of 
Slovenian key informant Petra: “Whenever family members need help, I am glad 
to help them no matter how busy I am. I feel a sense of duty because that is how 
I was raised”. The Slovenian key informant Anja also writes that her grandfather 
often prefers contacting his grandchildren directly, as they know how to help.
What emerges from the Finnish data is the ambivalence of communication 
norms between different generations. For instance, Rita reports:
My parents are, in turn, more dutiful and trustworthy as communicators than 
people of my age or younger. My parents always answer the phone, if they 
are not driving a car or taking a sauna. They also reply to all text messages 
they receive and read them immediately when incoming message beeps. 

Intergenerational solidarity and ICT usage  81
They also answer emails straightaway, when they have time to read them. 
With people of my age the culture of using mobile phones differs from that of 
fixed phones more clearly. . . . There is no need to always answer the phone, 
and you may switch it off completely, if you want to be alone.
This excerpt illustrates how the normative basis of use of ICT for communica­
tion has not been established in families yet. The disagreement concerning the 
proper uses of ICTs between generations seems to echo with more general norma­
tive expectations that separate younger from older people. Similarly, a relatively 
strong expectation concerning the provision of assistance from grandchildren to 
grandparents (or its absence, like in Finland) cannot be considered only specific 
to the use of ICT, but it certainly reflects more profound cultural values, pre­
vailing housing arrangements and the integrity of the family that vary between 
Scandinavian and South European countries (e.g. Hank, 2007).
Structural solidarity
Structural solidarity refers to the opportunities and barriers to intergenerational 
family interaction via ICT. These structural factors shed light on many country 
differences discussed earlier in the chapter. While shorter geographical distances 
make possible regular in-person interaction between family members in Slovenia, 
longer distances in Finland create a demand for technology-mediated family com­
munication from afar. The Slovenian key informant Tia notes: “I agree that our 
family has always spent a lot of time together, and the whole family lives rela­
tively close, so in the time it takes to call someone you can simply find them and 
tell them in person” (also for Jakob and Angela in Slovenia).
On the contrary, Finnish interviewees highlight that regardless of different ICT 
preferences between younger and older generations, families are highly depend­
ent on technology due to long distances keeping them apart. The key informant 
Emma writes: “As there are several hundred kilometres of physical distance, 
meeting face-to-face is not very often possible”. Emma adds to this: “The utilisa­
tion of information technology makes it possible to maintain close relations with 
close ones even if there is lots of distance”. Such comments are less frequent in 
Slovenia. However, the importance of ICT (e.g. email, Skype, Viber) for family 
communication and solidarity are recognised especially when a family member 
moves to another country (e.g. the families of Erika, Julija, Klara).
Health conditions and functional capabilities are other structural factors that 
influence the possibilities to enhance family solidarity via ICTs. Poor eye-sight and 
agility of hands are mentioned as factors reducing ICT use for family communica­
tion in both countries. For instance, in Finland, Emilia writes that “Grandfather’s 
vision has worsened so much that he can barely read or write. He has also for­
gotten how all the equipment works, so he no longer uses other devices than the 
phone”. In Slovenia, Petra writes about her parents and grandmother who use a 
feature phone, but find that “their fingers are ‘too tough’ and they do not have a lot 
of sensitivity in their finger pads” (also Marija and Aleksej in Slovenia).

82  Sakari Taipale et al.
Furthermore, comments show that health problems can make older people 
realise the benefits of ICTs. As Katarina from Slovenia writes: “Grandmother did 
not want a mobile phone, but she got one when she spent a longer period of time in 
the hospital for knee surgery”. Both grandparents were “convinced to use ICT by 
the possibility of communicating with their granddaughters and great grandson”.
Discussion and conclusions
In this chapter, we explored how the uses of ICT in extended families relate to 
family solidarity in Finland and Slovenia. Regarding our first aim, to what extent 
ICT usage is intertwined with different forms of intergenerational family solidar­
ity, we showed that in spite of increasingly individualised networking, ICT use 
contributes to solidarity in extended families. However, this applies mainly to 
associational and functional solidarity, and is specific to life stages as well as 
reliant on prevailing housing arrangements and cultural values. Structural fac­
tors, such as long distances and physical ability to control ICT devices, influence 
the utilisation of ICTs for promoting associational and functional solidarity in 
families. We also revealed that normative, consensual and affectual forms of soli­
darity are manifested to a smaller degree in relation to ICT usage. This might be 
explained with increased individual networking, which presupposes less familial 
regulation for ICT use and may thus rather cause disagreements within families 
than add to its integrity.
Regarding our second aim, to investigate potential country differences between 
Finland and Slovenia in terms of the relationship between use of ICTs and forms 
of intergenerational family solidarity, we came across some obvious differences. 
It turned out that social media platforms have been particularly embraced in 
Finland to enable new micro-level (or nano-level, see Eranti and Lonkila, 2015) 
interactions between family members. A perpetual exchange of short messages, 
especially through WhatsApp, enhances associational solidarity between family 
members who live apart and have few occasions to meet in person. At its best, 
the use of one-to-many communication tools ties together many family members 
or the whole family. Unlike in Finland, the adoption and use of ICT in Slovenian 
families feeds functional solidarity between generations. Physical propinquity in 
intergenerational relations makes technological assistance – a new form of social 
support between grandchildren and grandparents – a common practice with posi­
tive consequences for family solidarity.
This result suggests that intergenerational assistance in ICT emerges not just 
from generational differences, but also pertains to life stages and country dif­
ferences in the developmental stage of the information society. The higher use 
of social media for intra-family communication seems to account at least for 
the fact that young people live longer with their parents in the same household 
(EuroStat, 2016). Furthermore, in some life stages, a person is clearly more 
dependent on other family members when it comes to the use of ICTs (e.g. 
while a child learns to use ICT for the first time or an older adult tries to keep 
up with technological development). In light of the ICT Development Index, the 

Intergenerational solidarity and ICT usage  83
need for intergenerational assistance in ICT use might be higher in Slovenia, 
where ICT skills and the share of individuals using the internet is somewhat 
lower than in Finland (ITU, 2015).
Some implications for further research can be drawn from this study. While 
many causal relations between various solidarity forms have been found earlier 
(e.g. Bengtson and Roberts, 1991; Grzywacz and Marks, 1999; Schwarz et al., 
2005; Hogerbrugge and Komter, 2012), our research indicates that ICT-mediated 
interaction may alter such associations. For instance, the lack of normative soli­
darity in family communication is perhaps not related to lower associational 
solidarity (cf. Bengtson and Roberts, 1991) as ICTs enable communication from 
afar and continuously. The research also pointed out some ways of measuring 
ICT-related family solidarity. In particular, intergenerational help with ICT use 
emerged as a potentially important indicator of functional support in Slovenia. 
Affectual solidarity, in turn, could be gauged through the level of encourage­
ment contributing to ICT use among other family members. Having the same 
ICT tools and applications as other family members could work as an indicator 
of structural solidarity.
Finally, this study is also subject to certain limitations inherent to the EGI 
method (elaborated on earlier) and study design. It is obvious that the student key 
informants and their family members included in the sample are ethnically rather 
homogeneous. Including ethnic minorities and immigrants in the study could have 
revealed such practices of ICT use that enhance family solidarity but remained as 
yet undiscovered. It is also worth noting that even small age differences between 
the key informants and their interviewees may be reflected in the results. The fact 
that the key informants’ mothers and grandparents were younger in Slovenia and 
the key informants’ siblings were younger in Finland may be reflected in the distinct 
patterns of family interactions between countries, frequent in-person contacts being 
more typical for the former, and social media use for the latter.
Acknowledgements
This study was partly supported with the Academy of Finland research grant 
(no. 265986) and with networking grants for Short-term Scientific Missions 
provided by the COST Action IS1311 (www.interfasol.eu).
Note
1	 The analysis here concentrates in these two countries, although data was also collected 
from Italy.
References
Bakardjieva, M., 2005. Internet society: the internet in everyday life. London: SAGE.
Bengtson, V. and Roberts, R. E., 1991. Intergenerational solidarity in aging families: an 
example of formal theory construction. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 53(4), 
pp. 856–870.

84  Sakari Taipale et al.
Bengtson, V., Giarrusso, R., Mabry, J. B. and Silverstein, M., 2002. Solidarity, conflict, 
and ambivalence: complementary or competing perspectives on intergenerational rela­
tionships? Journal of Marriage and Family, 64(3), pp. 568–576.
Bengtson, V., Rosenthal, C. and Burton, L., 1996. Paradoxes of families and aging. In: 
R. H. Binstock and L. George, eds. Handbook of aging and the social sciences. New 
York: Academic Press, pp. 253–282.
Connidis, I. A. and McMullin, J. A., 2002. Ambivalence, family ties, and doing sociology. 
Journal of Marriage and Family, 64(3), pp. 594–601.
Dolničar, V., Filipovič Hrast, M., Vehovar, V. and Petrovčič, A., 2013. Digital inequal­
ity and intergenerational solidarity: the role of social support in proxy internet use. In: 
IR14: resistance + appropriation. Denver, CO: Association of Internet Researchers.
Eranti, V. and Lonkila, M., 2015. The social significance of the Facebook Like button. 
First Monday, 20(6). http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/5505.
EuroStat, 2010. Household structure in the EU. Luxembourg: Publications Office of the 
European Union.
EuroStat, 2016. Share of young adults aged 18–34 living with their parents by age and sex. 
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/en/web/products-datasets/-/ILC_LVPS08.
Eynon, R. and Helsper, E., 2015. Family dynamics and internet use in Britain: what role do 
children play in adults’ engagement with the internet? Information, Communication & 
Society, 18(2), pp. 156–171.
Fortunati, L. and Taipale, S., 2014. The advanced use of mobile phones in five European 
countries. The British Journal of Sociology, 65(2), pp. 317–337.
Garattini, C. and Prendergast, D., 2015. Critical reflections on ageing and technology in the 
twenty-first century. In: D. Prendergast and C. Garattini, eds. Aging and the digital life 
course. New York: Berg Hahn, pp. 1–15.
Grzywacz, J. G. and Marks, N. F., 1999. Family solidarity and health behaviors. Journal of 
Family Issues, 20(2), pp. 243–268.
Haddon, L., 2011. Domestication analysis, objects of study, and the centrality of technolo­
gies in everyday life. Canadian Journal of Communication, 36(2), pp. 311–323.
Hammarström, G., 2005. The construct of intergenerational solidarity in a lineage perspec­
tive: A discussion on underlying theoretical assumptions. Journal of Aging Studies, 
19(1), pp. 33–51.
Hank, H., 2007. Proximity and contacts between older parents and their children: a 
European comparison. Journal of Marriage and Family, 69(1), pp. 157–173.
Hänninen, R., Taipale, S. and Korhonen, A., forthcoming. Refamilisation in the broadband 
society. The effects of ICTs on family solidarity in Finland.
Hogerbrugge, M. J. and Komter, A. E., 2012. Solidarity and ambivalence: comparing two 
perspectives on intergenerational relations using longitudinal panel data. The Journals of 
Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 67(3), pp. 372–383.
Hsieh, H. F. and Shannon, S. E., 2005. Three approaches to qualitative content analysis. 
Qualitative Health Research, 15(9), pp. 1277–1288.
Hurme, H., Westerback, S. and Quadrello, T., 2010. Traditional and new forms of contact 
between grandparents and grandchildren. Journal of Intergenerational Relationships, 
8(3), pp. 264–280.
ITU, 2015. Measuring the Information Society Report 2015. Geneva: ITU.
Kennedy, T. L. M. and Wellman, B., 2007. The networked household. Information, 
Communication & Society, 10(5), pp. 645–670.
Kennedy, T. L. M., Smith, A., Wells, A. T. and Wellman, B., 2008. Networked families. 
Washington, DC: Pew Internet & American Life Project.

Intergenerational solidarity and ICT usage  85
Kilpeläinen, A. and Seppänen, M., 2014. Information technology and everyday life in 
ageing rural villages. Journal of Rural studies, 33(1), pp. 1–8.
Lassiter, L. E. and Campbell, E., 2010. What will we have ethnography do? Qualitative 
Inquiry, 16(9), pp. 757–767.
Lin, C. I. C., Tang, W.-H. and Kuo, F.-Y., 2012. “Mommy wants to learn the computer”: 
How middle-aged and elderly women in Taiwan learn ICT through social support. 
Adult Education Quarterly, 62(1), pp. 73–90.
Ling, R. and Haddon, L., 2003. Mobile telephony, mobility, and the coordination 
of everyday life. In: J. Katz ed., Machines that become us: The social context of 
personal communication technology. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 
pp. 245–265.
Litwak, E., 1960. Occupational mobility and extended family cohesion. American 
Sociological Review, 25(1), pp. 9–21.
Livingstone, S., 2009. Children and the internet. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Luijkx, K., Peek, S. and Wouters, E., 2015. “Grandma, you should do it—it’s cool”: older 
adults and the role of family members in their acceptance of technology. International 
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 12(12), pp. 15470–15485.
Lüscher, K. and Pillemer, K., 1998. Intergenerational ambivalence: A new approach to the 
study of parent-child relations in later life. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 60(2), 
pp. 413–425.
Lüscher, K., Hoff, A., Lamura, G., Renzi, M., Sánchez, M., Viry, G., Widmer, E., 
Klimczuk, A. and De Salles Oliveira, P., 2015. Generations, intergenerational rela­
tionships, generational policy, A multilingual compendium. www.kurtluescher.de/
downloads/Luescher-Kompendium_7sprachig-komplett_online_15–10–2015.pdf.
Madden, M., 2010. Older adults and social media. www.pewinternet.org/files/old-
media//Files/Reports/2010/Pew%20Internet%20-%20Older%20Adults%20and%20
Social%20Media.pdf.
Marshall, M. N., 1996. The key informant technique. Family Practice, 13(1), pp. 92–97.
Mori, K. and Harada, E. T., 2010. Is learning a family matter? Experimental study of the 
influence of social environment on learning by older adults in the use of mobile phones. 
Japanese Psychological Research, 52(3), 244–255.
Oblak Črnič, T., 2009. Družinska (ne)harmonija ob računalniških zaslonih [Family (dis)
harmony in front of the computer screen]. Družboslovne razprave, 25(61), pp. 41–58.
OECD, 2016. Skills matter: further results from the survey of adult skills, OECD Skills 
Studies. Paris: OECD Publishing.
Piper, A. M., Cornejo Garcia, R. and Brewer, R. N., 2016. Understanding the challenges 
and opportunities of smart mobile devices among the oldest old. International Journal 
of Mobile Human Computer Interaction, 8(2), pp. 83–98.
Punamäki, R. L., Wallenius, M., Nygård, C. H., Saarni, L. and Rimpelä, A., 2007. Use of 
information and communication technology (ICT) and perceived health in adolescence: 
the role of sleeping habits and waking-time tiredness. Journal of Adolescence, 30(4), 
pp. 569–585.
Rainie, L. and Wellman, B., 2012. Networked. The new social operating system. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Rappaport, J., 2008. Beyond participant observation: collaborative ethnography as theo­
retical innovation. Collaborative Anthropologies 1, pp. 1–31.
Rasi, P. and Kilpeläinen, A., 2015. The digital competences and agency of older people 
living in rural villages in Finnish Lapland. International Journal of Media, Technology & 
Lifelong Learning, 11(2), pp. 149–160.

86  Sakari Taipale et al.
Reczek, C., 2014. Conducting a multi family member interview study. Family Process, 
53(2), pp. 318–335.
Repo, K. and Nätti, J., 2015. Televisio ja tietokone lasten ja nuorten ajankäytön rytmit­
täjinä. In: A.-H. Anttila, T., Anttila, M., Liikkanen, M. and Pääkkönen, H. eds. Ajassa 
kiinni ja irrallaan – yhteisölliset rytmit 2000-luvun Suomessa. Helsinki: Statistics 
Finland, pp. 135–152.
Sayago, S., Forbes, P. and Blat, J., 2013. Older people becoming successful ICT learn­
ers over time: challenges and strategies through an ethnographical lens. Educational 
Gerontology, 39, pp. 527–544.
Schwarz, B., Trommsdorff, G., Albert, I. and Mayer, B., 2005. Adult parent–child 
relationships: relationship quality, support, and reciprocity. Applied Psychology: 
An International Review, 54(3), pp. 396–417.
Selwyn, N., 2004. The information aged: a qualitative study of older adults’ use of infor­
mation and communications technology. Journal of Aging Studies, 18(4), pp. 369–384.
Silverstein, M. and Bengtson, V. L., 1997. Intergenerational solidarity and the structure of 
adult child-parent relationships in American families. American Journal of Sociology, 
103(2), pp. 429–460.
Valentine, G., 2006. Globalizing intimacy. The role of information and communication 
technologies in maintaining and creating relationships. Women’s Studies Quarterly, 
34(1/2), pp. 365–393.
Zickuhr, K., 2014. Older adults and technology. JASA’s Seminar on Advocacy and 
Volunteering in New Landscapes. www.pewinternet.org/2014/04/29/older-adults-and-
technology/.
Zickuhr, K. and Madden, M., 2012. Older adults and internet use. www.sainetz.at/
dokumente/Older_adults_and_internet_use_2012.pdf.

7	
Gendering the mobile phone
A life course approach
Carla Ganito
Introduction
The gender effect cannot be ignored in the design, development, innovation and 
communication of technological products (Cockburn, 1992). The ‘technofeminism’ 
theory proposes that technology is at the same time a cause and a consequence 
of gender relations (Wajcman, 2004). Wajcman (2007) defines technofeminism as 
opening new opportunities to studies focused on different groups of women and 
their response to diverse technologies. Technofeminism urges researchers to take 
into account women’s agency and offers an approach to the gendering process 
which incorporates multiple contradictions.
This chapter aims to provide a broader picture of the relationship between 
women and technology through an inquiry into the role of the mobile phone in the 
lives of Portuguese women. The chapter takes on Wajcman’s challenge and studies 
how different groups of Portuguese women encounter the mobile phone and incor­
porate it into their daily lives. The chapter is guided by one main question: What is 
the significance of the mobile phone in women’s lives, at different life stages?
This chapter brings women to the forefront of the discussion of the usages 
and affordances of the mobile phone, and building on the concept of mobile 
communications (Goggin, 2008), it introduces the idea of feminist cultural 
studies as a conceptual lens through which to focus on mobile communication. 
Previous research on gender and technology widely argues that gender differ­
ences are less marked in younger populations (Ling, 2001b). However, there 
are also scholars who present that gender differences in technology usage are 
not only generational, but also shaped by socialisation processes (Grint and 
Gill, 1995; Wajcman, 2004). As Helsper notes: “Adults’ behaviour in their cur­
rent life stage might help predict their future online behaviour much better than 
studying young people’s current behaviour” (Helsper, 2010, p. 353). According 
to this line of research, gender roles depend on the current stage of life, and thus 
gender differences will not just disappear as time goes by.
Mobile phones across life course: an egalitarian technology?
Although the mobile phone is currently one of the most pervasive communication 
technologies, only a few studies have approached it from a gender perspective 

88  Carla Ganito
and even fewer from a feminist viewpoint (Ganito, 2012). As many researchers 
point out, the usage rates and patterns between men and women are rather similar 
(Geser, 2006a, 2006b), but differences emerge when looking at the qualitative 
aspects of use; the purposes and nature of mobile use; and the discourses about the 
mobile phone (Geser, 2004; Lemish and Cohen, 2005a, 2005b).
Studies about gender and mobile phones can be divided into two categories: 
studies centred on the differences between men and women, and those that offer 
a more nuanced account of gender practices. Within the first category, there are 
plenty of quantitative studies mapping gender-related differences in which the 
mobile phone is described as an egalitarian technology, contrary to other tech­
nologies where the gender gap still persists, as is the case with the internet and 
computer usage. In Portugal, there seems to be no gender difference in people 
who own a mobile phone: ownership is split 50/50 between men and women 
(Cardoso et al., 2007). After the first introduction phase where women and even 
girls lagged slightly behind, justified by men’s positive attitude towards inno­
vation, women, as in the telephone, soon became heavy users surpassing men 
in certain cultural contexts and uses (Ling, 2001a). In contrast to internet use, 
women exceeded males in all categories of mobile phone use (Rice and Katz, 
2003) and seemed to favour written communication (Geser, 2006a, 2006b).
These and other statistical studies often offer a contradictory view to the second 
category of studies, claiming that the mobile phone, similarly to other domestic 
technologies, reinforces traditional roles (Lemish and Cohen, 2005a and 2005b; 
Ling, 2001a, 2001b; Lohan, 2001; Plant, 2001; Rakow and Navarro, 1993). These 
are also poorly aligned with studies that present the mobile phone as a tool that 
has levelled the playing field between men and women (Geser, 2006a, 2006b; 
Shade, 2007), and those that portray the mobile phone as a disruptive technology 
for gender roles (Lee, 2005; Skog, 2002). More recently, some studies have gone 
beyond the statistical duality of men and women, exploring the differences that 
take place among women (Fortunati, 2009; Fortunati and Taipale, 2012; Hjorth, 
2005, 2007, 2009a, 2009b; Kurniawan, 2006).
Diverse lives of women: the life course approach
In this study, I follow the strand of research that explores differences among 
women, focusing on their life course:
As a concept, the life course refers to the age-graded, socially embedded 
sequence of roles that connect the phases of life. As a paradigm, the life 
course refers to an imaginative framework comprised of a set of interrelated 
presuppositions, concepts, and methods that are used to study these age-
graded, socially embedded roles.
(Mortimer and Shanahan, 2004, p. xi)
A distinction should be made between life cycle and the life course. The first 
approach emphasises ages and life stages, while the second puts emphasis on the 

Gendering the mobile phone  89
transitions into those stages (Allatt et al., 1987). The life course approach enables 
the researcher to account for change and complexity. Castells (1996) describes 
how societies have to replace biological life cycle with a socio-biological one, 
and proposes that the network society is moving towards social arrhythmia. As 
societies become more complex, the use of the life cycle approach has to resort to 
a more flexible understanding of how different stages unfold.
Analysing the role women play at each life stage helps to better understand 
their relationship to technology, yet life stages no longer follow a sequential path 
or individual turning points (Hareven and Adams, 1982). Hence, an individual 
life course should be taken into consideration as well. The study thus analyses 
trajectories that are understood as sequences of roles and experiences incorporat­
ing social context and individual variation. I base the analysis of these trajectories 
on the principle of agency, where people construct their own life course through 
daily choices and practices within the limits and opportunities of given historical 
and social circumstances (Elder et al., 2003).
Methodology
The findings are derived from qualitative data drawn from 36 in-depth interviews 
of Portuguese women. The list of women interviewed, their ages and main activi­
ties according to life stage are shown in Table 1 below.
Women interviewed were recruited through a ‘snow-ball’ method from a 
pool of urban heterosexual women. The interviews were carried out in 2011 
and information was anonymised. The option was for semi-structured inter­
views, which allowed me to navigate the questions as befitted the flow of the 
conversation, and to pick up on interesting comments and follow them up more 
comprehensively, because the interest was in “thoughts and feelings that are 
often not articulated as stable opinions or preferences” (Turkle, 1984, p. 318), 
and these cannot be captured by more direct methods. The interviews were 
conducted in settings familiar to the interviewees: workplace, home or any 
other place of their choice where they would feel comfortable. There was no 
end time set for the interview; some lasted for three hours, others took more 
than six. The goal was to hear women speak freely about their lives and their 
relationship with technology in general and the mobile phone in particular, 
without limiting them.
The women in the study were aggregated into seven groups according to their 
life stage. The example of a Portuguese market research (Marktest, 2006), based 
on a sample of 10,093 structured interviews, was followed to define the 7 life 
stage groups. The Marktest study used 5 variables (marital status, age, occupa­
tion, number of people in the household, and number of children and teenagers in 
the household) to cover the entire life cycle of the Portuguese consumer consti­
tuted by 11 distinctive groups. For this research, the 11 categories were combined 
into seven to represent the different life stages of the women interviewed: single 
dependent, young independent, nesting, mothers, single mothers, mature inde­
pendent and empty nesters.

90  Carla Ganito
Table 7.1  The interviewees, their ages and main activity according to life stage.
Single dependent
  1	 Constança, 23, university student, 
single
  2	 Joana, 20, university student, single
  3	 Raquel, 20, high-school student, 
single
  4	 Rita, 24, designer in an internship
Young independent
  5	 Carla B., 35, economist, single
  6	 Inês, 25, marketing manager, single
  7	 Nicole, 29, engineer, single
Nesting
  8	 Catarina, 31, teacher, married
  9	 Patrícia, 33, economist
10	 Patrícia D., 36, marketing manager
11	 Sandra A., 35, environment 
engineer
12	 Sónia, 27, pharmacist
13	 Vanda, 36, training technician
Mothers
14	 Ana A., 34, web content producer, 
married, mother of an infant
15	 Ana C., 34, journalist, mother of an 
infant
16	 Ana D., 39, business owner, 
married, mother of two children
17	 Carla D., 34, unemployed 
marketing manager, married, 
mother of a toddler
18	 Margarida, 33, engineer, married, 
mother of two infants
19	 Sara, 35, social worker, married, 
mother of two children
20	 Sílvia, 29, nurse, married, mother 
of an infant
Mature independent
21	 Ana, 56, assistant, single
22	 Carla P., 30, tourism agent, separated
23	 Estela, 36, communications manager, 
divorced
24	 Marisa, 34, consultant, divorced
25	 Susana, 36, engineer, single
Sole caregivers
26	 Carmen, 40, secretary, divorced, 
mother of two
27	 Cecilia, 46, human resource technician, 
divorced, mother of a teenage boy
28	 Fatima 1, 52, unemployed 
administrative worker, divorced, 
living with her mother and niece. 
Her son as a military comes home 
on the weekends
29 Sofia, 47, human resource manager, 
divorced, mother of two teenage boys
Empty nesters
30	 Deolinda, 51, hairdresser business 
owner, widow, now living in a new 
relationship
31	 Fátima 2, 56, retired insurance 
professional, married, grandmother 
of one
32	 Fernanda F., 52, computer manager, 
married
33	 Fernanda R., 65, retired topographer, 
married, grandmother of two, caring 
for one of her grandchildren
34	 Manuela, 56, pre-retired saleswoman, 
divorced, in a new relationship
35	 Maria, 60, retired teacher, married, 
grandmother of three
36	 Paula, 59, retired administrator, 
married, grandmother of two, caring 
for one of her grandsons
Women in the single dependent life stage are above 18 years old but still depend 
on their family financially and still live with them. In the next life stage, young 
women are financially independent, and although they may still live with their fam­
ily, they are able to control purchase decisions. The nesting life stage is determined 
by the beginning of a co-habitation relationship that may or may not be formally 
constituted as a marriage. The next life stage is that of motherhood. Contrary to 
the Marktest (2006) study, women with children at different ages were aggregated, 
although I acknowledge some differences in the use of the mobile phone according 

Gendering the mobile phone  91
to the age of the kids and if they are old enough to have a mobile phone of their own. 
Single mothers were either widows or single because they were divorced or sepa­
rated from their partners. The interest was in analysing the effects of the absence 
of the masculine part of the couple in the relationships of women with technology. 
Women in the mature independent life stage are those that are around the age of 35, 
have no children and either have never been involved in a co-habitation relation­
ship or have divorced or separated from their partners. Finally, empty nesters are 
women whose children have left home, who have retired or whose job has reached 
a plateau. This last stage is more complex to define as it presents much variation, 
including old pensioner, average retirees, fully abled elders, as well as elders with 
disabilities (Castells, 1996, p. 446).
Regarding the analytical strategy, that study is based on the ideal-type analysis. 
While in Weber’s work ideal types are fictional constructions, in this research, 
following the sample of Turkle’s (1984) study on computer cultures, real cases 
studies are used to serve the same end – to highlight particular aspects of the gen­
dering of the mobile phone. The ideal-type analysis was conducted following the 
principles of Soulet (2002), who drew his ideas from Maxwell’s (1999) proposal 
for an interactive approach to qualitative research.
This method of analysis is structured into two levels consisting of various 
steps. In the first level of local interpretation, each interview is analysed to con­
struct particular life stories that help answer research questions. For this step, 
the researcher starts by writing a synopsis, which is a synthesis of the interview 
discourse. The following step is to write the inner history of the interview, provid­
ing a chronological reading from the point of view of the interviewee in relation 
to the problem being analysed. To complete the local level of interpretation, the 
researcher retrieves a message that we can define as what each person wanted to 
tell us. These three steps are conducted for every interview and then the researcher 
proceeds to the second level of global interpretation, a transversal of the indi­
vidual stories. This interpretation helps identify the aggregated ideal types, which 
in the scope of this research are the seven life stages, and finally the overall story.
The analysis is informed by some major categories: identity, dependency, 
affectivity, norms and social fears, safety and control. The goal in analysing these 
categories is to identify the turning points1 in women’s lives that had an impact on 
their use of the mobile phone; to provide an account of their daily lives (technology 
uses, media diets, routines) and determine its impact on their technological inti­
macy; and to analyse mobile phone use, the affordances it allowed to women such 
as identity construction, affectivity, safety and control and how these affordances 
were translated into uses such as those of personalisation, micro-coordination, 
creativity and entertainment. The chapter presents main findings for each life 
stage, as a more detailed analysis would require a more extensive presentation.
Women’s voices
The stories of women presented here illustrate the multiplicity of the facets of their 
emerging relationship with mobile phones, and how their life stories intersect with 

92  Carla Ganito
different uses of technology and the mobile phone in particular. For each life stage, 
one or more stories of individual women were chosen to provide a detailed account 
of women’s lives as a whole.
Single dependent: autonomy and connectedness
The single dependent women interviewed are marked by their recent coming of 
age. They are at the stage where differences between men and women are less 
prominent and they still have not faced the challenges of entering the workforce 
and motherhood, which often constitute hurdles in women’s lives in Portugal. For 
these women, the mobile phone is essentially a tool for social networking and 
autonomy. The device they choose is still a personal choice based only on self-
expression, while they live in a highly complex media environment characterised 
by high internet use in which the mobile phone is only one piece of the puzzle but 
probably the most pervasive one. For them, the convergence of mobile phones 
and internet is only hampered by money constraints.
Raquel, a 20-year-old economics student is, like other young women in her 
life stage, searching for autonomy and independence, and technology is instru­
mental in that purpose. She feels the need to always be connected and mostly uses 
technology that satisfies this need and allows her autonomy from other family 
members that control activities such as television viewing: “I only see TV when 
I have nothing else to do on the computer. The TV is always on and my grand­
mother is always watching soap operas. Sometimes I keep her company but I 
don’t care much about TV shows”.
But all single dependent women felt that this always-connected culture has its 
flip side and that they sometimes feel the need to disconnect. But when they do 
disconnect there is a sense of guilt and peer and family pressure not to repeat the 
behaviour: “Not being available seems weird. I am always afraid something might 
happen to someone I love” (Rita, 24-year-old designer in an internship). This 
pressure builds up in the next life stage when professional demands are added to 
the equation.
Young independent: finding a place for femininity
The young independent are at the life stage where employment comes into the 
picture. Women at this stage have a genuine expectation to balance their profes­
sional and personal lives, but that does not mean barriers to professional success 
have fallen completely.
For young independent women, the mobile phone is a blend between a social 
networking and a professional tool, and their main concern is to project an inde­
pendent and professional image, which oftentimes means a more masculine 
approach to what they wear or what they choose as technology. Inês is a vivid 
example of these women who struggle to find a balance between their female 
identity and their professional environment. Inês is a 25-year-old marketing man­
ager who is also going through graduate school and for whom starting her first job 

Gendering the mobile phone  93
was definitely a turning point. She was able to pursue the career she wanted and 
that made her feel very accomplished and fulfilled. But entering the job market 
brought with it increased responsibilities and commitments like “being forced to 
keep a schedule and limited vacation which was confusing for me at first”.
Because of her job status, Inês is now forced to make concessions on her 
self-expression, like in the choice of clothing colours (Miller, 2004). When a 
researcher showed her a pink mobile phone, she immediately liked it but said she 
would never buy a pink phone:
I would never buy a pink phone but I would buy a white one if it were an 
option for the Blackberry. Even in my notebook purchase that was a question. 
There was a pink, a white and a black one and my sister told me not to buy 
the pink one because I would not be taken seriously. Pink is a childish colour 
and because we tend to associate pink with a more feminine woman or more 
detail-oriented people might also think we are not professional and serious. I 
bought white because it is still a good colour for technology but is still a bit 
feminine. If I could choose I would choose pink. I still have lots of stuff that 
are girly and I like them a lot. In the mobile phone I could not choose so I 
have a black one.
To compensate for the masculine exterior, Inês personalises her mobile phone 
and her computer with images from a beach that she loves to go to, flowers and a 
pink screensaver, but she does not use ringtones because she is not interested in 
music. In addition, Inês feels so dependent on her mobile phone that she uses it to 
multitask and expresses dual feelings about it:
On the one hand to be without the mobile phone would be great because I 
would have a less stressful life. I could enjoy things that now I cannot like 
simply staring at the landscape or be in silence. On the other hand, I would 
feel anxious. Even if I do not use it I need it to be there.
She never turns the mobile phone off even when staying with her family because 
the mobile phone is both a professional tool and a lifeline to the people she loves 
and cares about. This symbiosis between professional and private life makes her 
take the mobile phone with her even on vacation and to answer phone calls even 
if they are job related. Inês says: “It enables me to answer something in a few 
minutes and get that matter out of the way. I feel more in control and reassured 
that things are going smoothly”. The changing routines and the feeling that time 
flies too fast intensify in the next life stage: the nesting phase.
Nesting: accommodating new routines
For nesting women, the mobile phone is an umbilical cord to friends and family 
that are now growing distant from their daily lives. Women are in the nesting phase 
when they share a house in a stable relationship that can range from the traditional 

94  Carla Ganito
marriage arrangement, as in the case of Catarina, to more unconventional living 
arrangements. When entering a more stable relationship, new routines settle in 
and for women that can also mean slipping into a more traditional gender role in 
household management and their relation to technology. Women also lose much of 
their prior focus for social networking as they become social coordinators for the 
couple, especially in what concerns family activities. The mobile phone becomes a 
nexus of social relations with now distant family and friends.
Catarina, 31 years old, has been married for four years and has no kids. As she 
is a teacher, she has irregular working hours and she brings a lot of work home. 
Technology serves a double need in her life – to support that flexible working 
arrangement and to keep track of her family and friends. As Catarina explains:
I have to miss out on many dates with my friends because I end up hav­
ing to work. And it is frequent to work on weekends because I was not 
able to organise myself during the week. I feel guilty about it but I cannot 
help myself.
Nesting women usually live in a new home where they do not have a landline 
phone, so the mobile becomes their main source of contact with friends and fam­
ily for whom they have less face time than before. They blend professional and 
personal lives and they usually don’t see the mobile phone as an intruder; these 
women do not feel anxious having the mobile phone around because it enables 
them to perform their tasks at a distance or solve problems quickly. Their lev­
els of personalisation are very low and their option is for devices that project a 
professional look. Having a partner makes them transfer technology choices, an 
action they justify by their lack of interest or knowledge. Some of these women’s 
practices will change in the next life stage and others will be reinforced; namely, 
the personalisation level increases as women have kids and start using the mobile 
phone as a portable photo album, which means placing a higher value on the cam­
era features. Their dependency peaks with the constant need to be available for 
any problem their kids might have or because leisure time and social interaction 
are reduced dramatically.
Mothers: craving time
The mobile phone becomes the sole or main contact resource for women with 
children in Portugal. It is also employed as an electronic leash or a tool for remote 
mothering, replacing their physical presence by their kids. However, women’s 
experiences as mothers vary according to the age of their kids. Carla D. represents 
the multiplicity of roles performed by mothers in Portugal.
Carla D. is a 34-year-old marketing manager who recently became unem­
ployed for the second time in her career. She is also a recent mother of a baby girl. 
She is married and comes from a struggling family: “We feel the responsibilities 
in a whole different way: bills to pay and clothes to wash. The first months were 
really hard, so moving [in] together had a stronger impact on my life than getting 

Gendering the mobile phone  95
married two years after”. Now she is going through a second major shift with 
becoming a mother as her daily routines revolve around the baby: “The day no 
longer has days or nights, it’s organised in periods of three or four hours”.
Time pressure and time bind (Hochschild, 1997) are also part of Carla’s life:
I feel I have no time to myself, to go for a massage, or lay on the sofa when­
ever I want, or go out for a coffee whenever I feel like it. I miss working 
outside the house, being with other people and learning new things.
Carla tries to break her isolation using the mobile phone and the internet on a 
daily basis. She has also started to value the camera more to take photos of eve­
rything the baby does. She even thinks she uses the mobile phone more when she 
is at home, not only to keep in touch with other people but also as reassurance: 
“I always think something might happen so I don’t leave home without it. I no 
longer have my own safety to think of. Nothing can happen because my daughter 
is there”.
Since she started to work, Carla has had a mobile phone that she bought with 
her own salary. Now she has a Nokia that was her husband’s: “The company 
gave him this Nokia but he wanted something better so he bought a Qtek for 
himself and I took his”. But if she could choose she would have an iPhone 
because “it is modern and it gives you status. I wouldn’t mind having a Diva 
either but most mobile phones targeted at women seem teenage like to me”. She 
personalises her mobile with a photo of her daughter and she also uses a special 
case, some charms and a strap:
I think the mobile phone can be a fashion accessory but I should need lots of 
money to have mobile phones in different colours or one to use during the day 
and another to go out at night. I think the mobile phone can be more attrac­
tive, have different colours like silver or gold, have a mirror or be branded, 
but for me its main benefit is to be able to talk wherever we are.
Although Carla is fashion oriented and is a heavy user, she places an emphasis 
on the communication function of the mobile phone and on efficiency features. 
She does not use the mobile phone for any service or leisure content like games, 
internet or music: “I don’t like things to converge and so I browse the internet on 
my notebook and I have an iPod to listen to music”.
Mothers are time-starved, stressed and sometimes unhappy with their mundane 
routine-driven life, and hence they look for solutions that help manage the com­
plexities of their lives, lessen their stress and workload, as well as give them more 
time to focus on what they consider most important: spending time with their kids.
Sole caregivers: holding the world on their shoulders
Single mothers form a specific group of women who are financially even more 
constrained than other mothers, and suffer even more from the lack of time. 

96  Carla Ganito
What they want is no frills and time-consuming technology. For them, the mobile 
phone is a tool for remote mothering and social networking. They need to keep 
track of their kids and, often, elderly members of the family, but they also want to 
keep track of their social networks. The mobile phone provides the opportunity to 
perform their gendered emotional labour in a more effective way.
Cecília is a good example of these women who are or have become sole 
caregivers through divorce or having become widows. Cecília is a 46-year-old 
divorced woman, mother of a 14-year-old son that spends half the week at her 
house and the other half at his father’s. She is devoted to her career and her pro­
fessional development, continually attending courses that improve her skills as a 
human resources manager.
Besides her son, and as most women her age in Portugal, Cecília has to take 
care of her parents. Her mother recently passed away after a long illness that 
was time-consuming for Cecília. Now she still feels the need to always be avail­
able for both her son and her father, and this is where the mobile phone plays 
its main role in Cecília’s life. She no longer recalls the time when she first got 
a mobile phone. It started out for personal use, but it has become an important 
tool in her job:
I would have more difficulty in giving up my mobile phone than my com­
puter. It is where I have everything, my contact list, birthdays and it is the 
easiest way to reach me. I give out my mobile phone number to everyone. I 
give support to people that are sick at home and its easier for them to have 
a direct line to me and all my colleagues have my mobile phone but not all 
have my email.
Because accessibility is her main concern, the phone features Cecília values the 
most are ease of use, access to the internet and the agenda or calendar. For listen­
ing to radio, playing music and taking photos, she prefers to use other devices that 
perform better. She does not personalise her device either, but thinks that it is a 
highly personal device: “I would never touch someone else’s mobile phone, let 
alone my boyfriend’s or my son’s. It is his space, a personal object”.
Cecília is heavily dependent on her mobile:
It is always with me. I never turn it off. I used to turn it off during the night 
but when my mother got sick I stopped doing it. I am afraid someone might 
need me. I had to spend a day without it and it was a bit hard, not being able 
to keep track of my son. When I am on vacation I don’t like to be disturbed 
by phone calls but I can’t turn it off either.
Regardless of these ambivalent feelings she describes the mobile phone as being 
a fundamental tool in her life that helps her keep track of her daily routines – both 
private and professional – and to keep in touch with her friends and family. This 
connection to the outside world of home is also important for mature independent 
women, like Carla P. and Ana, who are presented next.

Gendering the mobile phone  97
Mature independent: back or still in the game
Carla P. and Ana are examples of the challenges mature independent women 
face when they find themselves back or still in the game for a romantic relation­
ship. Mature independent women are those who live solo or have never been 
married. They may also be single through divorce, separation or because they 
have become widows and have no children. Mature independent women are 
presented here through two examples that represent two extremes in terms of 
age: Carla P. is a 30-year-old woman who ended an eight-year cohabiting rela­
tionship, and Ana is a 56-year-old woman who has never been married or had 
a long, stable, cohabiting relationship. Previous research from other countries 
points to a greater interest in single women purchasing and using new technol­
ogy (Blumenthal, 2000). This comes out in the interviews with both Carla P. 
and Ana, whose mobile phones cater to their solo lifestyles by being social net­
working tools and providing safety to sustain their independence and freedom 
of movement.
Carla P. is single and lives alone; in this life stage, what is most important for 
her is making new friends and rebuilding the networks she lost or that are now 
scattered between Portugal and Germany, where she once lived. As for her mobile 
phone, she describes it as the most private technology she has. She had her first 
one at the age of 17 and it was a gift from her father for safety concerns: “I felt like 
a grown-up because I had a mobile phone which at the time was something only 
grow-ups had but pretty fast everybody started having one and it became a mun­
dane thing to have”. She is very self-conscious of being dependent on the mobile 
phone, which she tries to refrain from using in instances such as in a supermarket 
when she lost her friend for a second. However, she never turns the phone off, and 
carries the charger with her in case she runs out of battery.
Born years apart, the mobile phone has the same meaning for Ana D., a 
56-year-old woman who lives alone with her cat. For her, safety was the trigger 
for getting a mobile phone:
Once I got stuck on the highway and I could not reach a person. I felt I had to 
get something to talk with my dad. Before that I felt no one needed to know 
my whereabouts but we can also lie with the mobile phone.
Today she has two mobile phones: one for work and one personal. The personal 
mobile phone she chose because it took good pictures and because it is a clamshell 
model, “I am very distracted and I kept making calls by mistake”. She uses the 
camera to take pictures of the cat but the main purpose of the mobile is to keep 
her company. The mobile phone is also an emotional reassurance tool for Ana D: 
“I keep all my messages and notes in there”. If she could choose she would have 
an iPhone because she confesses to enjoying technology and would value internet 
and email access.
For Ana D., it would be hard to go without her mobile, “without noticing 
we pour our memory into it” and she feels calmer when she has it; emotional 

98  Carla Ganito
reassurance and freedom of movement are for her the main benefits. These 
are also important benefits for empty nesters like the women introduced next.
Empty nests: nests not so empty after all
Fátima and Maria show how empty nests are not so empty after all. Even after 
retirement, as in the case of Maria, many women in Portugal find themselves hav­
ing to take care of their grandchildren or return to work to provide extra money for 
their families. For both of them, the mobile phone means safety and a connection 
with the outside world. They show high mobile usage, especially for leisure pro­
poses and, when combined with low internet usage, a lack of internet skills. But 
the cases of Fátima and Maria also show how the place of a mobile phone within 
a wider personal media ecology shapes the use of a mobile phone.
Fátima is a 56-year-old retired insurance professional with low internet skills and 
who is profoundly dependent on her mobile phone: “I feel naked without it . . . it 
is always in my pocket and goes with me everywhere . . . It is how I keep in touch 
and it is safety, now even more”, but Maria says she would rather use the computer. 
Companies often underestimate the interests of older women in mobile technol­
ogy (Kurniawan, 2006). However, our interviewees showed that they are keen to 
understand, enthusiastic to learn and actually use some advanced features of mobile 
phones such as MMS (multimedia messaging services).
Maria is a 60-year-old retired school teacher who was obliged to take full-time 
care of two of her three grandchildren: a 9-year-old boy and a 3-year-old girl. 
She also looks after another granddaughter. The daily routine of taking care of 
three children leaves little time for leisure activities like listening to the radio or 
watching TV. But she does use the internet on a daily basis for everything from 
paying the bills to searching health topics related to the kids. Although she con­
siders herself very proficient in the use of the computer, on the mobile phone she 
only uses voice calls and reads text messages, neglecting all other features, even 
personalisation. Her friend Fátima is at the opposite extreme.
Fátima also takes care of one grandson. She does embroidery as a hobby and 
runs a small business doing it. During the week, her life revolves around the televi­
sion which is always on, “I have five TV sets, one for each room and I go around 
the house I always have one on and sometimes they are all turned on”. But Fátima 
never uses the computer or the internet; and her husband performs all online activi­
ties. But it is completely different with the mobile phone, which she has possessed 
for many years, and now uses for voice calls and text messages to keep in touch 
with friends and family and to coordinate daily activities. Fátima explains that: 
“it [the mobile phone] keeps me company and it is also a way to feel safer. I once 
had a flat tyre in the middle of nowhere and I truly regretted not having a mobile 
phone”. She even uses it to keep her small handicraft business running. Fátima also 
values having a camera feature and takes pictures of her grandchild to send to his 
mother and to reminisce about the moments with him afterwards.
Fátima never turns off her mobile phone and carries it everywhere. In fact, she 
was one of the few interviewees who kept her mobile phone on the table during 

Gendering the mobile phone  99
the whole interview. Fátima is a good example of women who have no internet 
skills, but for whom a mobile phone provides a channel to communicate. The 
mobile phone allows them to keep in touch by sending text messages and con­
ducting casual conversations with others.
Conclusions
The study reveals that in Portugal, the mobile phone has different roles and affor­
dances throughout women’s life courses. Instead of finding a dominant use that 
would be in line with other studies (cf. the theory of Apparatgeist, Katz, 2006), 
I found a nuanced relationship with the mobile phone that is continuously con­
structed across life stages. This study shows that Portuguese women value the 
mobile phone not for the device itself but because of the central role it plays in 
their lives, which is highly dependent on the life stage, as the role assigned to the 
mobile phone alters when women shift from one life stage to another. The inter­
viewees reported a high degree of dependency across all life stages even while 
underlying reasons differed: for mothers, the main reasons relate to safety and 
control of their children; for single dependents, it is autonomy; for mature inde­
pendents, accessibility; for single mothers, a combination of accessibility and 
control; and for empty nesters, the balance between autonomy and safety. Hence, 
the role of the mobile phone in the everyday lives of women cannot be reduced 
to mere socioeconomic factors, and the linear associations are often highlighted 
in statistical accounts.
Another striking finding is that the trajectory of the mobile phone across life 
stages does not have an expected evolution. If it is true that young women show 
a higher predisposition to a more diversified and intense use of the mobile phone, 
older women do not always correspond to the stereotype of lack of interest or 
skills. On the contrary, the mobile phone seems to play a very important role for 
empty nesters.
The methodological option for this study was to learn about women from 
women, to give them a voice, to gain insights from their discourse and thus the 
choice was for a qualitative design. However, it would be interesting to provide 
extensive analysis through a quantitative survey based on a life stage approach. 
This study is also limited to adult women, but it could prove insightful to apply the 
same methodology to younger and older women. The research, although situated 
in Portugal, opens avenues for cross-cultural analysis in the future.
Throughout their life stages, women face different challenges and needs that 
are expressed in different relationships with technology. It is related to their 
“situated knowledges” (Haraway, 1988) and specific locations. Each woman 
tells a different story, has a different voice. The question is if someone is lis­
tening. From a broader perspective, this study bears implications for product 
and service design by urging the mobile phone industry to use a life course 
approach to move from a functional perspective to a broader socio-cultural 
perspective that would enable the development of products that resonate with 
women’s lives.

100  Carla Ganito
Note
1	 Turning points can be defined as “traditional points in a person’s life where daily 
rhythm and routine alter drastically due to a change in a person’s role in society” 
(Helsper, 2010, p. 355).
References
Allatt, P., Keil, T., Bryman, A. and Bytheway, B., eds., 1987. Women and the life cycle. 
Transitions and turning-points. London: Macmillan Press.
Blumenthal, D., 2000. Targeting the single female consumer. London: Reuters Business 
Insight.
Cardoso, G., Gomes, M. D. C., Espanha, R. and Araújo, V., 2007. Mobile Portugal. Lisbon, 
Portugal: Obercom.
Castells, M., 1996. The rise of the network society. Vol. 1. Cambridge, UK: Blackwell.
Cockburn, C., 1992. The circuit of technology: gender, identity and power. In: R. Silverstone 
and E. Hirsch, eds., Consuming technologies: media and information in domestic spaces. 
London: SAGE, pp. 32–48.
Elder, G. H., Johnson, M. K. and Crosnoe, R., 2003. The emergence and development of 
life course theory. In: J. T. Mortimer and M. J. Shanahan, eds. Handbook of the life 
course. New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, pp. 3–19
Fortunati, L., 2009. Gender and the mobile phone. In: G. Goggin and L. Hjorth, eds. Mobile 
technologies: from telecommunications to media. New York: Routledge, pp. 23–34.
Fortunati, L. and Taipale, S., 2012. Women’s emotions towards the mobile phone. Feminist 
Media Studies, 12(4), pp. 538–549.
Ganito, C., 2012. Moving time and juggling spheres: (i)mobilities in the gendering of the 
mobile phone by adult Portuguese women. Feminist Media Studies, 12(4), pp. 570–579.
Geser, H., 2004. Towards a sociological theory of the mobile phone. http://socio.ch/
mobile/t_geser1.pdf.
Geser, H., 2006a. Are girls (even) more addicted? Some gender patterns of cell phone 
usage. http://socio.ch/mobile/t_geser3.htm.
Geser, H., 2006b. Pre-teen cell phone adoption: consequences for later patterns of phone 
usage and involvement. http://socio.ch/mobile/t_geser2.htm.
Goggin, G., 2008. Cultural studies of mobile communication. In: J. Katz, ed., Handbook of 
mobile communication studies. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, pp. 353–366.
Grint, K. and Gill, R., eds., 1995. The gender-technology relation: contemporary theory 
and research. London: Taylor & Francis.
Haraway, D., 1988. Situated knowledges: the science question in feminism and the privi­
lege of partial perspective. Feminist Studies, 14(3), pp. 575–599.
Hareven, T. K. and Adams, K. J., eds., 1982. Ageing and life course transitions: an inter­
disciplinary perspective. London: Guilford Press.
Helsper, E. J., 2010. Gendered internet use across generations and life stages. 
Communication Research, 37(3), pp. 352–374.
Hjorth, L., 2005. Postal presence: a case study of mobile customisation and gender in 
Melbourne. In P. Glotz, S. Bertschi and C. Locke, eds., Thumb culture: the meaning 
of mobile phones for society. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, pp. 53–67.
Hjorth, L., 2007. Snapshots of almost contact: the rise of camera phone practices and a case 
study in Seoul, Korea. Continuum, 21(2), pp. 227–238.
Hjorth, L., 2009a. “It’s complicated”: a case study of women and mobile intimacy. www.
abs-center.si/gbccd/papers/P204.pdf.

Gendering the mobile phone  101
Hjorth, L., 2009b. Mobile media in the Asia-Pacific. New York: Routledge.
Hochschild, A., 1997. The time bind: when work becomes home and home becomes work. 
New York: Metropolitan Books.
Katz, J., 2006. Magic is in the air: mobile communication and the transformation of social 
life. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Kurniawan, S., 2006. An exploratory study of how older women use mobile phones. In: 
P. Dourish and A. Friday, eds. Ubicomp 2006: Ubiquitous Computing. Berlin: Springer.
Lee, D., 2005. Women’s creation of camera phone culture. Fibreculture 6. http://journal.
fibreculture.org/issue6/issue6_donghoo.html.
Lemish, D. and Cohen, A., 2005a. On the gendered nature of mobile phone culture in 
Israel. Sex Roles, 52(7–8), pp. 511–521.
Lemish, D. and Cohen, A., 2005b. Tell me about your mobile and I’ll tell you who you are: 
Israelis talk about themselves. In: R. Ling and P. E. Pedersen, eds. Mobile communica­
tions: re-negotiation of the social sphere. London: Springer, pp. 187–202.
Ling, R., 2001a. Adolescent girls and young adult men: two sub-cultures of the mobile 
telephone. Kjeller, Norway: Telenor R&D.
Ling, R., 2001b. “We release them little by little”: maturation and gender identity as seen 
in the use of mobile telephony. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 5, pp. 123–136.
Lohan, M., 2001. Men, masculinities and “mundane” technologies: the domestic telephone. 
In: E. Green and A. Adam, eds. Virtual gender: technology, consumption, and identity. 
London and New York: Routledge, pp. 149–162.
Marktest, 2006. O perfil do consumidor português [The profile of the Portuguese con­
sumer]. Lisbon: Marktest.
Maxwell, J. A., 1999. La modélisation de la recherche qualitative: une approche interac­
tive. Paris: Editions Universitaires.
Miller, D., 2004. The little black dress is the solution, but what is the problem? In: K. 
Ekström and H. Brembeck, eds. Elusive consumption. Oxford, UK: Berg, pp 113–127.
Mortimer, J. T. and Shanahan, M. J., eds., 2004. Handbook of the life course. New York: 
Springer.
Plant, S., 2001. On the mobile: the effects of mobile telephones on social and individual 
life. London: Motorola.
Rakow, L. and Navarro, V., 1993. Remote mothering and the parallel shift: women meet 
the cellullar telephone. Critical Studies in Mass Communication, 20(3), pp. 144–157.
Rice, R. and Katz, J., 2003. Comparing internet and mobile phone usage: digital divides 
of usage, adoption, and dropouts. Telecommunications Policy, 27(8–9), pp. 597–623.
Shade, L. R., 2007. Feminizing the mobile: gender scripting of mobiles in North America. 
Continuum: Journal of Media & Cultural Studies, 21(2), pp. 179–189.
Skog, B., 2002. Mobiles and the Norwegian teen: identity, gender and class. In: J. Katz, 
ed. Perpetual contact: mobile communications, private talk, public performance. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Soulet, M.-H., 2002. Gérer sa consommation. Drogues dures et enjeu de conventionnalité. 
Fribourg, Switzerland: Editions Universitaires Fribourg Suisse.
Turkle, S., 1984. The second self: computers and the human spirit. London: Granada.
Wajcman, J., 2004. Technofeminism. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Wajcman, J., 2007. From women and technology to gendered technoscience. Information, 
Communication & Society, 10(3), pp. 287–298.

8	
How young people experience 
elderly people’s use of digital 
technologies in everyday life
Leopoldina Fortunati
Introduction
The aim of this chapter is to investigate how young people experience the adop­
tion and use of everyday life technologies, such as television, radio, mobile 
phones and computers, by their grandparents and by elderly people in general. 
Due to the rapid ageing of populations in contemporary societies, the relative 
importance of older people as a target of both academic studies and as technol­
ogy users increases. According to the United Nations, there were 901 million 
people aged 60 or over, corresponding to 12 per cent of the global population, in 
2015. The size of this age group is growing at a rate of 3.26 per cent per year, and 
although Europe has the highest percentage of 60+ population (24 per cent) in the 
world, rapid ageing is occurring in all continents save Africa (UN, 2015, p. 7).
The importance of the older population also relates to the fact that they have 
become healthier and wealthier than in the past (Piketty, 2014) with more educa­
tion and more time to spend (Kearney, 2013). There is a burning need to better 
understand the magnitude of these changes in the nature of later life and the 
changing network of their family members who use various digital technologies 
to organise and maintain their everyday life. In this study, young people were key 
informants to examine older people’s use of digital technologies in Italy. In Italy, 
the student key informants have a typically direct and immediate relationship with 
older members of their families. They are also widely considered as the experts 
on technology within their families (Schofield Clark, 2013), and hence are par­
ticularly suitable to give first-hand information on the use of technology by their 
aged family members.
Older people and digital technologies
Older people are probably the least-studied age group in respect to ICT use and 
adoption (Richardson et al., 2011). Nowadays, the older population lives longer 
than before, and many will reach advanced old age (i.e. living well into their 
eighties and nineties). In many respects, they may even be in a better position 
than, for example, middle-aged adults today (Sarrica et al., 2014; Petrovčič et al., 
2015). Thanks to the media and the internet, many can keep themselves updated 

Young and elderly people’s use of ICT   103
and be informed about the latest innovations and news as well as stay in touch 
with friends and families through social media.
In Italy, the age group of 55–64 olds was the watershed in terms of internet 
use in 2014. In this age group, the share of internet users was 46 per cent. Among 
those older than 64 years of age, that figure drops to 12.5 per cent. These figures 
correspond to about 3.7 and 10.7 million internet non-users respectively (ISTAT, 
2015a, 2015b). According to the same ISTAT data (2015a, 2015b), there is still a 
large gender difference in the use of the internet among those aged 65 years and 
older (31 per cent of men vs 17 per cent of women). As many as 40 per cent report 
the lack of knowledge about the internet as the main reason for their not using it, 
and this only increases with greater age.
These social changes in later life are interrelated with changes that affect other 
generations (Bolin, 2016). For example, the number of elderly people living alone 
has increased because their adult children live away from them (Chattopadhyay 
and Marsh, 1999). The dissolution of nuclear families (Gutmann, 1987) and the 
erosion of traditional social norms shape the lives of elderly people all around the 
world. For example, Cheung and Yui-Huen Kwan (2009) found that in China, 
where filial piety is one of the cultural bulwarks of society (Savelsberg, 2002), the 
material performance of intergenerational solidarity cannot but decrease as adult 
children take up jobs and live in places far away from their parents (Sheng and 
Settles, 2006; Ye et al., 2014).
In this new context, the transmission of knowledge from one generation to 
another has changed direction. Young people are now the ones to teach their par­
ents and grandparents how to use digital devices (Oksman, 2006; Correa, 2014; 
Lim, 2016). As a consequence of this change, young people have started to per­
form a certain amount of (digital) immaterial labour, and hence gain kudos inside 
the family. Kennedy et al. (2015) examined the gendered distribution of expertise 
in the performance of ‘digital housekeeping’ required to maintain a networked 
home. They showed how differential, gendered access to and use of ICTs is over­
come inside the household, thanks to cooperation among family members. Such 
cooperation inside large families, between the older family members and the 
younger, technologically savant members may help mitigate generational digital 
divides (Vehovar et al., 2006).
In this chapter, I argue that not only is the distribution of digital expertise in con­
nection with digital housekeeping gendered, it is also organised intergenerationally 
within the family. Intergenerational digital housekeeping can be better understood and 
conceptualised by analysing the three characteristics of the social contract between 
parents and children. First of all, the ‘social contract’ established between parents 
and children is more deferred over time than that established between spouses. In the 
case of spouses, each contractor has to contribute to the wellbeing of the other on the 
basis of his/her material and immaterial capability. Spouses are expected to continu­
ously verify the contract, and yet the high number of divorces today shows that the 
binding force of marriage and marital ties is also getting weaker.
Different conditions apply to the parent-child contract, which is expected to 
change over the life course. It is based on the hope that children will take care of 

104  Leopoldina Fortunati
their parents as their material (if necessary) and immaterial resources decline, as 
the parents grow old. While parents are clearly owners of their capacity of parental 
reproduction, children are so, only partially. For this reason, the exchange between 
parents and children is in part immediate and unaware and in part is deferred until 
the children grow up and become adults (Fortunati, 1981). Historically, countries 
have developed different welfare systems to collectively respond to this need for 
care and support (Esping-Andersen, 1990), and when these responses are insuf­
ficient, the responsibility falls to family members, especially in Southern Europe.
Second, the parent-child ‘contract’ is weakened by its compulsory nature. 
Paternal, maternal and filial labour cannot circulate as in the free market, but can 
do so only inside the family to which these individuals belong. This means that 
the family constitutes an obligatory market in which such labour must operate 
and collaborate. Due to the compulsory nature of the contract, parent-child rela­
tionships are particularly problematic because children do not decide to be born, 
neither do they choose their parents (or vice versa).
Third, the contract between parents and children contains many elements of 
uncertainty, because a series of social reasons might affect the performance of 
the reproductive labour by children (and in some cases, of the grandchildren) 
towards their parents (and grandparents). For example, increases in the intensity 
of work and the extension of the working day, increasing commuting time, chil­
dren’s residential mobility and children’s family commitments, have resulted in 
unexpected social changes that in many cases have brought about an unequal 
distribution of public resources favouring the elderly. All these factors have 
become a serious impediment to honouring this contract of children taking care 
of their parents.
Bengtson and Oyama (2007, p. 9) have described the content of this con­
tract by referring to the expression of “intergenerational solidarity” (cf. also 
Silverstein and Bengtson, 1997; Silverstein et al., 2003). This construct is char­
acterised by “the behavioural and emotional dimensions of interaction, cohesion, 
sentiment, and support between parents and children, grandparents and grand­
children, over the course of long-term relationships” (Bengtson and Oyama, 
2007, p. 9). I would like to stress here the relevance of considering this process 
in the particular context of the immaterial labour carried out in the household. 
Digital housekeeping, which is necessary to maintain a networked home, is one 
of the domestic tasks that has now entered young people’s agendas, extending 
the nature of what constitutes immaterial or ‘reproductive’ labour.
The aim of this chapter is to investigate how young people have experienced 
the use of technology by their elderly family members over the last four years. 
The theories to which I anchor the design of this study, but that I also challenge, 
are domestication theory (Silverstone and Haddon, 1996) and the diffusion of 
innovations theory (Rogers, 1995). Specific research questions guiding this study 
are: i) how do youth describe the relationship between older people and digital 
technologies? and ii) how do they perceive their own engagement with digital 
housekeeping towards their elderly relatives? The next section is devoted to the 
description of the methodology applied in this study. Then I illustrate the results 

Young and elderly people’s use of ICT   105
of the study through the original words and expressions used by the young people 
who served as key informants. Finally, I end the chapter by discussing the results 
and providing some concluding remarks.
Method
In 2012, a group of undergraduates (N=23) studying for a Bachelor in Multimedia 
Sciences and Technologies at the University of Udine, Italy were asked to describe 
and reflect on their experiences of elderly people’s use of digital technologies. In 
2016, another group of 86 undergraduate students in the same course took part 
in the same study assignment. The majority of the students were males (61.5 per 
cent male; 38.5 per cent female). The age of the key informants ranged from 19 to 
22 years. They represented two regions of North-East Italy: Friuli Venezia-Giulia 
and Veneto. The students were expected to be particularly sensitive to the issue of 
digital technologies, since understanding their features and functionality was part 
of their course syllabus.
Following a series of studies based on similar methods (Fortunati and Vincent, 
2014; Taipale, 2014; Farinosi et al., 2015; Fortunati et al., 2015), the student 
key informants reported their observations and experiences in written form. They 
were asked to act as key informants, observe their grandparents’ technology 
use and reflect upon older people’s use of digital technologies in general. The 
students were also asked to describe their own engagement in digital housekeep­
ing towards elderly members of their family. Some students felt it necessary to 
conduct brief interviews with the elderly people they observed. These key inform­
ants’ reports should not be considered as windows to ‘reality’ but more as young 
people’s articulations of their experiences of and attitudes towards older people. 
The reports can be seen as instruments that convey youth’s perceptions of their 
grandparents and the older generation in general.
No specific instructions on how to write the reports were supplied, as the aim 
was to collect students’ spontaneous thoughts and their everyday observations. 
The written reports obtained in this way allow for more self-expression and spon­
taneity of content than in a classical structured interview. However, students were 
requested to observe and describe how their grandparents used ICTs in every­
day life in order to ensure students attended to the actual practices of use, and 
hence delivered more objective information. Epistemologically, this data collec­
tion method was motived by the will not to influence – if at all possible –the 
interaction between the key informants and the people who formed the focus of 
their study. The anonymity of the key informants and their family members was 
protected by reporting only the key informants’ first names and the initial letter 
of their surnames.
Qualitative content analysis was applied to analyse the reports, which were 
first broken down into discursive frames that captured the most frequently recur­
ring categories (Altheide, 1996). Categories with relatively low frequencies but 
possible importance for the clarification of some points of analysis were also 
retained and discussed, as Silverman (1997) advises. As the analysis progressed, 

106  Leopoldina Fortunati
at a certain point no new categories emerged indicating that informational redun­
dancy had been reached. The main assets of this methodological tool consist in 
the fact that it gives us new food to revise concepts or ideas taken-for-granted 
in the literature related to the topic investigated, and enables us to formulate new 
lines of research for future quantitative studies with more representative samples 
from the elderly population.
Analysis of the reports
The results emerging from these reports concern the key aspects of the relation­
ship between older people and digital technologies. The presentation of the results 
is organised according to the most frequently recurring categories representing 
the various discursive frames that emerged in these reports.
The long tail of domestication
In recent decades, many studies have adopted domestication theory as proposed 
by Silverstone and Haddon (1996) as a point of reference when exploring how 
users make sense of and appropriate new media. But then something happens to 
the domesticators once the domesticated technologies have become incorporated 
into the spaces and rhythms of their daily lives. In a personal communication in 
2012, Maria Bakarijeva wondered: “Do activities, relationships and roles in the 
household remain fundamentally the same, or may be some cultural and even 
civilizational changes take hold? Does the private sphere retain its basic structure, 
or does it undergo a significant re-configuration?”
While these questions are more than appropriate to understand the post-
domesticated world, in the case of the older population, they are not so timely. 
Many elderly people are still domesticating ICTs in their everyday life. This 
progress is under the eyes of all. The most recent EU-wide survey shows that the 
use of mobile phones among elderly people has increased at a very quick pace 
and that the use of personal computers and tablets is following close behind 
(Eurobarometer, 2016). However, many older people still seem to resist the 
adoption and use of new technologies. People aged 55 or more are less likely 
than younger age groups to embrace internet telephony, instant messaging, 
emails, social networks and even mobile telephony. Similarly, they consider 
online communications services and mobile internet less important than other, 
younger age groups. The key informant Valentina B. writes:
My grandparents, who are between 80 and 90 years, after having pur­
chased a mobile phone, have used it rarely and after a few attempts have 
not tried to use it anymore. They are not interested at all in domesticating 
the mobile phone.
These elderly people often have good reasons to resist digital technologies. They 
were not introduced to the new media until a later point in their lives, so their own 

Young and elderly people’s use of ICT   107
life histories demonstrate that they can live successfully without digital technolo­
gies. When these technologies spread out in society, the patterns of older persons’ 
personal, familiar and social behaviour and their everyday practices were already 
set and the ritualisation of their daily life was firmly established (Ling, 2008). In 
fact, many students report that their grandparents live very well without a com­
puter and a smartphone since they do not perceive them as useful for their life. As 
Claudio L. maintains:
My grandparents do not see the real utility of the new technologies and are 
convinced that having lived for most of their lives without these devices they 
can continue to do so. But when they have found themselves in a busy street 
with a broken car engine, they repented of not having the mobile phone.
Their weaker perception of (or engagement with) the zeitgeist of the times – that is 
the cultural, social and spiritual climax characterising any specific epoch – heavily 
influences the self-confident resistance of many elderly people. The research mate­
rial indicates that the reduced energy and shorter time horizon of elderly people 
attenuate their ability to keep up with and even perceive the changes of the zeitgeist. 
Moreover, their ability to recognise these technological changes is often lowered, 
not least because the pace of social-technological change is in sharp contrast to 
their own rhythm of life, which is generally much slower. Further, their reduced 
awareness of these changes seems to be metabolised through a more general lack 
of interest. This lack of interest is often used as an (emotional) explanation for not 
embracing the digital technologies that are characteristics of the zeitgeist. Massimo 
D. R. captures this point when he notes that:
My grandfather has had the same mobile phone for ten years. The technolo­
gies that the elderly have are old because they become old with them.
But there are of course many interesting exceptions like the following, as 
Simone C. explains:
My grandmother is 96 and is a very lucid and intelligent person. She reads the 
newspaper every day, watches television, has had a mobile phone for years. 
Some months ago she asked me to teach her how to use a computer and the 
internet because she wants to keep up with the times.
In addition, generations employ different types of symbolisation. For young peo­
ple and adults, the new technologies represent a ‘window on the world’; a way to 
be in tune with the zeitgeist. In contrast, for some of the elderly people observed 
by the students, the new technologies seemed to represent a way of feeling young. 
For example, Chiara De P. reveals that:
My grandparents have learnt quickly to use the mobile phone, maybe because 
they were really motivated or because they wanted to ‘feel young’.

108  Leopoldina Fortunati
It is not surprising that elderly people feel young when using a mobile phone, 
since this device is deeply embedded in the narratives of modernisation, and its 
use is typically associated with a young or youthful lifestyle. However, the reports 
also reveal that many elderly people prefer not to look at the world through a tech­
nological window. This reluctance towards adopting digital technologies explains 
why the motivation to purchase and use these technologies is often quite weak in 
this age group. It also explains why older people often become owners and users 
of digital technologies, such as mobile phones, only when the devices are gifted 
to them by their children or grandchildren (cf. Piper et al., 2016).
Another interesting issue that these reports describe is well-known to scholars 
who study the diffusion and adoption of ICTs: namely, that the ownership of a 
device does not always coincide with its use. Some elderly people formally own a 
device but do not use it, while others do not own but occasionally use that of their 
children or grandchildren. In this connection, Andrea F. reports:
My grandmother is 92. Last month my brother went to Spain for an Erasmus 
exchange period. Thus, I set up a Skype call between us and him. Also, my 
grandmother participated. She was serious and excited as she was participat­
ing in a Skype conversation for the first time.
Erika F. states that her grandparents often ask her to go on Facebook in order to 
acquire information about relatives who live overseas and to see pictures of their 
great-grandchildren. Not only do grandparents ask for help, but sometimes so too 
do their elderly neighbours. Manuele D. M. reports that sometimes his 65-year-old 
neighbour asks him to download results of some medical tests. Since the results of 
the medical tests carried out in Italy are only available online, having a grandchild 
or a young neighbour becomes essential for those, such as older persons, who are 
not familiar with computer technology. In the reports, a clear distinction is often 
made between those elderly persons who became familiar with new technologies 
during their working life, and those who spent most of their lives without using 
any digital technology. Manuele D. M., for example, reports that the cousin of 
his grandfather, who is 91 years old, uses a computer to search for economic and 
financial information, given that he used to work in a bank. Sometimes elderly 
people can surprise youth with their skill and knowhow, as Stefano C. describes:
My grandmother, having seen that I own a Nintendo DS console for playing 
videogames, asked me if she could try. She proposed some videogames I did 
not know and that she had discovered thanks to TV advertising.
However, in most of these reports, the elderly people depict more their ease with 
analogue technologies such as the old media (newspapers and radio) and older 
domestic appliances (such as washing machines, irons and ovens). What is prob­
lematic for many elderly people is the digital technologies and their interface. 
Unlike the analogue instruments that had few and very simple push key buttons, 
digital technologies require the user to follow a precise path of menus and touch 

Young and elderly people’s use of ICT   109
buttons to work properly. This shift, which entails a lack of push button imme­
diacy and increased complexity in use, is challenging for many elderly people.
Thus, it appears that for many older people, the problem is not the technol­
ogy itself but the digital technologies and their interface. In many cases, they 
tend to treat the digital technologies as if they were analogue devices operated 
according to analogue rules. With their more limited skills and experiences, 
older people often try to de-digitalise the device and make it simple to use. As 
Piero M. explains:
The problem with the elderly is that while they were all forced to switch to 
the DTT (digital terrestrial television), their use of the television continued to 
be exactly like in the analogue regime. They look at the same channels they 
used to see before, without taking any advantage from the digital.
The challenge of digital television for elderly people
As Eurobarometer (2016) reports, in every EU member state mobile telephony 
is considered by far the most important communication device in people’s daily 
lives (74 per cent), followed by mobile internet (34 per cent) and fixed land­
line telephony (32 per cent). Similarly, internet connections (52 per cent) and 
online communication services (46 per cent) are considered to be two of the most 
important digital services. Regarding both these issues, there is a considerable 
‘generation gap’. In the case of older people, this also takes the form of a different 
ranking of technologies that are considered important, when compared with the 
rankings of other age groups. According to the study at hand, the most important 
device for older people was neither the mobile phone nor the computer-internet, 
but the television.
In elderly people’s repertoire, the TV is the most essential of all technolo­
gies. This essentiality has made the digitalisation of the television, carried out 
as a result of a European level political decision, a particular problem for many 
elderly people. Whereas the modernisation of the landline telephone happened 
outside the device itself, through the advent of the mobile phone, television 
has been modernised by means of its digitalisation. In Italy, the landline phone 
continues to be a well-established part of elderly people’s lives and maybe is 
still the most important channel through which family and social relationships 
are maintained. With regard to the mobile phone, it may be said that they are 
still domesticating it.
However, as social networks often narrow with age, the need for media that 
entertains and keeps older people informed about the world increases – providing 
also the mediated presence of other people on the other side of the screen. For 
today’s elderly population, television is a crucial device through which they organ­
ise and shape a large part of their social life. Now, digital television is at the core of 
elderly people’s media consumption and helps them to pass the time and get through 
to the end of the day. Yet digital television poses many problems for those who have 
managed to domesticate it with some degree of difficulty. As Chiara S. writes:

110  Leopoldina Fortunati
In my grandmother’s life (96-year-old) the most important problem is the 
DTT. Sometimes it happens that the channel programming is bust because 
of the bad weather or some other difficulty in receiving a clean signal. Not 
being able to reprogram the television she cannot follow the programs in her 
favourite channels, such as Telechiara, RAI 1 and Channel 4.
To make this crucial technology – DTT – function for them, the students state that 
their grandparents often request their assistance in reprogramming the television 
and restoring their preferred channels.
Gender issues
Statistics on the diffusion and use of digital technologies show that gender is an 
important mediating influence that increases with age. Among younger genera­
tions, the differences in the use of digital devices between teenage boys and 
girls are smaller than those among older age groups, especially older people 
(e.g. Eurostat, 2013). In the case of the elderly population, the stringent power 
of social structures and normative expectations shapes the unequal gendered 
use of ICT more powerfully than among younger users. However, the students’ 
reports analysed here reveal some interesting insights into their families, who 
mainly belong to a lower middle class. The key informants report gender dif­
ferences concerning the propensity towards using different types of technology. 
Women, as expected, are more familiar and at ease with domestic appliances 
than men. Mariateresa M. writes:
My maternal grandmother is 82 years old and has a good relationship 
with technology, especially for household appliances. She knows very 
well how to use the dishwasher, washing machine, microwave oven and 
vacuum cleaner.
Unexpectedly in this research, many men were reported to be less comfortable 
with digital technologies than women. This finding in a certain sense supports 
the line of discourse that conceptualises ICTs as tools for challenging tired gen­
der roles and for pursuing women’s empowerment (Ganito, 2010; Tacchi et al., 
2012). Probably many of the older men observed by the students had not been 
exposed to the use of ICTs in their working life. By contrast, women had had 
the experience and gained familiarity with domestic appliances and with landline 
phones, given that they usually had the principle communicative role to network 
with relatives and friends. For instance, Graziella E. F. notices that the grand­
mother of her friend makes calls via WhatsApp and also shares photos and videos. 
Stefano C. continues by writing:
While my grandmother, although she has always worked as housewife, is 
capable and curious towards the communication tools, my grandfather, who 
is a retired bank employee is unprepared to use the new technologies.

Young and elderly people’s use of ICT   111
Stefano C., whose grandmother’s knowledge about the Nintendo console sur­
prised him, also observed the gender difference between his grandmother and 
grandfather, writing that: “By contrast, my grandfather has a mobile phone but he 
does not use it, [and] has a computer but he often prefers to use a typewriter for 
making documents”.
Morena C.’s report points in the same direction. She writes: “My grandfather 
interacts badly with technological innovations, while my grandmother tries her 
best to use them”. These excerpts seem to lead to the conclusion that elderly 
women are generally more open towards digital technologies than men. Thus, 
they seem to confirm that the perception of the gendered competence of ICT use is 
often incorrectly stereotyped and does not correspond to the gendered skill levels 
observed in everyday life (Hargittai and Shafer, 2006).
Practices of digital housekeeping: the relationship between elderly 
and young people
The reports are replete with examples of digital housekeeping practices per­
formed by young people in their families. Almost all the students report that they 
have taught grandparents to use DTT, mobile phones and the computer/internet. 
These warm experts, to use Bakardjieva’s (2005) expression, have not only taught 
elderly family members how to use these devices but they report that they take 
care of these devices all the time, e.g. digital television needs to be reprogrammed, 
or the sound in the mobile needs to be reactivated, etc.
Given that, as we have already mentioned, younger family members are often 
considered the true experts on technology (Berg et al., 2005), as they are the ones 
whose responsibility it is to patiently assist the elderly members of the family in 
their dealings with technology. The most frequent task for Matteo C. is:
[t]o help retune the television or tune-up the mobile phone, check if it still 
has credit or if it has received messages or even to delete received messages. 
Other times the help is needed for the purchase or installation of new appli­
ances that have become too complicated for an old person. More rarely I help 
my grandmother to look for something on the internet, such as recipes or 
information, or to purchase train tickets to go and find some sister who lives 
far away.
But how do elderly people themselves see young people’s relationship with digi­
tal technologies? According to Adriano A., the three old ladies he interviewed 
stated that they were convinced that mobile phones, instead of keeping people in 
contact, create inopportune and impolite situations, such as making and receiving 
calls while eating. These ladies furthermore argued that:
[n]ew technologies and above all social networks are creating quite a stir 
among the youth and are making them slaves of a virtual world in which you 
no longer need some good manners or have direct contact with their own kind.

112  Leopoldina Fortunati
Many reasons behind older people’s resistance towards adopting the new tech­
nologies can be understood by analysing how they perceive the use of digital 
technologies by youth. The reports clearly revealed the elderly person’s disap­
proval with youth’s manner of using digital technologies. For instance, the 
90-year-old grandmother of Daniele D. P. says that: “I like the new technologies 
but not the new generation, because I see many youth losing a lot of time to play 
with those devices, the mobile phones”. Many elderly people see that their grand­
children are continuously distracted because of their constant engagement with 
their mobile phone and/or their computer. They also argue that these technologies 
do not increase the ability of their grandchildren to communicate but have the 
opposite effect. Daniele B. notices the elderly person’s negative judgement on 
the effects that digital technology has on youth. He reports that his grandmother 
often says: “you guys are always fixed on the screen and you do not communicate 
with anyone”.
Sara M. reports that her grandfather takes concrete measures against the use of 
the technologies by his children and grandchildren. Each time they go to visit him, 
he puts all their mobile phones in a drawer because he does not want them to inter­
fere with their meetings. At other times, the key informants seemed to appreciate 
the elderly person’s life style as they find it more authentic. For example, Elisa A., 
who has a 98-year-old grandfather, notices that:
Although he shows disinterest towards the new technologies, my grandfather’s 
life is much more ‘true’ and direct than that of her generation. Discussions 
were not interrupted by some telephone and nobody was hidden behind a 
screen. They look inside their eyes, weighing the words that they say.
But in some cases, there were very proactive reflections arising from the young 
key informants about the things that older people wanted from this technology. 
According to Paolo B.:
The questions that my grandparents ask me most often are: “Which button do 
I press to make the writing on the TV go away?” Or “What buttons do I press 
to ensure that the light on the phone stops blinking?” Elderly people are not 
interested to find the cause of why something happens but they try to return 
everything to normal as soon as possible.
For older people, it would be important to use intelligent voice func­
tions that respond to the questions on the issues they have when they use 
a mobile phone. Another thing I really miss in technological products for 
[the] elderly are clear instructions that explain in a simple and understand­
able way the functions and that take as a reference the old user. A very 
trivial example would be the explanation of the functions of all the buttons 
on a remote control of a television set.
The digital housekeeping work of young people that combines digital competence, 
careful observation and the immediate experience of their own grandparents’ 

Young and elderly people’s use of ICT   113
attitudes and behaviours promises to become a significant resource for develop­
ing new technological innovations for older people, as well as a way of learning 
essential skills for using the devices and maintaining them.
Changes between 2012 and 2016
The reports from the two groups of students made possible a qualitative longitu­
dinal inquiry into changes in the practices of ICT use by elderly people. However, 
the content of the reports collected in 2012 were not so different when compared 
with the reports collected most recently, in 2016. Perhaps the time span is rela­
tively short; however, as the number of elderly people who have already engaged 
with new technologies in their adult life increases each year, I consider it impor­
tant to analyse what kind of changes, if any, can be detected from the research 
material from the two cohorts of student informants.
The most notable difference is the increasing variety of digital media that 
is entering the technological ecology of elderly people in 2016. Andrea A. 
talks about the cordless phone that his 93-year-old grandmother uses normally. 
Davide A. reports that today it is not rare “to find elderly who, to keep pace with 
the times, send their best wishes on WhatsApp or ‘Likes’ a post in Facebook”. 
Eleonora B. states that her grandmother asked for help regarding the use of 
WhatsApp. Adriano A. had interviewed two friends of his grandmother: the 
average age of all three ladies was 75 years. He was surprised to discover that 
two out of three had a smartphone, one had a computer and an email account, 
and two owned a flat screen TV with integrated digital receiver.
The presence of an increasing variety of digital media in elderly people’s lives 
probably should be read as a kind of countermeasure. They are realising that given 
the current turmoil of mobility that has affected their children’s lives, they often 
have to live far away from them. Likewise, their children in turn are often too 
busy in their everyday life (their work and their family) to have the possibility of 
being present in the lives of their parents with any degree of significant continuity. 
Thus, they are considering more seriously activating technologies that will enable 
them to continue living independently while staying in contact with their children 
and grandchildren. Elena B writes:
I know, many young elderly (65 years) who are adapting to new technologies, 
so that they learnt to use a smartphone, Facebook, WhatsApp. Some also 
have an iPod and listen to music more modern than me (I listen mostly to 60s 
music strictly on CD).
Older people’s use of the new media is not always appropriate, however, and they 
often behave like novices. As GianMarco A. observes:
[h]aving discovered these technologies late in life they are not really aware of 
what they use. It often happens that they publish pictures of small children or pri­
vate photos in their Facebook page naively, not knowing that it can be dangerous.

114  Leopoldina Fortunati
The elderly person’s naivety (Livingstone and Bober, 2006) can be a problem 
because they approach the new media, as we saw before, with the same attitude 
they applied towards analogue technologies, which can have unpleasant conse­
quences for them.
In 2016, several elderly people were reported to be attracted by online games. 
Generally, analogue card games had been more popular among elderly people 
in the past. Card games were considered good for memory and developing men­
tal strategies important for the maintenance of cognitive abilities. Nowadays, 
playing online cards games and videogames are practices that are spreading rap­
idly among elderly people. Gloria N. reports that her 77-year-old grandmother, 
Gioia, has a Nintendo GameCube which she uses to play Super Mario and other 
games. Two years ago, the family gave her an iPad on which to play cards when 
alone, since gaming has been her passion. She enjoys this very much and is now 
climbing the world rankings in some games!
Discussion and final remarks
In the students’ reports, there was little trace of generational consciousness in 
relation to new technology. Probably this stems from the social isolation in which 
many elderly persons live, which limits the possibility for them to feel any strong 
sense of belonging to or identifying with their own cohorts, or in creating a sense 
of identity with technology and a feeling of solidarity with their peers. This lack 
of reported generational consciousness may be also due to the fact that their peers 
remind them very vividly of the difficulties and the limits of the stage of life they 
are living – and instil caution about identifying too strongly with such an iden­
tity. While the construct of generation can create strength and closeness among 
youth who have a life ahead of them to build, among older people who, day after 
day, see their friends pass away, the same construct may not give them the same 
resources or provide the same support and sense of belonging. The peers of these 
grandfathers and grandmothers are relatively weak social agents, and probably 
any generational identity for them threatens ghettoisation and marginalisation 
rather than strength.
Many interesting points have emerged from this research regarding elderly peo­
ple’s life stage that have enabled me to offer some answers to my first research 
question: How do youth describe the relationship between the elderly and digital 
technologies? The domestication theory turned out to still be effective in under­
standing the gaze of youth on elderly people’s engagement (or lack of) in the process 
of making sense and activating digital technologies. It enabled us to understand that 
the elderly practise domestication in a peculiar way and grasp domestication theory 
more profoundly. First, for the elderly the problem is not the technology itself, but 
rather the particular logic of digital technologies. As described above, among the 
digital technologies, the main concern is related to the digital television, since it 
is the most important technology for them but also the most difficult to manage. 
Second, the strategy they apply most frequently in the use of the new technologies 
is their de-digitalisation, that is, their attempt to make them more similar to the 

Young and elderly people’s use of ICT   115
analogue technologies and thus simpler to use. Third, the process of domestica­
tion, which usually imposes a roadmap adhering to the dynamics of changes of the 
zeitgeist, is obliged to incorporate the much slower rhythm of the elderly, which 
is discordant with that typical of digital technologies. According to the students’ 
reports, the elderly have a drastically different perception of zeitgeist in comparison 
with younger family members. Whereas the digital technologies have in their DNA 
a continuous updating and require a metacommunication strategy to learn how to 
use them, the elderly are used to a direct learning, which, once consolidated, tends 
to remain unchanged over time without requiring further learning. Fourth, the use 
of digital technologies is often carried out by the elderly through the devices of their 
children and grandchildren. This type of use probably escapes the large surveys, 
like those mentioned at the beginning of the chapter, on the diffusion and adoption 
of new technologies.
The analysed reports also provide interesting insights into the fact that elderly 
women appear much more curious and open to new technologies than men. This 
finding too remains somehow hidden in the large surveys on the diffusion and use 
of digital technologies, in which older women appear as the weakest users of tech­
nology. Furthermore, several important suggestions came from our respondents 
for improving the design of technologies, especially of the mobile phone, for the 
elderly. It also emerged that between 2012 and 2016, a higher degree of domes­
tication was retrieved: new media, such as tablets and iPods, social networks like 
Facebook and mobile messenger applications like WhatsApp, have begun to arrive 
in the lives of the elderly. The larger variety of digital technologies present in the 
elderly’s houses we investigated in 2016 shows that although de-digitalisation has 
remained the main strategy of domestication of the new technology, the elderly are 
now more available to encounter new languages and functions.
Regarding my second research question: How do youth perceive their own 
engagement in the digital housekeeping towards the elderly?, the role of youth 
in the digital housekeeping of elderly people emerged as quite serious and con­
tinuous. The students stated many times that they helped their grandparents 
to learn how to use these technologies by acting as warm, savant teachers and 
that any time their grandparents needed it, they provided support. Thus, my 
proposal that the distribution of digital expertise in connection to digital house­
keeping is not only gendered but also intergenerational, finds support in this 
study. This finding resonates also with many quantitative studies, which found 
that the elderly who have grandchildren are the most skilful in technology and 
are technologically oriented (Hunt, 2012).
This finding also has implications on the diffusion of innovations theory 
(Rogers, 1995) since it sheds light on the specific mechanism of the transfer of 
innovation. For this theory, the laggards are the last to adopt an innovation, are 
generally focused on traditions and are typically in contact with only family and 
close friends. They arrive at the adoption through some communication chan­
nels that permit the transfer of information from one unit or group to another. 
The transfer of innovation from an individual or group to another is generally 
depicted as a linear phase, but the present study highlights how this process can 

116  Leopoldina Fortunati
be contradictory and thus obstruct the adoption of innovation. In this study, the 
elderly are clearly laggards as the time for them to adopt the digital technolo­
gies is quite long. The transfer of knowledge about new technologies comes, in 
this case, from their children and grandchildren, who are presumably innovators 
or early adopters. However, this transfer is ambivalent since, on the one hand, 
elderly people receive encouragement and support from their grandchildren 
regarding the adoption and use of the digital technologies. On the other, they are 
discouraged from approaching new technologies by the technological life style 
of their grandchildren of which they disapprove. The observation and evalua­
tion of the practices of ICT use by their grandchildren and youth in general do 
not push them towards the appropriation of these technologies. The ambivalent 
meaning of the message that passes through the transfer is a factor that probably 
delays the elderly’s adoption of digital technologies.
On the whole, these data suggest the need to redesign the questions in quantita­
tive surveys regarding technology use in later life. First, the relationship between 
possession and use could be split in two; the role of elderly women, which needs 
to be investigated beyond the stereotypical assumptions with which we generally 
approach it; and second, the role of youth who ‘take care’ of their grandpar­
ents quite seriously (their digital housekeeping is a kind of domestic immaterial 
labour, which is never counted). More qualitative research on the relationship 
between elderly people and new technologies is needed in the future to better 
understand the unexpected findings that emerged in this study and the specific 
features that characterise this relationship, depending on whether elderly people 
are in their seventies, eighties or nineties. Further qualitative research is needed 
to better understand the limitations that such technologies possess in forging an 
intragenerational, rather than an intergenerational identity.
References
Altheide, D. L., 1996. Qualitative media analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Bakardjieva, M., 2005. Internet society: the internet in everyday life. London: SAGE.
Bengtson, V. L. and Oyama, P. S., 2007. Intergenerational solidarity: strengthening 
economic and social ties. New York: United Nations.
Berg, E., Mörtberg, C. and Jansson, M., 2005. Emphasizing technology: socio-technical 
implications. Information Technology and People, 18(4), pp. 343–358.
Bolin, G., 2016. Media generations: experience, identity and mediatised social change. 
New York: Routledge.
Chattopadhyay, A. and Marsh, R., 1999. Changes in living arrangement and familial sup­
port for the elderly in Taiwan: 1963–1991. Journal of Comparative Family Studies, 
30(3), pp. 523–537.
Cheung, C.-K. and Kwan A. Y.-H., 2009. The erosion of filial piety by modernisation in 
Chinese cities. Ageing & Society, 29(2), pp. 179–198.
Correa, T., 2014. Bottom-up technology transmission within families: exploring how youths 
influence their parents’ digital media use with dyadic data. Journal of Communication, 
64(1), pp. 103–124.
Esping-Andersen, G., 1990. The three worlds of welfare capitalism. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.

Young and elderly people’s use of ICT   117
Eurobarometer, 2016. E-communications and the digital single market. Special 
Eurobarometer 438. www.eena.org/download.asp?item_id=177.
Eurostat, 2013. Devices used for mobile connection to the internet. Special module 2012: 
mobile connection to the internet. http://ec.europa. eu/eurostat/web/products-datasets/-/
isoc_cimobi_dev.
Farinosi, M., Lim, C. and Roll, J., 2015. Book or screen, pen or keyboard? A cross-cultural 
sociological analysis of writing and reading habits basing on Germany, Italy and the 
UK. Telematics & Informatics, 33(2), p. 410–421
Fortunati, L., 1981. L’arcano della riproduzione: casalinghe, prostitute, operaie e capital. 
Venice, Italy: Marsilio.
Fortunati, L. and Vincent, J., 2014. Sociological insights on the comparison of writing/reading 
on paper with writing/reading digitally. Telematics & Informatics, 31(1), pp. 39–51.
Fortunati, L., Taipale, S. and Farinosi, M., 2015. Print and online newspapers as material 
artefacts. Journalism, 16(6), pp. 830–846.
Ganito, C., 2010. Women on the move: the mobile phone as a gender technology. 
Comunicação & Cultura, 9, pp. 77–88.
Gutmann, D., 1987. Reclaimed powers: toward a new psychology of men and women in 
later life. Chicago, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Hargittai, E. and Shafer, S., 2006. Differences in actual and perceived online skills: the role 
of gender. Social Science Quarterly, 87(2), 432–448.
Hunt, D. M., 2012. Technology and the grandparent-grandchild relationship: learning 
and interaction. Master’s thesis. The University of Toledo, Ohio, USA.
ISTAT, 2015a. Internet@Italia 2014. L’uso di internet da parte di cittadini e imprese. 
Rome: ISTAT.
ISTAT, 2015b. Italia in cifre. Rome: ISTAT.
Kearney, A. T., 2013. Understanding the needs and consequences of the ageing con­
sumer. The Consumer Goods Forum, Korea. www.theconsumergoodsforum.com/files/
Publications/ageing_consumer_report.pdf.
Kennedy, J., Nansen, B., Arnold, M., Wilken, R. and Gibbs, M., 2015. Digital housekeepers 
and domestic expertise in the networked home. Convergence, 21(4), pp. 408–422.
Lim, S. S., ed., 2016. Mobile communication and the family. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: 
Springer.
Ling, R., 2008. The elderly and texting. The Information Society, 24(5), pp. 334–341.
Livingstone, S. and Bober, M., 2006. Regulating the internet at home: contrasting the 
perspectives of children and parents. In: D. Buckingham and R. Willett, eds. Digital 
generations: children, young people and new media. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 
pp. 93–113.
Oksman, V., 2006. Young people and seniors in Finnish “mobile information society”. 
Journal of Interactive Media in Education, 2. http://doi.org/10.5334/2006–3.
Petrovčič, A., Fortunati, L., Vehovar, V., Kavčič, M. and Dolničar, V., 2015. Mobile phone 
communication in social support networks of older adults in Slovenia. Telematics and 
Informatics, 32(4), pp. 642–655.
Piketty, T., 2014. Capital in the twenty-first century. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Piper, A. M., Cornejo Garcia, R. and Brewer, R. N., 2016. Understanding the challenges 
and opportunities of smart mobile devices among the oldest old. International Journal 
of Mobile Human Computer Interaction, 8(2), pp. 83–98.
Richardson, M., Zorn, T. E. and Weaver, C. K., 2011. Older people and new communica­
tion technologies: narratives from the literature. In: C. T. Salmon, ed. Communication 
Yearbook 35. London: Taylor & Francis, pp. 121–154.

118  Leopoldina Fortunati
Rogers, E., 1995. Diffusion of innovations. New York: The Free Press.
Sarrica, M., Fortunati, L. and Contarello, A., 2014. New technologies, ageing and social 
well-being in a South-Italian context. In: T. Denison, M. Sarrica and L. Stillman, eds. 
Theories, practices and examples for community and social informatics. Melbourne, 
Australia: Monash University Publishing, pp. 19–44.
Savelsberg, J. J., 2002. Dialectics of norms in modernization. Sociological Quarterly, 
43(2), pp. 277–305.
Schofield Clark, L., 2013. The parent app: understanding families in the digital age. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Sheng, X. and Settles, B. H., 2006. Intergenerational relationships and elderly care in 
China: a global perspective. Current Sociology, 54(2), pp. 293–313.
Silverman, D., ed., 1997. Doing qualitative research: theory, method, and practice. 
London: SAGE.
Silverstein, M. and Bengtson, V. L., 1997. Intergenerational solidarity and the structure of 
adult-child parent relationships in American families. American Journal of Sociology, 
103(2), pp. 429–460.
Silverstein, M., Bengtson, V. L. and Litwak, E., 2003. Theoretical approaches to problems 
of families, aging, and social support in the context of modernization. In: S. Biggs, 
A. Lowenstein and J. Hendricks, eds. The need for theory: critical approaches to social 
gerontology. Amityville, NY: Baywood, pp. 181–199.
Silverstone, R. and Haddon, L., 1996. Design and the domestication of information and 
communication technologies: technical change and everyday life. In: R. Mansell 
and R. Silverstone, eds. Communication by design: the politics of information and 
communication technologies. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, pp. 44–74.
Tacchi, J., Kitner, K. R. and Crawford, K., 2012. Meaningful mobility: gender, develop­
ment and mobile phones. Feminist Media Studies, 12(4), 528–537.
Taipale, S., 2014. The affordances of reading/writing on paper and digitally in Finland. 
Telematics & Informatics, 31(4), pp. 532–542.
UN, 2015. World population prospects: the 2015 revision, key findings and advance tables. 
Working Paper No. ESA/P/WP.241. https://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/publications/files/
key_findings_wpp_2015.pdf.
Vehovar, V., Sicherl, P., Hüsing, T. and Dolničar, V., 2006. Methodological challenges of 
digital divide measurements. The Information Society, 22(5), pp. 279–290.
Ye, W., Sarrica, M. and Fortunati, L., 2014. A study on Chinese bulletin board system 
forums: how internet users contribute to set up contemporary notions of family and 
marriage. Information, Communication & Society, 17(7), pp. 889–905.

9	
ICTs and client trust in the care 
of old people in Finland
Helena Hirvonen
Introduction
As one of the Nordic welfare states, Finland offers some of the world’s longest-
established universal provision of health and social care services for its elderly 
citizens. However, these support systems have come under financial pressure in 
recent decades. Scarcity of public resources and efforts to increase efficiency 
now motivate the development of welfare services. Technology is a key fac­
tor influencing public policy-making in Finland, among other postindustrial 
countries (UN E-government, 2014) and, as a result, the knowledge economy 
and technology-assisted control and regulation of services are increasingly seen 
as solutions to the crises of the public service economy. The Finnish govern­
ment emphasises digitalisation of public services as one of its strategic priorities 
(Strategic Government Programme, 2016). Strong optimism and hopes of more 
flexible and efficient service production, better civic participation, improved 
transparency, documentation, quality and comparability of service outputs 
validate digitalisation (Ministry of Social Affairs and Health, 2015). Due to 
growing service demand and the fiscal crisis, more is now expected of family 
members as carers of old people, while information and communication tech­
nologies (ICTs) and digitalisation of services are highlighted as solutions to 
improve public service performance (Jolanki et al., 2013).
Yet, digitalisation is not only a technological transformation for public ser­
vice organisations and workplaces, but also a cultural and social one. On the one 
hand, care professionals are key actors in reasserting citizens’ trust, while on the 
other, the rather hidden role of (un)paid family carers as primary care takers of 
older relatives has come to the fore in recent years. As intergenerational help and 
care is mostly provided between dispersed households, ICTs provide an important 
tool for coordinating between informal and formal care and help. There is a vast 
literature on the adoption and use of ICTs in different organisational settings of 
care work and on the co-construction of new technologies and the body (Haddon 
et al., 2008). However, the question of how implementation of ICTs affects the 
formation of trust between participants in these relationships, and between them 
and the care service system, has not been studied in depth.
Trust is an important vehicle to reduce and deal with complexity in technologi­
cal societies, and the digitalisation of welfare services poses specific challenges in 

120  Helena Hirvonen
the formation of trust in health and social care work. Care involves technical and 
medical expertise, but also more intangible aspects of personal service, bodywork 
and emotional orientation to the needs of another human being (Tronto, 1993). 
These cannot always be captured or replaced with ICT. Following Luhmann 
(1979), the trust that welfare service users develop towards the welfare state and 
its service system ultimately depends on individual encounters and the personal 
trust that is created between service users and care professionals in face-to-face 
encounters. To date, research about professional–citizen relations strongly shows 
that face-to-face-encounters are very important for the emergence of trust in these 
relations (Hirvonen, 2014). Meanwhile, expert knowledge of care professionals 
is increasingly questioned in contemporary knowledge societies (Santiago and 
Carvalho, 2015), obliging professionals to use a growing amount of ICT-mediated 
accountability work, such as reporting and registering of tasks and activities in 
various electronic databases.
What does the (at least partial) substitution of face-to-face encounters by digi­
tal encounters mean for trust in the context of formal and informal elderly care? 
This chapter aims to gain insight into this question. It analyses cultural and social 
transformation brought on by the use of ICTs (namely mobile phones and comput­
ers) in the care of old people. The analysis is based on qualitative data collected 
from caring family members of old people (n=12) and elder care professionals 
(n=12). The chapter strives to answer the question of how the growing use of ICT 
affects trust in care relationships. The system level trust – citizens’ confidence 
in the competence of public services – has remained high in Finland (Kouvo 
et al., 2012). However, a recent survey suggests that only half of the people in the 
75–89 age group trust getting help and care from the public service sector, while 
nearly 80 per cent trust getting help and care from family members and next of 
kin (Aging and Housing, 2012; Jolanki et al., 2013). This is contrary to previous 
research claiming that trust tends to increase with age (on the ageing effect, see 
Robinson and Jackson, 2001).
The decline in the overall level of trust (the period effect) could partly result 
from the paradigm shift in Finnish elder care policies. In light of these changes, 
it is important to study if, how and to what end ICTs mediate trust in the care of 
elderly people. The great variation within the old age cohorts in terms of indi­
viduals’ cognitive capacities, quality of kinship ties and ICT readiness can further 
increase inequality in old people’s opportunities for a good quality of life. The 
chapter begins with an introduction of the context of elderly care in Finland, and 
the conceptual framework applied in the study. It then introduces the data and 
methods, followed by results and concluding remarks.
ICT and the care of old people in Finland
I use a broad definition of ICTs in this chapter, with an emphasis on conventional 
technologies, such as mobile phones, computers and the internet. The definition 
follows from descriptions used by the informants in the two data sets used in 
this study. In the case of care professionals, ICTs were described as software 

ICTs in care of old people in Finland  121
and devices, such as computers, hand-held devices and mobile phones. With 
almost 80 per cent of elderly people in Finland owning a mobile phone (Intosalmi 
et al., 2013), the market for so-called assistive technologies for old people living 
at home is rapidly growing. In line with these statistics, the ICT described and 
used the most by caring family members in this study was the mobile phone.
Following Kröger and Leinonen (2011), care of older people in Finland can 
best be described as a loosely coordinated web formed by actors in four realms: 
informal, public, private and voluntary. The focus in this study is on the infor­
mal and public provision of help and care, representing the two main ways of 
organising elder care. Informal care and help by family members is the most 
general and often the only source of help for old people (Kröger and Leinonen, 
2011). While there are more expectations than before, especially on the involve­
ment of adult children in the care of their old parents, most family members 
assist their relatives while themselves remaining in the labour market full time. 
Importantly, there is no legal obligation on families to provide care or financial 
support to older people in Finland.
In official policy, the role of family members remains complementary to 
local municipalities who are responsible for forming public welfare policies 
and providing care services (Kröger and Leinonen, 2011). The coverage and the 
contents of care services have changed rather dramatically in Finland since the 
1990s. Before that, almost all institutional and home care services were organ­
ised and provided as public services by municipalities, but since the mid-1990s 
marketisation of care services has been a strong trend in Finland (Anttonen 
and Häikiö, 2011). Today, care of old people involves various actors, including 
municipal home care services, private and non-profit service providers, as well 
as family members. The changes represent erosion of the idea of universalism. 
Meanwhile, living at home in advanced age has become an important welfare 
policy goal in the twenty-first century (Kröger and Leinonen, 2011; Aging and 
Housing, 2012). However, an increase in the number of older people in poor 
condition as well as the scarcity of resources have led many municipalities to 
tighten the criteria for home care service eligibility. Provision of elder care 
services is now based on individual needs assessments, which prioritise home 
care and avoid institutional care as much as possible. There is a growing focus 
on assisted living at home, while service users are forced to purchase supportive 
services – previously provided by the municipality ‒ from the market.
The uses of ICTs in mediating trust in the care of old people
Trust is an important vehicle to reduce and deal with complexity in increasingly 
technological societies. When defining trust in any relationship, the compli­
cated social, cultural and psychological networks underlying the relationship 
deeply affect the systems and individuals involved. For the care of old people, 
ICTs are a vehicle that has the potential to induce communication and to gen­
erate trust between old people, their family members and professional carers. 
However, the context of elderly care is also special in terms of communication. 

122  Helena Hirvonen
The communicative actors it encompasses are old and their communicational 
capabilities can be limited, which highlights the importance of physical close­
ness in the help and care of old people (Jaava, 2006). The more limited the 
cognitive capacities of the person in question, the more the communication 
happens through speech, touch and small gestures that one learns to interpret 
through accumulating knowledge of the other person.
Such a context poses challenges to ICTs. Proximity between individuals has 
traditionally been an essential requirement for the execution of corporeal and 
social practices of care that transfer the feeling of being in good hands (Tronto, 
1993). Consequently, the growing use of ICT affects the mechanisms through 
which trust can be generated and reasserted. Previous studies suggest that the use 
of ICT does not self-evidently facilitate formal or informal care relationships, but 
it may even inhibit good communication and interaction in care relationships by 
expanding the physical distance between the parties involved (Di Luzio, 2006). 
The negative impacts of ICT partly derive from the disregard of the value of 
verbal and non-verbal communication in face-to-face interaction and in the for­
mation of client trust (Brown and Calnan, 2011; Van Wynsberghe, 2011).
Regarding the potential of ICTs in terms of their availability and attitudes of 
old people as ICT users, there are great differences among the age cohort 75–89 
in Finland. In 2015, a third of people in this cohort had used the internet within 
the last three months and 13 per cent of the age group used it regularly (Statistics 
Finland, 2015). The diversity in the life situations of the people in the age cohort 
greatly affects individuals’ capacities to use ICTs. For one, internet user rate rises 
with the old people’s occupational status, level of education and the number of 
next of kin and social networks they have (Rasi and Kilpeläinen, 2016). The same 
goes for mobile phones, which are the most common ICT device used by people 
aged 75–89. Over 80 per cent of this age group own a mobile phone, though the 
user rate declines with rising age, and lower occupational and educational status 
(Intosalmi et al., 2013). People’s distinct lifestyles, identities, interests and culture 
may also shape ICT use, especially in more rural areas (Hakkarainen, 2012).
In this study, the role of ICTs in the care of old people is analysed from the 
point of view of sociological theorisation on trust (Luhmann, 1979; Kuhlmann, 
2006) on two levels: on ‘the system level’ as citizens’ trust towards the welfare 
service system, and on ‘the personal level’ as trust towards care professionals 
and other carers. Luhmann (1979) emphasises that system level trust ultimately 
depends on personal trust created between individuals, in this case the old people 
and their family members and/or care professionals. Therefore, the personal trust 
that is created in everyday encounters between workers, service users and family 
members can have far-reaching consequences on trust in the system level between 
citizens and the welfare state in general.
Data and methods
In the context of health and social care provision, empirical research has mainly 
studied trust from the point of view of patients/service users. The focus in this 

ICTs in care of old people in Finland  123
study, however, is on the ICT use of family members and care professionals as 
mediators of help and care of old people. The study focused on two aspects of 
elder care: first, on how ICTs mediate care workers’ multiple accountabilities 
(their organisational and professional trust) in the context of formal care service 
work, and second, on how ICTs mediate family members’ activities in the context 
of informal care. These two realms of care – formal care by professionals and 
informal care by family members – are interrelated in elder care provision and can 
thereby be studied in relation to one another.
The data comprises two separate sets of qualitative interview data. The first 
is a focus group interview data (n=12) collected in Finland in 2013 from women 
involved in the care of an older family member.1 The interviewees were aged 
between 40 and 59, apart from one who was under 30 and 2 that were aged 60+. All 
of the women participated in working life and had an elderly family member they 
helped regularly. Most of the interviewees represent the typical example of a caring 
family member in Finland who provides informal care to their older relative (in most 
cases their parent/parents) in the age group 75–89. Apart from one respondent, the 
interviewees did not share the same household with the relative whom they helped. 
Following the typology of Byrne et al. (2009), the women’s descriptions suggest 
their elderly relatives had some capacity to manage Activity of Daily Living tasks. 
In most cases, the women assisted their relative with Instrumental Activity of Daily 
Living tasks. The women thus offered more ‘help’ than ‘care’, as is often the case 
in countries with wide-ranging provision of public services (Brandt et al., 2009).
The focus group interviews dealt with the women’s life situations, their experi­
ences in combining work and care responsibilities, and their role in the help and 
care of their older relative. The respondents’ experience in using ICTs was not 
explicitly taken up during the interviews, but it turned out to be central to their 
accounts. Based on information given in a background questionnaire the inform­
ants completed, the majority of them are active ICT users, namely well-educated 
adults who live in a large or middle-sized municipality, and who work and have 
children (e.g. Fortunati and Taipale, 2012; Taipale, 2013).
The second set of data includes interviews (n=12) collected in 2007–2009 
from health and social care workers in Finland by using snowball sampling and 
by recruiting interviewees through adverts posted in welfare service facilities. 
The interviewees worked in municipal home care services or supported ser­
vice housing, which are the main forms of public elder care services in Finland. 
The interviewees were between 25 and 61 years old. In terms of the ICT usage 
described by the respondents, the focus of the interviews was mostly on patient 
information systems and various computer software programs the interviewees 
used as part of their work. The interview themes focused on the nature of the 
participants’ jobs and their relationships with co-workers and clients, as well as 
the changes they had experienced in their work. Overall, the aim was to map the 
respondents’ accounts of organisational life and work practices in various locales 
within the contemporary public service sector.
The interviews in both data sets were semi-structured and were recorded and 
manually transcribed. The focus group interviews with caring family members 

124  Helena Hirvonen
lasted approximately two and a half hours, while individual interviews with care 
professionals lasted approximately one and a half hours each. In both cases, spe­
cific themes were introduced using key questions and prompts when necessary. 
Both data sets only include female respondents, which should be taken into con­
sideration in the interpretation of the results. Furthermore, since the data from 
care professionals were collected in the period 2007–2009, it does not reflect 
the most recent turns in technology-mediated practices of professional care. 
However, because this is an exploratory study on ICTs and trust in the context of 
elder care, the results should be taken as a preliminary investigation into the field 
that requires further research.
The analysis was carried out by reading and re-analysing as a methodological 
tool (Dampier, 2008) in light of Luhmann’s (1979) idea of personal and system 
level trust. In the first-order analysis, the focus was on finding the parts containing 
informants’ descriptions of ICTs and their use in everyday activities of care and 
help. In the second-order analysis, these accounts were further organised and ana­
lysed based on the concepts of personal trust and system level trust. The results 
are organised under two sub-sections. The first recalls informal carers’ accounts 
of ICT use. The second sub-section presents the results from the data collected 
from care professionals.
Results
The role of mobile phones in informal care and help of older people
Policy-making regarding old people’s help and care needs at home can be divided 
into two discourses, in parallel with Higgs and Gilleard’s (2015) discourse of 
the third and fourth age: the third age sees old people as active seniors with 
financial resources, making independent choices according to their lifestyle and 
preferences. The fourth age discourse reflects the negativity and otherness that 
are presumed characteristics of the ‘old’ old age where frail old people’s living 
arrangements and care needs are dictated by their deteriorating physical and cog­
nitive state of health and resulting dependence on family members and/or care 
professionals. In the majority of interviews that I conducted with caring fam­
ily members, the discourse resembled the more negative one, that of the ‘fourth 
age’. A woman who gave help to her mother who lived by herself gave a typical 
description of a caring family member’s situation among the interviewees:
I have these two sisters. We all work and they also have young kids, and a 
bit more stable routine in terms of working times and lifestyles. So, I have 
become a kind of a carer for our mother, I take care of all things, financial and 
medical, I make check-up phone calls every day and drive to her if needed. 
And it wouldn’t be that tough if it wasn’t for her memory disease [dementia]. 
The disease makes everything so unpredictable: has something happened or 
not, is she lying to me on the phone, and so on. She lives at home alone and 
has become sort of a hermit, and now I try to take care of her from afar.

ICTs in care of old people in Finland  125
Respecting the autonomy of a mother who suffers from dementia is not easily 
combined with trusting that she is doing well. The description of the interviewee 
brings out the complexity and somewhat unsettled nature of the care and help of 
old people. In Finland, it is not common for adult family members of different 
generations to share a household, and adult children often live a significant dis­
tance from their old parents. As this was the case for many of the interviewees, 
mobile phones were the key device for coordinating activities of care and help. 
In some cases, the role of mobile phones was mainly sociable, whereas in others, 
it had become an irreplaceable lifeline between the interviewee and their elderly 
relative, as for one of the interviewees who described the situation of her late 
father as follows:
I was the only relative to my father who suffered from cancer and lived 200 
km from here. Towards the end, he was suicidal and in a lot of pain. So, I told 
at work that I have my mobile phone in my pocket, although we’re not sup­
posed to carry them during work, and I felt that it made it easier that he could 
contact me and talk to me, and it always did . . . those calls were really tough 
during workdays and at home, too. But the physical distance, which we’ve 
talked about, I understand well what it feels like when you can’t just take a 
bicycle and go to him, but he lives somewhere far away. And in my case, you 
can’t send anyone to him because he won’t open the door to anyone . . . The 
distances these days, it makes me think it’s the elderly who should move 
closer to their children (laughter), so it would be easier!
Where possible, workplace cultures have adapted to employees’ use of personal 
mobile phones. While such practices can ease the anxiety of both caring family 
members and their old relatives, having a mobile phone within one’s reach all day 
can also become a burden, as one of the interviewees recalled:
What made it so straining was that this spring, mom would first call my sister 
seven to thirty times a day – mom has a panic disorder. She is so insecure, 
although she gets home care service, and we visit often . . . So my sister was 
very tired with the situation, and if mom couldn’t get a hold of her, mom 
would call me. I have my phone on me all the time. Well, she didn’t call at 
night so much, but during the day and so on.
For the women in this study, the constant availability through their mobile phone 
had both positive and negative consequences. On the one hand, it eased their 
feelings of helplessness and guilt over the old relative’s wellbeing when they 
could not be physically close to them. On the other, being available 24/7 was 
also a source of stress and anxiety. Recent surveys from Finland suggest that 
the health, life experiences, needs and wishes of people in the age group 75+ are 
much more diverse than those of people in younger cohorts (Aging and Housing, 
2012). The variables behind the diversity include socio-economic status, family 
relations and health. In line with these findings, the results in this study suggest 

126  Helena Hirvonen
that the accumulation of various resources throughout one’s life course greatly 
affects one’s capacity for relatively independent living at home. The results also 
point to the complexities with family members’ attempts to respect the older rela­
tive’s decision-making autonomy regarding his or her capacity for independent 
living at home.
Providing help and care to an older family member is often a balancing act 
between three issues, as Kunk (2010) suggests: taking responsibility for the 
relative’s care, respecting their autonomy and placing a limit on one’s own 
involvement. The tension between autonomy and responsibility can at times cre­
ate particular difficulties in terms of family members’ involvement in the help 
and care of an older relative. Many of the women interviewed for this study made 
special efforts to set both practical and emotional boundaries between themselves 
and their older relative. Considering the widespread use of mobile phones and the 
associated expectation of one’s constant availability, drawing these boundaries is 
not always easy.
In terms of trust that is mediated in care and help through mobile phones, 
many of the interviewees emphasised how they could not fully trust the accu­
racy of information on their elderly relative’s condition received via phone calls. 
One thing in common with all of the interviewees was their general reservation 
towards the idea of extensive use of ICTs in the help and care of their old family 
members, especially in cases where the cognitive capacities of their elderly fam­
ily member were impaired. This was the case with a woman whose mother was 
diagnosed with dementia and who continued to live on her own:
She takes her own temperature thirty times and then calls and asks me “what 
does this mean?”, and I respond: “36.4 means no fever”. Eventually, it got 
to the point where she was taking her temperature, checking her blood glu­
cose level and blood pressure, all with using a single device! And there I 
am, trying to stay calm, when she calls and I ask her what (device) she has 
used to take these measurements, and she says “It says Omron on this”, and I 
respond, “Yes, well, that’s the thermometer”.
Typically, old people evaluate the ‘worth’ and value of technology based on 
how it supports their ability to carry out everyday activities and chores, and to 
manage their health and wellbeing (Leikas and Saariluoma, 2008). Users need 
to have confidence and skills to use these technologies, and understanding of the 
processes of ageing and the lifestyles of old people is therefore crucial for the 
successful use of technologies. Ideally, products and services are designed so that 
they increase people’s experiences of wellbeing, so that they don’t cause harm or 
become excluded from society (Leikas and Saariluoma, 2008).
Apart from devices and surveillance technologies that did not require active 
usership and skills, such as security bracelets, all interviewees were sceptical about 
the introduction of new technologies in the help and care of their elderly family 
members. Importantly, it is precisely family members who are the primary helpers 
of old relatives who, in practice, can encourage or discourage the introduction of 

ICTs in care of old people in Finland  127
any new technologies into the lives of old people. Old people in Finland are rather 
willing to make financial investments in technology and changes to their everyday 
lives at home (Intosalmi et al., 2013; Kilpeläinen and Seppänen, 2014), and even 
to accept the use of social robots in health care (Taipale et al., 2015) if they see that 
it improves their quality of life at home. The distributed competencies within fami­
lies to help and support old people in using ICTs are crucial in this respect (Rasi 
and Kilpeläinen, 2016). A lack of sufficient information about the possible uses 
of new technologies, and also the negative attitudes among caring family mem­
bers can stand in the way of ICT use in the care of old people who live at home. 
Although the women in this study represent the age groups and socio-economic 
groups of skillful, active users of new technologies, their know-how does not nec­
essarily extend or transfer into willingness or expertise in assessing if and how new 
technologies could be used in the help and care of their old family members.
ICTs mediating professional help and care of old people: a balancing act
In contrast to the position of caring family members as private citizens, the choice 
to adopt or not adopt ICTs in professional care is not so much an individual one. 
As end-users of ICTs in the formal care sector, all health and social care personnel 
in Finland have computer skills, ability to read and document patient information, 
and access to the internet (Hyppönen et al., 2015). However, especially in social 
services, the use of digital communication between professionals and citizens 
is still in its early stages, and electronic information exchange between workers 
and service users in home care service work remains rare. While workers believe 
that technology has a positive effect on service users’ sense of safety, they see 
unreliability of technology as its greatest disadvantage. Implementation of new 
technologies thereby requires training for both professionals and service users.
In professional care, the social dynamics of ICT use are subject to micro level 
and meso level influences (Loos, 2008). On the meso level, interaction within 
the organisational environment (e.g. service users and managers) drives profes­
sionals’ adaptation of ICTs that are supposed to enhance the effectiveness and 
efficiency of work and communication processes. Particularly at the micro level, 
however, employees do not greet all innovations enthusiastically. This applies 
especially to managerial technologies that do not directly facilitate patient work. 
Care professionals devote a significant proportion of their working time to ICT-
related tasks of recording and reporting, and therefore also assess the sensibility 
of their time use carefully, as a home care service worker described:
We’ve recently begun to also report all the indirect tasks that are not part of 
our official job descriptions, such as phone calls and references. But I’m not 
convinced that this is a good use of our time and skills . . . Then again, if I 
don’t have the time to go to the electronic patient record to read the patient 
files, it seems crazy to go into the clients’ homes because then I can only do 
the necessary basic tasks. I don’t always have the time, but when I do, I try 
to read their files the day before, to check who I’m supposed to see the next 

128  Helena Hirvonen
day, to go through their medical history and their life history, to get an overall 
picture. It feels meaningful to be able to piece together their life situations. It 
allows me to help them the best way I can, so that it’s not just separate tasks 
I do here and there.
The excerpt shows that the purposefulness of accountability work with regard 
to the core tasks of care is important for the acceptance of technology-assisted 
management practices. These practices affect workers’accountabilities and have 
consequences for client work and the ways in which client trust is enhanced. 
When directly related to client work, ICTs can benefit workers’ professional 
development and client relations in line with normative value systems and the eth­
ics of care work, such as in the case of familiarising oneself with clients’ histories 
through electronic patient records.
However, care work is also increasingly framed by practices of accountabil­
ity that entail assessment, reporting, budgeting and administrative tasks (Dahl 
and Rasmussen, 2012; Hirvonen, 2014). This accountability work by care pro­
fessionals is closely related to the question of personal and system level trust. 
System level trust towards elder care service ultimately depends on the inclination 
towards risks being kept under control by service providers. Service users’ con­
fidence in the functionality of care services builds on their continual, affirmative 
experiences in using these services (Jaava, 2006). Thus, minimising risks and 
making care work more transparent with the help of ICTs can help improve citi­
zens’ trust towards care service provision at the system level.
In elder care work, this kind of risk management work by professionals requires 
not only appropriate managerial tools and technologies but also more immaterial 
resources such as time. In fact, some interviewees suggested that ICT-assisted 
accountability work could reduce rather than increase professionals’ opportuni­
ties to engage in patient work:
One thing I’ve noticed in home care work is that we don’t have enough staff. 
Yet, we need to take care of all our clients. And when we have to hurry, we 
make more mistakes that the worker in the next shift will have to deal with. 
We forget to give them their medicine, give them wrong medication or forget 
to order in the medication we need . . . So the time goes into correcting these 
mistakes, making safety incident reports online, sending and printing them 
and dealing with them in the unit. The mistakes build up, it’s not just about 
correcting them, but reporting, dealing with and planning how to prevent 
them in the future. It’s kind of a funny cycle.
More often than not, technology-mediated practices of care do not contribute directly 
to increasing time for face-to-face work with clients, but rather to the growing trans­
parency of the service system. The irony in this is that for many care professionals, 
the rewarding aspect of elder care is precisely in the face-to-face contact with ser­
vice users (Laine et al., 2011; Hirvonen, 2014). Previous studies show how the 
growing use of ICTs by care professionals for managerial purposes often means a 

ICTs in care of old people in Finland  129
depersonalisation of social contact and a reduction in the autonomy of the workers’ 
decision-making (Loos, 2008; Eriksson-Lidman et al., 2012). For one, Calnan and 
Rowe (2008) suggest that we can no longer assume professional trust to be embod­
ied in the professional. Instead, this trust has to be earned through careful, explicit 
documentation of daily work that Kuhlmann (2006) describes as ‘checking-based 
trust’. In line with these studies, the results here suggest that although the task of 
‘leaving visible markers’ of one’s work is now a central feature of care work, the 
human service aspect of care work continues to be valued by both care profession­
als and service users, as one of the interviewees explained:
I like it when many of my clients say that “it’s nice that you’re here, you do 
the job so well”. It tells me I’ve managed to gain their trust. So, they trust me 
and are happy and give feedback . . . They’re more relaxed, because some­
times old people can be very specific about certain issues, so they don’t go 
and check that I’ve done everything I was supposed to. So, they know when 
I’m there, the job gets done.
The excerpt highlights how trust in the context of elder care is ultimately founded on 
a personal relationship that evolves over time in face-to-face encounters. This sug­
gests that earning a service user’s trust at the personal level, and temporal resources 
for such engagement, can be important for building trust in the context of profes­
sional care work. To connect this issue with the question of old people’s agency, 
ICTs and telecare devices have proven to be useful for giving patients control of 
their own care, improving their autonomy and increasing the amount of informa­
tion available for both service users and professionals (Pols, 2012). However, old 
people’s capacities for such engagement varies tremendously. Opportunities to 
reassert personal trust in terms of face-to-face encounters between service users 
and care professionals therefore remain necessary for ensuring service users’ equal 
access to good care, and also for the meaningfulness of work for care professionals.
Conclusions: the complex construction of trust in the 
care of old people
A growing number of old people live in their own homes at a late age, receiving 
both informal and formal help and care. Assuring elderly citizens that they are in 
good hands is a key component of a good quality of life at home. At the policy 
level, respect for old people’s autonomy and a simultaneous assumption of their 
capabilities to make choices regarding their own care go hand in hand with the 
logic of consumer choice, which has become prominent in health and social care 
services in recent decades (Anttonen and Häikiö, 2011). In this chapter I have 
tried to demonstrate the role of ICTs from the point of view of personal level and 
system level trust. It would be wrong to assume that the introduction of novel 
ICTs into care services for old people is ‘a magic bullet’ that will cure all ills and 
automatically improve their sense of security. Rather, it seems that the enthusiasm 
for technologisation of care simply overlooks some crucial aspects of elder care.

130  Helena Hirvonen
First of all, the availability and acceptance of the use of ICTs among the age 
group 75+ varies greatly, based on an individual’s life situation, their location 
(rural vs. urban), differences in their cognitive capacities and socio-economic 
and social resources (Intosalmi et al., 2013; Kilpeläinen and Seppänen, 2014). In 
terms of using ICTs as a part of help and care, mobile phones and the possibility 
for 24/7 contact and communication is one of the most crucial aspects of the care 
of old people who continue to live in their own home. Second, family members 
are in a key position to introduce new devices to their elderly relatives. The social 
and socio-economic resources of old people and their family members, as well 
as the distance between family members and their elderly relatives, influence the 
ways in which technology is used.
The question of how best to cater for the care and help needs of a growing 
number of old people is an acute one. In Finland, more e-health services are now 
provided directly to citizens than ever before. Nevertheless, electronic infor­
mation exchange between patients and health care personnel is still not widely 
used. According to Hyppönen et al. (2015), the challenge is to make e-services 
user-friendly and show their added value to citizens (and professionals) so as to 
encourage their use. This, of course, requires a renewal of service processes. In 
2014, citizens’ use of online e-health and e-welfare services through electronic 
patient records was still modest (12 per cent). The top services citizens wanted 
to use electronically were access to information, such as laboratory test results, 
and online renewal of prescriptions. Apart from prescription renewals, however, 
a strong belief remains that contact with care professionals cannot be replaced by 
e-services. This is by far the most important barrier to citizens’ uptake and use of 
e-health and e-welfare services (Hyppönen et al., 2015).
The results suggest that in ageing societies, a growing number of service 
users need help and assistance that require embodied, personal care (Hirvonen, 
2014). Yet, the work of care professionals is not being articulated any more 
consciously than before, because the world of policy-making – where prob­
lems are presented in abstract, neutral terms – is a disembodied one. Hence, 
the outcome of the research is that apart from managerial purposes, ICT use in 
professional care does not necessarily contribute to client trust at the personal 
level, and that the use of the mobile phone as a vehicle for communication 
between professionals and service users remains rare in home care service work. 
Regarding formal care and help of old people, the growing use of managerial 
technology is therefore a double-edged sword. On the one hand, it enables better 
transparency and organisational accountability of care services. This can help 
in securing citizens’ trust towards the care services at the system level and, ulti­
mately, help secure the legitimacy of the welfare state. On the other, widespread 
managerial use of technology does not necessarily contribute to service users’ 
sense of personal trust. Verbal and non-verbal communication between care 
professionals and service users remains an integral element to service users’ 
sense of personal trust and care professionals’ sense of meaningfulness of work. 
To improve service users’ sense of personal trust, it seems that public elder 
care service provision has yet to take advantage of old people’s growing use of 

ICTs in care of old people in Finland  131
mobile phones and the internet, which could provide a cost-effective and user-
friendly means to reassert care relationships and service users’ personal trust 
towards service providers.
Although only one-third of people aged 75+ currently have access to the inter­
net in Finland, the proportion will rise with younger cohorts. The frequency of 
mobile phone ownership among old people therefore gives a promising example 
of how technology can be of great help when the distance between old people 
and their family members is great, as the results in this study suggest. Yet, this 
is so only if caring family members and old people themselves have access and 
the ability to use this technology. Those in the oldest age groups with low socio-
economic status and with few or no next of kin are in the most precarious position 
in this regard. This is alarming because once they become users of ICTs, people 
in the age group 75–89 find that ICTs, and mobile phones in particular, increase 
their sense of security (Blazun, 2013; Intosalmi et al., 2013). The dispersed access 
and ability to use technology among old people can therefore add to existing dis­
parities in the quality of life of old people.
As a conclusion, the chapter suggests that ICT use in the care of old people 
needs to be assessed from a sociological point of view, with a focus on the conse­
quences of digitalisation on both personal and system level trust, which are both 
essential for the legitimacy of the service system. Attention should also be paid 
to the great differences in the life course accumulation of social, cultural and eco­
nomic capitals within old age cohorts. Attention to these resources brings about 
differences in individuals’ cognitive, social and socio-economic capacities that 
greatly affect how ICTs can improve people’s abilities to live independently at 
home and, ultimately, their quality of life.
Note
1	 The data were originally collected as part of the cross-national comparative proj­
ect FLOWS - Impact of local welfare systems on female labour force participation 
(EC, FP7, 2011–2014, www.flows-eu.eu).
References
Aging and Housing, 2012. Ikääntyminen ja asuminen. 75–89-vuotiaiden näkemyksiä 
asumisesta ja ikääntymisestä. KÄKÄTE-project Publications. Helsinki, Finland: 
Vanhustyön keskusliitto ja Vanhus- ja lähimmäispalvelun liitto.
Anttonen, A. and Häikiö, L., 2011. Care “going market”: Finnish elderly-care policies in 
transition. Nordic Journal of Social Research, 2(2), pp. 1–21.
Blazun, H., 2013. Elderly people’s quality of life with information and communication 
technology (ICT): toward a model of adaptation to ICT in old age. PhD Dissertation in 
Social Sciences and Business Studies, no 59. University of Eastern Finland.
Brandt, M., Haberkern, K. and Szydlik, M., 2009. Intergenerational help and care in 
Europe. European Sociological Review, 25(5), pp. 585–601.
Brown, P. R. and Calnan, M., 2011. The civilizing process of trust: developing quality 
mechanisms which are local, professional-led and thus legitimate. Social Policy & 
Administration, 45(1), pp. 19–34.

132  Helena Hirvonen
Byrne, D., Goeree, M. S., Hiedemann, B. and Stern, S., 2009. Formal home health care, 
informal care, and family decision making. International Economic Review, 54(4), 
pp. 1205–1242.
Calnan, M. and Rowe, R., 2008. Trust relations in a changing health service. Journal of 
Health Service Research & Policy, 13(3), pp. 97–103.
Dahl, H. M. and Rasmussen, B., 2012. Paradoxes in elderly care: the Nordic model. In: A. 
Kamp and H. Hvid, eds. Elderly care in transition. Management, meaning and indentity 
at work: a Scandinavian perspective. Copenhagen, Denmark: Copenhagen Business 
School Press.
Dampier, H., 2008. Re-reading as a methodology: the case of Boer women’s testimonies. 
Qualitative Research, 8(3), pp. 367–377.
Di Luzio, G., 2006. A sociological concept of client trust. Current Sociology, 54(4), 
pp. 549–564.
Eriksson-Lidman, E., Norberg, A., Persson, B. and Strandberg, G., 2012. Healthcare 
personnel’s experiences of situations in municipal elderly care that generate troubled 
conscience. Scandinavian Journal of Caring Sciences, 27(2), pp. 215–223.
Fortunati, L. and Taipale, S., 2012. Organization of the social sphere and typology of the 
residential setting in Europe: how sociability affects the adoption of the mobile phone 
in rural and urban locations. Technology in Society, 34(1), pp. 33–43.
Haddon, L., Mante-Meijer, E. and Loos, E., 2008. Introduction. In: L. Haddon, E. Mante-
Meijer and E. Loos, eds. The social dynamics of information and communication 
technology. Aldershot, UK: Routledge, pp. 15–22.
Hakkarainen, P., 2012. “No good for shovelling snow and carrying firewood”: social 
representations of computers and the internet by elderly Finnish non-users. New 
Media and Society, 14(7), pp. 1198–1215.
Higgs, P. and Gilleard, C., 2015. Rethinking old age: theorising the fourth age. London: 
Palgrave.
Hirvonen, H., 2014. From embodied to disembodied professionalism? Discussing the 
implications of medico-managerial management in welfare service work. Social Policy 
& Administration, 48(5), pp. 576–593.
Hyppönen, H., Hämäläinen, P. and Reponen, J., 2015. eHealth and eWelfare of Finland: 
checkpoint 2015. Helsinki, Finland: National Institute for Health and Welfare.
Intosalmi, H., Nykänen, J. and Stenberg, L., 2013. Teknologian käyttö ja asenteet 
75–89-vuotiailla. Raportti kyselytutkimuksesta. KÄKÄTE-projekti. Helsinki, Finland: 
Vanhustyön keskusliitto ja Vanhus- ja lähimmäispalvelun liitto.
Jaava, J., 2006. Trust as a decision: the problems and functions of trust in Luhmannian 
systems theory. PhD Dissertation. University of Helsinki.
Jolanki, O., Szebehely, M. and Kauppinen, K., 2013. Family rediscovered? Working carers 
of older people in Finland and Sweden. In: T. Kröger and S. Yeandle, eds. Combining 
paid work and family care: policies and experiences in international perspective. 
Bristol, UK: Policy Press, pp. 53–69.
Kilpeläinen, A. and Seppänen, M., 2014. Information technology and everyday life in age­
ing rural villages. Journal of Rural Studies, 33, pp. 1–8.
Kouvo, A., Kankainen, T. and Niemelä, M., 2012. Welfare benefits and generalized trust 
in Finland and Europe. In: H. Ervasti, J. G. Andersen, T. Fridberg and K. Ringdal, eds. 
The future of the welfare state: social policy attitudes and social capital in Europe. 
Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing, pp. 296–328.
Kröger, T. and Leinonen, A., 2011. Home care in Finland. In: T. Rostgaard, 
C. Glendinning, C. Gori, T. Kröger, A. Österle, M. Szebehely, H. Theobald, V. Timonen 

ICTs in care of old people in Finland  133
and M. Vabø, eds. Livindhome: living independently at home: reforms in home care 
in 9 European countries. Copenhagen, Denmark: SFI – Danish National Centre for 
Social Research, pp. 117–138.
Kuhlmann, E., 2006. Traces of doubt and sources of trust: health professions in an uncer­
tain society. Current Sociology, 54(4), pp. 607–620.
Kunk, L. M., 2010. Prioritizing parental autonomy: adult children’s accounts of feeling 
responsible and supporting aging parents. Journal of Aging Studies, 24(1), pp. 57–64.
Laine, M., Kokkinen, L., Kaarlela-Tuomaala, A., Valtanen, E., Elovainio, M., Suomi, R. 
and Keinänen, M., 2011. Sosiaali- ja terveysalan työolot 2010. Kahden vuosikymmenen 
kehityskulku. Helsinki, Finland: Työterveyslaitos.
Leikas, J. and Saariluoma, P., 2008. “Worth” and mental contents in designing for ageing 
citizens’ form of life. Gerontechnology, 7(3), pp. 305–318.
Loos, E., 2008. Using ICT in human service organisations: an enabling constraint? Social 
workers, new technology and their organisation. In: L. Haddon, E. Mante-Meijer and 
E. Loos, eds. The social dynamics of information and communication technology. 
Aldershot, UK: Routledge, pp. 119–132.
Luhmann, N., 1979. Trust and power. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Ministry of Social Affairs and Health, 2015. Information to support well-being and 
service renewal: eHealth and eSocial strategy 2020. Helsinki, Finland: Ministry of 
Social Affairs and Health.
Pols, J., 2012. Care at a distance: on the closeness of technology. Amsterdam: Amsterdam 
University Press.
Rasi, P. and Kilpeläinen, A., 2016. Older people’s use of learning of new media: a case 
study on remote rural villages in Finnish Lapland. In: J. Zhou and G. Salvenrdy, eds. 
Human aspects of it for the aged population. Healthy and active aging, PART II, Second 
International Conference, ITAP 2016 Proceedings. Switzerland: Springer International 
Publishing, pp. 239–247.
Robinson, R. and Jackson, E., 2001. Is trust in others declining in America? An 
age-period-cohort analysis. Social Science Research, 30(1), pp. 117–145.
Santiago, R. and Carvalho, T., 2015. Towards changes in professions and professionalism: 
academics, doctors and nurses. In: T. Carvalho and R. Santiago, eds. Professionalism, 
managerialism and the health services. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave, pp. 1–12.
Statistics Finland, 2015. Use of information and communication technology by individu­
als. www.stat.fi/til/sutivi/2015/sutivi_2015_2015-11-26_tie_001_en.html.
Strategic Government Programme, 2016. Action plan for the implementation of the 
key projects and reforms defined in the Strategic Government Programme. Finnish 
Government Publications 1/2016. Helsinki: Prime Minister’s Office.
Taipale, S., 2013. The dimensions of mobilities: the spatial relationships between corpo­
real and digital mobilities. Social Science Research, 43, pp. 157–167.
Taipale, S., De Luca, F., Sarrica, M. and Fortunati, L., 2015. Robot shift from 
industrial production to social reproduction. In: J. Vincent, S. Taipale, B. Sapio, 
L. Fortunati and G. Lugano, eds. Social robots from a human perspective. London: 
Springer, pp. 11–24.
Tronto, J., 1993. Moral boundaries: a political argument for an ethic of care. New York: 
Routledge.
UN E-government Survey, 2014. United Nations Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs. New York: United Nations.
Van Wynsberghe, A., 2011. Designing robots for care: care centered value-sensitive 
design. Science Engineering Ethics, 19(2), pp. 407–433.

10	 Mobile phone use and social 
generations in rural India
Sirpa Tenhunen
Introduction
Mannheim (1952) introduced the concept of social generation – people who were 
born during the same date range and share similar cultural experiences – and it has 
since been developed to include human agency and social divisions, such as gen­
der, class and race (Aboim and Vasconcelos, 2014; Woodman and Wyn, 2015). 
In its sense of kinship descent, the concept of generation has a long tradition in 
social anthropology (Kertzer, 1983). However, the notion of social generation has 
mostly been applied to Western countries, whereas, particularly, anthropological 
scholarship of India has examined social relationships mainly through the con­
cepts of gender, kinship and caste. My earlier research revealed how positions 
in the kinship system influence mobile phone use patterns in rural India and, in 
turn, how phone use mediates changes in family and kinship (Tenhunen, 2014). 
Nevertheless, rural India has experienced numerous social changes that have 
influenced different generations in distinct ways. In this chapter, I explore these 
generational differences in the appropriation of mobile phones in rural India.
Broad changes such as the decline of agriculture, changes in caste and gender 
relationships, and rising levels of education that have influenced rural West Bengal 
where I carried out my research, are also prevalent in other parts of rural India 
(Kumar, 2016; Otten and Simpson, 2016). In fact, much of my motivation to carry 
out long-term ethnographic fieldwork in rural West Bengal is based on my interest 
in these changes. Every visit has revealed new and interesting developments, and 
mobile telephony was just one of the many changes I witnessed during my fieldwork.
Demographic changes make crucial contributions to the formation of social gen­
erations; consequently, I start by briefly exploring demographic trends in India and 
more specifically in rural West Bengal. Next, I describe ongoing social changes in 
the region – the decline of agriculture, changes in caste and gender relationships, 
and rising levels of education – to examine how the changes that resulted in the for­
mation of social generations influenced different age groups. Thereafter, I analyse 
how social generations use phones in distinct ways as part of local hierarchies. My 
identification of different mobile phone user groups reveals that it is especially the 
groups whose structural position has undergone changes that use mobile phones 
to negotiate their positions in local hierarchies. These groups are youth, high caste 

Mobile phone use in rural India  135
women and low caste people. I also demonstrate that social generations do not 
evolve or use new media in isolation from each other; instead the younger genera­
tion plays an important role in helping the elder generation use calling functions of 
mobile phones as well as to access the internet.
My fieldwork site, Janta, is a multi-caste village in the eastern state of West 
Bengal with 2,441 inhabitants (Census of India, 2011a), the majority of whom 
earn their livelihood from paddy cultivation and vegetable farming. This chapter 
is based on interviews, observation and survey data on the use of mobile phones 
in 2005, 2007–2008, 2010 and 2012–2013. I also draw from my earlier work in 
Janta in 1999–2000 and 2003–2004.1
Age groups formed an important context for both the diffusion and appropria­
tion of mobile phones in Janta. When I searched for phone owners in Janta, I was 
usually introduced to young men. However, the very first phone in the village 
was acquired by an elderly woman’s sons for her. Her sons had emigrated from 
the village and the phone helped them stay in touch with their mother. The first 
group of mobile phone buyers were adult men: micro entrepreneurs as well as car 
and tractor drivers who found phones useful for staying in touch with customers 
and calling for help if they experienced problems on the road. As mobile phones 
became associated with communicating with kin, it became common for women 
to receive mobile phones as gifts from their fathers, brothers or husbands.
When inexpensive smart phones became available around 2011, it was again 
time for the young men to express their technological agency by pioneering the use 
of smart phones – if their older models were still working, they were kept in the 
house and used by the rest of the family, particularly by women, who usually stay 
at home more than men do. At the same time, women who moved outside the home 
for work or study started to acquire personal phones. Young women also preferred 
smart phones and expressed their technological agency and aspirations for change 
by readily discussing the multiple functions of these phones and demonstrating 
their ability to use them. The following discussion begins with a description of 
demographic trends in the village before moving to explore the social changes that 
contributed to the abovementioned generational differences in mobile phone use.
Social changes
The population in Janta is predominantly young and the village has a skewed male-
female ratio (see Figure 10.1). Both these striking demographic trends are in line 
with broader trends in India. India has the largest youth population – 356 million 
10- to 24-year-olds – as well as one of the world’s most skewed gender ratios 
(The UNFPA Report, 2014). According to the 2011 census, the ratio of female 
children in the age group 0–6 years had decreased from 945 to 914 per 1,000 male 
children, the lowest level since India’s independence. The imbalance is explained 
by girls receiving poorer nutrition and health care than boys, as well as the higher 
rate of abortion of female foetuses. In particular, wealthy urban Indians influence 
the sex ratio by ascertaining the sex of their unborn child with ultrasound tests 
and aborting female foetuses, even though this is illegal in India. There are also 

136  Sirpa Tenhunen
significantly fewer girls than boys in Janta, which may indicate the neglect of 
female children, as I did not find any evidence of villagers determining the sex of 
unborn children with ultrasound.
The quintessential Janta village scene of cows and goats and a cluster of small 
brick and mud houses connected by dirt roads and paths, hides the fact that the 
village experienced diverse social upheavals. Land reforms and the increase in agri­
cultural productivity due to the introduction of new farming technologies improved 
the living conditions of small farmers and landless labourers after India’s independ­
ence in 1948 and during the communist party (CPI(M)) rule of the state of West 
Bengal (1977–2011). Extreme poverty, which manifested itself as occasional food 
scarcity, disappeared from Janta in the 1990s, reflecting the decrease in poverty2 in 
the entire state from 73 per cent to 32 per cent during 1977–2000 (Banerjee et al., 
2002). In Janta, affluent houses have television sets, motorcycles, tractors, jeeps and, 
from 2003 onwards, mobile phones. However, for most villagers, the rise in liv­
ing standards has meant small but important improvements in their quality of life. 
Daily labourers have prospered in that they can now afford a more balanced diet, 
better quality clothing, soap and oil. The villagers’ understanding of the essentials of 
the standard of living is summed up by the Bengali expression khaua–makha–pora, 
which literally means eating, anointing the skin with oil, and clothing.
Since the economic liberalisation in the 1990s, small farms have, however, 
become less profitable due to increases in farming costs and decreases in the 
prices of agricultural products. Only large-scale farmers have continued to make 
profits, thanks to the greater volume of their production and investments in side 
businesses. Smaller farmers’ main coping strategy has thus been to send young 
men to work as paid labourers, mainly in the southern and western parts of India.
Figure 10.1  Age groups according to gender in Janta.

Mobile phone use in rural India  137
Class crucially overlaps with caste in Janta, and the village is divided into caste 
neighbourhoods. The dominant caste, both numerically and in terms of land own­
ership in Janta, is the Tilis (50 per cent). Other major caste groups are the Bagdis 
(15 per cent) and Casas (16 per cent). Most Tilis and Casas own land, while most 
Bagdis, who are classified as a scheduled caste, earn their livelihood by means of daily 
labour, mainly agricultural work or work in the brick factories. In Janta, 87 per cent of 
Bagdis are landless, whereas 59 per cent of Tilis are landowners. Villagers know one 
another’s caste identity, while strangers’ caste identity is assessed on the basis of their 
dialect and behaviour, or directly inquired, unlike in the cities, where it is no longer 
such an appropriate topic for conversation with strangers.
Caste is a social institution that evolved from Hindu religious thinking dur­
ing the Veda epoch (1000–600 bc), which defines the cosmic order into four 
hierarchically organised categories, or varnas, based on purity: the Brahmins, the 
highest group, are in charge of religious rules, speech and prayers; the Kshatriyas, 
the warrior caste, maintain and conserve the sacred order (dharma); and the 
Vaishyas, as merchant caste, create prosperity. The Shudras, the lowest caste, 
serve the upper castes with their manual labour (Stern, 1993, p. 55). The varna 
classification of the religious texts does not, however, reflect how caste is classi­
fied in everyday life in India, as only the Brahmins are labelled by their varna title. 
Other castes are called by their local jati names – jati is a wide-spread local term 
for caste. Hierarchical standing of numerous jati groups is locally determined, but 
in relation to the varna hierarchy and its principles. The higher the caste, the purer 
it is held to be. The concepts of purity are not associated with hygiene, but with 
the distance from biological processes like birth, death and refuse. For example, 
the skinning of animals, fishing, cleaning, cremation and laundering are impure 
professions. The impurity is transmitted when a person touches one who is purer, 
or when the purer one enjoys food or drink prepared by someone who is consid­
ered ritually less pure.
Whereas small farmers experienced a sharp rise in their standards of living in the 
1990s and their position has become increasingly precarious, landless and sched­
uled caste labourers have prospered since 2000. Bagdis, the lowest caste groups of 
the village, benefit from their caste status in that they have traditionally worked at 
the tile factories in the region. As work at the brick kilns is not available during the 
rainy season, Bagdis also work as agricultural labourers. The Rural Employment 
Guarantee Programme (NREGA), which officially guarantees at least 100 days 
of paid unskilled manual work annually, has increased job opportunities for cas­
ual work. Although in practice people obtain less work than is guaranteed, the 
NREGA has diversified their sources of income. Moreover, government quotas 
have given scheduled castes real possibilities for class mobility, as almost half of 
the jobs in India’s central government and seats of education have been reserved 
for scheduled castes and tribes (Varshney, 2000). Even if quotas have only helped 
a few Bagdis in the village to obtain salaried jobs, these exceptional career paths 
are important tangible examples of emerging new opportunities.
There are signs of the lessening of caste discrimination, as low castes are no 
longer dependent on the few large landowners of the dominant caste. In addition, 

138  Sirpa Tenhunen
opportunities for inter-caste socialising, which starts in primary schools where 
children of all castes have their central government-sponsored midday meal 
together, have increased. Yet, caste groups still live and interact in their own 
neighbourhoods, and inter-caste marriages are rare. Higher castes seldom visit 
lower caste neighbourhoods and lower castes enter higher caste neighbourhood as 
day labourers, to sell fish and vegetables, or just to chat with higher castes. When 
lower castes do visit the homes of higher castes, they usually stand or sit in the 
yard – they do not enter the house. Lower caste labourers have their meals on the 
veranda as part of their payment, but they never enter the higher caste house, and 
higher castes do not eat food prepared in lower caste houses.
Despite the continuity of caste discrimination, Bagdis are not particularly moti­
vated to organise themselves in order to change their position as a caste group, 
neither have the scheduled castes in the entire state of West Bengal joined the 
Dalit movement through which scheduled castes have organised, particularly in 
the western parts of India. The lower castes in Janta talk about imitating the upper 
strata of village society in terms of consumption, of being able to eat and dress so 
well that they can no longer be recognised as low, thereby circumventing the purity 
criteria for social ascent by striving for a new identity through consumption.
Another major change in India – and in Janta – is the increase in the levels of 
education. Literacy rates have improved in India during the last decade by 9 percent­
age points, and the improvement among women has been more pronounced than 
among men. Primary school enrolment at the age of six has become nearly universal, 
although the dropout rate remains high (Rustagi, 2009). In 2011, 74 per cent of men 
and 58 per cent of women in Janta were literate (Census of India, 2011a). The same 
figures for India are 82 per cent for men and 65 per cent for women (Census of India, 
2011b). As Figure 10.2 shows, in Janta the decline in illiteracy has been most dra­
matic among higher caste females, for example the age group 11–15 is fully literate. 
This is the highest rate in any age group, and is also higher than the literacy of high 
caste boys in the same age group. High caste women have thus caught up with men 
in terms of literacy, and the younger age groups in the low castes are catching up with 
the high castes, but the gap between the literacy levels of low and high castes is still 
wide. Both upper and low caste women have experienced significant improvements 
in education in comparison to upper caste men. As a result, upper caste men have 
been losing their relative advantage in education.
Women were allocated quotas in the local governing organs, panchayats, in 
1993. During the CPI(M) rule of West Bengal (1977–2011), women of all castes 
joined mahila samitis (women’s committees) and regularly attended meetings. 
The women’s committees focused on raising women’s consciousness about their 
rights and motivating women to participate in panchayat led programs. The first 
female panchayat representative from Janta, Tapati Kundu, arranged income earn­
ing opportunities and a literacy program for women. According to her (Kundu, 
2000), women should identify and protest against cultural practices that are 
harmful to them. She advocated the protection of the kinship-related morality by 
protesting against women’s mistreatment and demanding that men should fulfil 
their duties as breadwinners. However, Kundu also demanded changes in central 

Mobile phone use in rural India  139
cultural institutions including the marriage system, by advocating women’s rights 
to divorce, to earn an income and for the eradication of the dowry system.
Even if female representatives have taken active political roles, the scope of 
the panchayats’ powers is limited, and state policies towards women have been 
ambiguous. While involving women in its activities and state administration, the 
ruling CPI(M) party carried out land reform without considering women as land 
owners until most of the land had been distributed (Basu, 1992). In India, land 
mainly gets passed by inheritance through the male line, and ideas of the home as 
the women’s place prevent women from participating in market activities such as 
running small-scale businesses. Only a few middle-class women have benefitted 
from women’s rights economically, as these discourses encouraged them to obtain 
college education, which qualifies them for public sector jobs. The first upper 
caste girls (Tilis and Brahmins) of Janta graduated from college in the 1990s, 
and two of them found white-collar jobs (one as a teacher and the other in pub­
lic administration) soon after. Like middle-class women, only a few upper caste 
women have followed these occupational footsteps in the subsequent decades.
Mobile phone user generations
Based on the abovementioned changes, I delineate three age groups in relation to 
mobile phone use. These groups also form social generations due to their experiences 
of different social changes. Those in the age group 40+ are illiterate or have a low 
Figure 10.2  Illiteracy rate according to gender and caste status in Janta.

140  Sirpa Tenhunen
level of education. Consequently, they are unable to browse the internet. I frequently 
witnessed how many could not even make a phone call without help. Most people 
in this age group know numbers as written in Bengali script. Mobile telephones with 
Bengali script were initially available, but in 2012 I no longer saw these around; 
most people had switched to using Chinese phones, which use the English alphabet. 
Therefore, most people in this age group can answer a phone, but are unable to read 
and type numbers written in English script. The reason for this age group’s inability 
to learn English is that in 1981, the state’s former ruling Marxist government banned 
the study of English in schools up to class 5; however, English was re-introduced 
from class 2 in 1999.3
A technical ability to use a phone matters; nevertheless, the inability to read 
English numbers and text does not exclude anyone from calling, because phones 
are shared and people are helped to use a phone. I witnessed both young men and 
women acting as phone use experts in their families. Consequently, intergenera­
tional relationships give the elder generation access to digital media similarly to 
rural China, where Oreglia (2014) discovered unlikely ICT users in older women 
who maintained relationships and accessed online entertainment after receiving 
training from their children. Similar kinds of assistance relationships have been 
observed in many locations, both in developing and developed countries. Based 
on her research on internet users in North America, Bakardjieva (2005) estab­
lished the concept of a ‘warm expert’ to refer to the local technical expert who is 
sympathetic to those who need help and support with ICTs and who has knowl­
edge about the people s/he helps. Many people worldwide are also involved in 
proxy internet use, defined as using the internet on somebody else’s behalf or 
relying on others to access the internet (Selwyn et al., 2016).
The importance of education for mobile phone use was highlighted when I 
observed a 12-year-old girl effortlessly learning to browse English language infor­
mation from the internet by means of a smart phone while the older, less educated 
generation in the same family needed help to just type in a number. Since mobile 
phones are not considered private, children play an important role in enabling 
the elder generation’s phone use by helping them manage the phone’s functions. 
A wealth of studies (Fortunati, 2001; Kasesniemi and Rautiainen, 2002; Wilska, 
2003; Höflich and Hartmann, 2006; Ito et al., 2006; Yoon, 2006a, 2006b) demon­
strate that teens and children use digital media to construct identity and fine-tune 
social relationships, especially in Western countries. In Janta, the generational 
divide differs from that in most Western countries, since children and teens in 
rural India still rarely have a chance to independently use digital media. Most 
people simply cannot afford to allow their children to make regular phone calls. 
Although children are not perceived as consumers with a certain degree of auton­
omy, as in Western countries, in Janta both girls and boys are skilled at operating 
phones, even smartphones, which they use to play games and listen to music.
Like children, the age group 25–40 is better educated than the older generation, 
and most of the first college-educated people in the village belong to this cohort. 
Consequently, this generation has the ability to use phones independently. In 
addition, they are the first generation to grow up experiencing the decrease in the 

Mobile phone use in rural India  141
importance of farming, and young men in this group, considered the main opera­
tors and owners of household phones, are more motivated to use their phones to 
build networks outside the village than older generations. The majority of phone 
owners mentioned calling relatives as the main reason for obtaining their phone. 
However, in practice, men call their friends more than their relatives.
Women in this age group of 25–40 are influenced by the women’s movement 
in India. The most important function of mobile phones for young married women 
is to better connect with their natal families, as for most women, natal families 
are a major source of support in times of difficulties. Women appreciate how 
mobile phones offer them the possibility to move away so that fewer people are 
within hearing distance, although it is seldom possible to make a call in complete 
privacy. For instance, young daughters-in-law told me that they usually call their 
natal homes when the in-laws are not at home. Another example is a mother I 
observed advising her daughter over the phone to disobey the mother-in-law. Her 
daughter had married into a well-to-do family, where the daughter was expected 
to take responsibility for all housework, while the mother-in-law did very little. 
Although the villagers considered the daughter as happily married because she 
had married into a wealthy family, the division of work between the women of 
the household was not considered fair. The woman’s mother saw that the only 
solution was that her daughter should express her view and refuse the excessive 
work in her in-law’s house. Without the phone, the chances for this conversation 
would have been limited because the mother would usually only meet her daugh­
ter surrounded by the daughter’s in-laws. As Lim (2016) argues, based on studies 
of diasporic families in Asia, families are actively ‘done’, shaped and reshaped, 
through mobile communication.
Whereas in many parts of India women’s mobile phone use has been expe­
rienced as a threat to the marriage system (Grodzins Gold, 2009; Doron, 2012; 
Jouhki, 2013; Kärki, 2013), in rural West Bengal the marriage system and the 
ensuing hierarchical relationships between kin groups encourage and legitimise 
women’s mobile phone use. The old practice of maintaining relationships with the 
in-laws has continued, with a new emphasis on women as initiators of contact. It 
is tangible proof of the change that it has become common practice for newlywed 
wives to stay in touch with their parents over the phone right after their mar­
riage, whereas just a decade ago I observed that contact between kin groups was 
avoided for a year after the marriage. Mobile phones help women to cultivate the 
matrilineal tendencies in the kinship system and thereby challenge male domi­
nance. Furthermore, women’s increasing access to mobile phones influences the 
kinship code of conduct and kinship hierarchies within families and between kin 
groups. Motivated by women’s rights discourses and political activism, women 
use phones to realise their goals of widening the domestic sphere.
Mobile phones are a double-edged sword in that they undermine the author­
ity structure of joint families, which could contribute to conflicts and make young 
women vulnerable. However, since women who call their parents often receive 
money for their calls from their husbands, women’s calling does not lead to conflicts 
with husbands, which long visits to women’s natal families could. A husband who 

142  Sirpa Tenhunen
provides money for his wife’s calls strengthens his relationship with his wife and 
loosens the grip of the joint family on the couple’s relationship. Moreover, women 
calling their natal families serves to reduce the distance between the kin groups, 
which can have unintended consequences for the meaning of all kin relationships.
Generations within local hierarchies
The concept of social generation has appealed to market researchers in their quest 
to understand generational differences in consumption through such notions as 
Generation Y, which has mostly been used to refer to young and adventurous con­
sumers mainly in Western countries, but also in India. For example, Jain and Pant 
(2015) identify Generation Y as those born between 1980 and 2000, from three 
Indian metropolises. Nevertheless, their description focuses clearly on upper class 
youth since they are the ones who can afford to access multiple media simultane­
ously. In rural West Bengal, class and caste crucially influence the above discussed 
age groups’ experiences and phone use. The biggest barrier for both men’s and 
women’s phone use is the cost of calling. Low-income families share the under­
standing that phones need to be used sparingly, thus reflecting their financial means, 
whereas the upper classes can spend generously on phone calls. I will next discuss 
how local hierarchies influence the meaning of new media within generations.
Considering the difficulties many villagers face in using even basic phones for 
calling, I was surprised to discover in 2012 that most households had a Chinese-
made smartphone. I was told that nowadays Bagdis (the lowest caste) have 
acquired fancy phones. These inexpensive Chinese smartphones cost around INR 
700 (€9.5),4 which equals approximately one week of a daily labourer’s salary, 
and they are internet ready. Most people in the scheduled caste neighbourhood of 
the village did not own a television when they purchased a Chinese smartphone. 
When I told my upper caste friends in the town of Vishnupur about the popularity 
of smartphones among the Bagdis, they commented that common people’s use 
of phones as entertainment centres entails the misuse of phones, which should be 
used for making calls. The low castes and classes’ use of mobile phones for enter­
tainment stirred controversy, because their new ability to possess such advanced 
technological gadgets was deemed as disruptive of local hierarchies – apparently, 
a Bagdi caste person owning a smartphone challenges upper castes’ views of lower 
castes as backward. Although Bagdis did not buy branded phones, their smart­
phones are a similar statement of identity that confirms their relative improvement 
in relation to the upper, land owning castes in the village. Smartphones repre­
sent Bagdis’ services and consumer products from which they had been excluded. 
This exclusion, in turn, had contributed to their social standing in neo-liberal India 
where media images have delineated the urban middle classes as the consumers 
of not just the newly available commodities but also of the new India produced 
through the meanings of these commodities (Fernandes, 2000).
Even though most households now own smartphones, only a few people used 
their personal phones to browse the internet in the village. Those who accessed 
the internet with their personal phones all had college education and therefore 

Mobile phone use in rural India  143
belong to a minority. In 2012–13, I found 33 villagers (1.4 per cent of the popula­
tion of the village, the total population of which was 2,441 in 2011) who either 
had a college degree or were studying in college. Two sisters had used a service 
provider’s free trial period to access the internet via their mobile phone, but had 
not continued after this period had expired. Two young men, both of whom had 
service jobs, occasionally used search engines to browse the internet after the free 
trial period. They also accessed Facebook through their mobile phones. Others 
used the internet to download music and films, find out about prices, products, 
jobs and exam results, as well as to send email and access study sources. Since the 
screens of low-cost smartphones are small, browsing the internet with a phone is 
difficult; consequently, even people who are able to use search engines to browse 
the internet with their phones often preferred to use internet shops to, for example, 
access exam questions and results.
Smartphone owners who did not have a college education found that the 
phone’s most interesting feature was it could be used for leisure activities. They 
preferred to use their internet-ready phones for listening to music, taking and stor­
ing photos, and watching movies. Instead of browsing the internet directly through 
their smart phones, most people use the internet indirectly on their phones. They 
buy music, videos and pictures, which are downloaded on the phone’s memory 
chip. The usual package sold in the downloading shop in Janta includes popular 
Hindi and Bengali songs and films, devotional music, pictures of scenery, women, 
film stars, and gods and goddesses.
The availability of internet-ready phones in Janta has not, regardless of class 
and education, caused people to become internet users. Grasping the textual con­
tent of the internet requires more than the average level of education in the village 
and thus, only those with a college education can use search engines to browse 
the internet. Like mobile calls, internet use is considered expensive: the lowest 
monthly fee was INR 98 (€1.3) in 2013, which only offers a limited number of 
gigabytes and a slow connection. Most people preferred to spend this amount on 
cable television instead of internet connection as it is possible to get more than 
100 television channels for INR 100 per month.
As Donner (2015, p. 153) argues, practitioners, theorists and policymakers 
should be wary of proclaiming that the digital divide between developed and 
developing countries has been bridged thanks to smartphones. Access to the 
internet by means of smartphones does not provide the same affordances as a 
broadband connection by means of a desktop or laptop computer. In addition to 
the difficulties of reading on a small screen, it is hard to use smartphones to author 
internet content, which is one of the key affordances of the internet, as compared 
to printed text. Moreover, when every click on the internet costs money, users are 
likely to conserve airtime and their data bundles’ balance carefully.
Conclusions
My exploration of social generations in rural India highlights how people’s posi­
tions in hierarchical social structures shape the formation of social generations 

144  Sirpa Tenhunen
as well as how the generations use new media. Moreover, in Janta village, the 
generational divide in mobile phone use is different from most Western countries 
since children and teens in rural India still rarely have a chance to use digital media 
autonomously. Most children and youth do not possess their own personal phones 
and therefore cannot use mobile phones and social media to strengthen ties with 
their peers, as youth in many parts of the world do. Nevertheless, they play an 
important role in making mobile telephony accessible for the elder generation: in 
rural West Bengal, the ‘soft expert’ is usually the younger family member rather 
than a peer or friend. The situation in Janta also differs from many other locations 
(Bakardjieva, 2005; Oreglia, 2014) in that people rely not only on others for using 
the internet but also for using the calling functions of the phones. By taking an 
expert role with regard to the mundane use of mobile phones, children and young 
adults are able to introduce subtle changes in family hierarchies, which is custom­
arily based on seniority. The younger generation, understood broadly as people 
who are in junior positions in their families, therefore use mobile phones to contest 
family hierarchies and build networks outside the family, more than the elder gen­
eration who are able to use mobile phones only with the help of an intermediary.
Much of the anthropological research on the use of mobile phones has an 
emphasis on the way technologies tend to reinforce existing structures and, espe­
cially, adherence to kinship patterns (Horst and Miller, 2006; Barendregt, 2008; 
Archambault, 2011; Doron, 2012; Jouhki, 2013; Lipset, 2013). Applying the con­
cept of generation helps to shift attention to how phones are used as part of social 
changes. The identification of different mobile phone user groups reveals that it 
is especially the groups whose structural position has undergone changes that use 
mobile phones to negotiate local hierarchies: youth, high caste women and low 
caste people. Therefore, not only do social generations reflect objective social 
changes, they also provide opportunities for agency, which in turn crucially shape 
generational experiences.
Notes
1	 My earlier research in Janta focused on gender, politics, and exchange relationships 
(Tenhunen, 2003, 2008, 2011).
2	 The official poverty line in India was calculated based on the minimum energy require­
ments until 2011, when a new poverty line based on a cost of living was introduced.
3	 Primary education from class 1 to 10 in India is for children aged 6 to 14 years old.
4	 In 2013, the minimum payment for daily workers according to the standards set by the 
government work scheme NREGA in India was INR 174.
References
Aboim, S. and Vasconcelos, P., 2014. From political to social generations: a critical reap­
praisal of Mannheim’s classical approach. European Journal of Social Theory, 17(2), 
pp. 165–183.
Archambault, J., 2011. Breaking up ‘because of the phone’ and the transformative potential 
of information in Southern Mozambique. New Media and Society 13, pp. 444–456.

Mobile phone use in rural India  145
Bakardjieva, M., 2005. Internet society: the internet in everyday life. London: SAGE.
Banerjee, A., Pranab, B., Basu, K., Datta, M., Chaudhury, M. D., Ghatak, M., Guha, A. S., 
Majumdar, M., Mookherjee, D. and Ray, D., 2002. Strategy for economic reform in West 
Bengal. Economic and Political Weekly, 37(41), pp. 4203–4218.
Barendregt, B., 2008. Sex, cannibals, and the language of cool, Indonesian tales of the 
phone and modernity. The Information Society, 24(3), pp. 160–170.
Basu, A., 1992. Two faces of protest: contrasting modes of women’s activism in India. 
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Census of India, 2011a. Primary census abstracts. West Bengal, New Delhi: Office of the 
Registrar General and Census Commissioner.
Census of India, 2011b. Provisional population totals [online] www.censusindia.gov.
in/2011-prov-results/indiaatglance.html.
Donner, J., 2015. After access: inclusion, development, and a more mobile internet. 
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Doron, A., 2012. Mobile persons, cell phones, gender and the self in North India. The Asia 
Pacific Journal of Anthropology, 13(5), pp. 414–433.
Fernandes, L., 2000. Nationalizing ‘the global’, media images, cultural politics and the 
middle class in India. Media, Culture and Society, 22(5), pp. 611–628.
Fortunati, L., 2001. The mobile phone, an identity on the move. Personal and Ubiquitous 
Computing 5, pp. 98–85.
Grodzins Gold, S., 2009. Tasteless profits and vexed moralities: assessments of the present 
in rural Rajasthan. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 15(2), pp. 365–385.
Höflich, J. R. and Hartman, M., eds., 2006. Mobile communication in everyday life: ethno­
graphic views, observations and reflections. Berlin: Frank and Timme.
Horst, H. and Miller, D., 2006. The cell phone: an anthropology of communication. 
Oxford, UK: Berg.
Ito, M., Daisuke, O. and Matsuda, M., eds., 2006. Personal, portable, pedestrian: mobile 
phones in Japanese life. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jain, V. and Pant, S., 2015. Positioning generation Y for effective mobile communication: 
the case of three cities in India. Transnational Marketing Journal, 3(1), pp. 1–25.
Jouhki, J., 2013. A phone of one’s own? Social value, cultural meaning and gendered use 
of the mobile phone in South India. Journal of the Finnish Anthropological Society, 
38(1), pp. 37–58.
Kärki, J., 2013. ‘If my daughter runs away, I will drink poison’: an anthropological study 
of child marriage in North Indian villages. Unpublished Master’s Thesis manuscript. 
Helsinki, Finland: University of Helsinki.
Kasesniemi, E.-L. and Rautiainen, P., 2002. Mobile communication of children and 
teenagers in Finland. In: J. Katz and M. Aakhus, eds. Perpetual contact: mobile commu­
nication, private talk and public performance. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University 
Press, pp. 170–193.
Kertzer, D. L., 1983. Generation as a sociological problem. Annual Review Sociology, 9, 
pp. 125–149.
Kumar, S., 2016. Agrarian transformation and the new rurality in western Uttar Pradesh. 
Economic and Political Weekly, 37(19), pp. 61–71.
Kundu, T., 2000. Personal interview with Tapati Kundu.
Lim, S. S., ed., 2016. Mobile communication and the family: Asian experiences in technol­
ogy domestication. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.
Lipset, D., 2013. Mobail: moral ambivalence and the domestication of mobile telephones 
in peri-urban Papua New Guinea. Culture, Theory and Critique, 54(3), pp. 335–354.

146  Sirpa Tenhunen
Mannheim, K., 1952 [1927]. The problem of generations. In: P. Kecskemeti, ed. Essays on 
the sociology of knowledge. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Oreglia, E., 2014. ICT and (personal) development in rural China. Information Technologies 
and International Development, 10(3), pp. 19–30.
Otten, T. and Simpson, E., 2016. F G Bailey’s Bisipara revisited. Economic and Political 
Weekly, 37(19), pp. 25–32.
Rustagi, P., ed., 2009. Concerns, conflicts, and cohesions: universalization of elementary 
education in India. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Selwyn, N., Johnson, N., Nemorin, S. and Knight, E., 2016. Going online on behalf of oth­
ers: an investigation of ‘proxy’ internet consumers. Sydney: Australian Communications 
Consumer Action Network.
Stern, R. W., 1993. Changing India. New Delhi: Foundation Books.
Tenhunen, S., 2003. Culture and political agency, gender, kinship and village politics in 
West Bengal. Contributions to Indian Sociology, 37(3), pp. 495–518.
Tenhunen, S., 2008. Mobile technology in the village, ICTs, culture, and social logistics in 
India. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 14(3), pp. 515–534.
Tenhunen, S., 2011. Culture, conflict and translocal communication, mobile technology 
and politics in rural West Bengal, India. Ethnos, 76(3), pp. 398–420.
Tenhunen, S., 2014. Mobile technology, mediation and gender in rural India. Contemporary 
South Asia, 22(2), pp. 157–170.
The UNFPA report, 2014. The state of world population: the power of 1.8 billion, adoles­
cents, youth and the transformation of the future. www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/
pub-pdf/EN-SWOP14-Report_FINAL-web.pdf.
Varshney, A., 2000. Is India becoming more democratic? Journal of Asian Studies, 59(1), 
pp. 3–25.
Wilska, T.-A., 2003. Mobile phone use as part of young people’s consumption styles. 
Journal of Consumer Policy, 26, pp. 441–463.
Woodman, D. and Wyn, J., 2015. Class, gender and generation matter: using the concept 
of social generation to study inequality and social change. Journal of Youth Studies, 
18(10), pp. 1402–1410.
Yoon, K., 2006a. The making of neo-Confucian cyberkids: representations of young 
mobile phone users in South Korea. New Media and Society, 8(5), pp. 771–753.
Yoon, K., 2006b. Local sociality in young people’s mobile communications: a Korean case 
study. Childhood, 13(2), pp.174–155.

Part III
Consumption, lifestyles 
and markets


11	 Necessities to all?
The role of ICTs in the everyday life 
of the middle-aged and elderly 
between 1999 and 2014
Terhi-Anna Wilska and Sanna-Mari 
Kuoppamäki
Introduction
The devices of the new information and communication technology (ICT) have 
become essential parts of everyday life. ICTs are incorporated in people’s lives 
through forms of social networking and knowledge formation that promote new 
kinds of interactions and collaborations between people in different social and 
demographic groups. Nearly everyone owns a mobile phone, while the ownership 
of personal computers (PCs), smartphones and tablet computers has increased 
significantly in all age groups (Statistics Finland, 2015). However, there is little 
quantitative research on the significance of ICTs, as to how necessary they are 
considered in everyday life, especially among older users of these goods and 
services. Particularly, longitudinal studies in the older population are rare.
Much research has been conducted on the topic of digital divides, pointing 
out both socio-economic and socio-demographic differences in use and access. 
In terms of age related differences, younger generations are frequently regarded 
as ‘born digital’. They have been called ‘digital natives’ whereas older genera­
tions seem doomed to be forever ‘digital immigrants’ (e.g. Prensky, 2001; Herold, 
2012; Lugano and Peltonen, 2012). This view of a generational divide has been 
contested by many researchers, however, and the importance of time, period, life 
course stage and lifestyle-related matters offer a more nuanced understanding 
when explaining access, ownership and ICT use in different age groups (Helsper 
and Eynon, 2010; White and Le Cornu, 2011; Bolin, 2014; Gilleard et al., 2015; 
Taipale, 2016). Research suggests that the use of and need for digital technolo­
gies varies over time and across the life course, as well as with changes in family 
composition, in patterns of work and leisure, and in people’s social life (Spero and 
Stone, 2004; Livingstone et al., 2005).
The aim of this chapter is to study how the perceived necessity of PCs, the 
internet and mobile phone for middle-aged and elderly people (aged 45–74) has 
developed during the period 1999–2014 in Finland. Drawing upon four waves 
of cross-sectional data, we explore both cohort/generation- and period-based 
approaches. The 15-year period that is covered by this research makes it possible 
to investigate if generational patterns (as distinct from patterns based upon period 
or age) can be found in the perceived significance of ICTs in people’s lives. 

150  Terhi-Anna Wilska, Sanna-Mari Kuoppamäki
We also look at the perceived necessity of mobile internet and tablet computers 
among all age groups (18–74) in 2014, in order to examine the significance of age, 
cohort and life course stage in the current diffusion of these more recent techno­
logical innovations.
ICT, generations and life course
The use of technology has been frequently explained by attributes related to genera­
tions, emphasising the importance of youth in the adoption of new technologies. The 
typologies and divisions of the age cohorts born in the Western world in the 20th 
century vary somewhat between countries (Smola and Sutton, 2002; Karisto, 2007; 
Hyde et al., 2009; Parment, 2013). However, in most countries, the post World War 
II birth cohorts are regarded as being in a particularly pivotal position in terms 
of the development of modern lifestyles. The division that has been employed in 
the analysis of this study are the early 1900s Generation (born ca. 1900–29), the 
pre-Baby Boomers or War Generation (born ca. 1929–1944), the Baby Boomers 
(born ca. 1945–59),1 Generation Xs (born ca. 1960–1974), Generation Ys (born 
ca. 1975–1989) and Generation Zs or the Millennials (those born ca. 1990–2005). 
The alphabetisation of the generations (as X, Y and Z generations), which is typi­
cal of American social and economic research,2 is nowadays also commonly used 
in Europe.
In the 1980s and 1990s, most of the research looked at the use of ICTs from 
a generational viewpoint, calling the younger age cohorts (Y, Z) as the Net 
Generation, or the e-Generation. Researchers argued that exposure to ICT in 
youth leads to better knowledge and more ready inclusion in digital environ­
ments. For these young age cohorts, their generational identity was typically 
seen as being bound up with the new technology, particularly to mobile phones 
that penetrated the market during the 1990s (Tapscott, 1998; Turkle, 1996). In 
general, the use of ICTs was frequently seen as an important marker separating 
younger and older generations. Especially in the early 2000s, studies of the use 
of ICTs showed clear differences between age cohorts, which led to the assump­
tion that technological skills are shaped in youth, and that this engagement with 
technology was shaping the core values of these generations, which in turn deter­
mines the interest in and competence of using new technology later in life. This 
pattern of differential adoption eventually results in a digital divide between 
the generations (Haddon, 2005; Green, 2010). Particularly in the 1990s, many 
researchers were fascinated by the ways young people used and appropriated 
ICTs, and the position of young users of ICTs became almost mythical by the 
2000s. The generations of ‘digital natives’ were thought to mature earlier and 
to have become more knowledgeable than any previous generation (Rushkoff, 
1996; Turkle, 1996; Tapscott, 1998; Gobé, 2001; Wilska, 2003; Wilska and 
Pedrozo, 2007). It was even argued that digital technologies had created a wider 
social and cultural gap between Generation X and the ‘digital natives’ genera­
tions Y and Z than the gap between Generation X and the Baby Boomers (Jones 
et al., 2009; Parment, 2013).

Necessities to all?  151
Each generation is, however, tied to certain time periods that are characterised 
by their own distinct social, economic and cultural conditions. This wider cultural 
context is likely to affect ICT usage and the perceived necessity of ICTs for all age 
groups. In Finland, the ownership rate of mobile phone or internet does not now 
differ much between age groups (Statistics Finland, 2015). This suggests that the 
use and consumption of digital technologies are connected to certain time periods 
when technologies become available to the majority of consumers, regardless of 
their age. Changes in the life course also matter, and generationally determined 
engagement with technology is likely to change along with people’s position in 
the life course. For instance, household structure and family context influence 
the use of digital technologies significantly (Livingstone et al., 2005). The pres­
ence of young people in the household increases the use of ICTs for adults, for 
example, as young people and children are often the reason for acquiring the 
technology in the first place. There is also a bi-directional pattern of influence 
as young people also may help their parents in the use of the new technologies 
(Haddon, 2005; Eynon and Helsper, 2015).
As children grow up and move away from home when their parents typically 
approach late midlife, ICTs become the necessary means for keeping up the con­
nection between the generations. Moreover, in late midlife and older adulthood, 
new demands for technologies emerge as the importance of social networks 
increases in terms of sustaining well-being. (Charles and Carstensen, 2010; 
Hutteman et al., 2014). After retirement, older adults have an increased amount 
of leisure time (Helson et al., 2006; Kokko, 2010), which facilitates engagement 
in leisure-based online services such as entertainment and social networking. 
Age differences in ICT use might also be blurring as lifestyles of different gen­
erations have been assimilated, particularly after the generational schism of the 
long 1960s, and middle-aged and older people want to become users of ICTs 
and participants in online activities in much the same way as younger people do 
(Räsänen and Koiranen, 2016).
Life course transitions and changes in social roles and personal relationships 
differ between men and women. These differences in turn may contribute to some­
what gendered practices in the use and consumption of ICTs in late midlife and 
old adulthood. Parenthood typically changes gender divisions, and the domestic 
division of labour often becomes more traditional within the household, which 
in turn affects the use of technologies in people’s daily lives (Fortunati, 2011). 
Then, as children move away from home and the demands of daily housework 
decreases, the gendered division of household labour changes once more, which 
in turn may further affect the role of ICTs in daily life.
ICTs and consumption norms
Apart from being means of communication and ways of using technological 
skills, ICT goods and services are also consumable objects and provide access 
to other new consumable services. Thus, ICTs can be examined as the acquisi­
tion of material possessions, as sources of distinction and as essential parts of 

152  Terhi-Anna Wilska, Sanna-Mari Kuoppamäki
modern consumer lifestyles. As a result of the rapid development of technol­
ogy, in Finland and other affluent countries, technological commodities such as 
mobile phones and computers, are increasingly regarded as part of life’s neces­
sities (Lehtinen et al., 2011; Aro and Wilska, 2014). In consumer societies, the 
consensually accepted necessities create consumption norms; those items which 
households should own, and activities they should be able to participate in. Issues 
such as the capability to achieve an adequate standard of living and a lifestyle 
which is in accordance with prevailing norms, are relevant when conceptualising 
the necessities in people’s everyday lives. (Halleröd et al., 2006; Bradshaw et al., 
2008; Aro and Wilska, 2014). The notion of a ‘good’ or ‘adequate’ consumer in 
modern consumer society possesses both the material resources and the cognitive 
competences to know how to consume (Bauman, 1998; Wilska, 2001).
Consumer societies are dynamic and driven by change. The shifting percep­
tions of what constitute the necessities of life and lifestyle mean that commodities 
that may at one time have been regarded as specialities or luxuries may in a short 
time span become necessities and essential elements in contemporary lifestyles 
(Dwyer, 2009, p. 334). In some cases, a peak and a fall may occur, as some items 
rise in importance only to quickly become obsolete and are then replaced by the 
next wave of new technology. In terms of telephony, for example, the landline 
phone was first replaced with ‘ordinary’ mobile phones, which were subsequently 
quickly replaced by smartphones. DVDs are rapidly being replaced by digital 
TV platforms, and non-professional digital cameras with mobile phone cameras. 
Technological products are often expensive when first introduced to the market, 
and they also require technical competence which some may be able to afford and 
some may possess, thus enabling such technology to serve as sources of distinc­
tion and symbols of status (cf. Bourdieu, 1984). The prices and status value of the 
new technologies have led to discussions about digital divides between different 
socio-economic groups, linking ICTs to questions of what is necessary for a decent 
standard of living in a consumer society. Previous research has confirmed that both 
income and education have effects on both the use of ICTs and their perceived 
necessity (Räsänen, 2006; Bauerlein, 2011; Tondeur et al., 2011; Aro and Wilska, 
2014). In older age groups, in particular, people with high education and income 
are more likely to possess and use PCs and the internet than less educated and/or 
poorer older people (Zickuhr and Madden, 2012; Van Deursen and Helsper, 2015; 
Piper et al., 2016; Räsänen and Koiranen, 2016). ICT goods cannot be seen solely 
in terms of their role as status commodities, though. They also serve as organisers 
of multiple functions in daily life and are increasingly needed for several errands 
in today’s societies such as accessing public services, shopping, entertainment 
and participating in various forms of social networking. The more ICT goods are 
regarded as necessities, the more they become intrinsic elements of everyday life 
(Lehtonen, 2003; Røpke, 2003; Shove, 2003; Warde, 2005).
Generational differences in the perception of life’s necessities, in the diffusion 
of the ICTs and in the ways that technology is incorporated into the lifestyles 
of people at different life course stages are undoubtedly intertwined (Hyde 
et al., 2009; Carr et al., 2012). Therefore, it is likely that the ways of using ICTs 

Necessities to all?  153
and the meanings they represent vary for different age cohorts, each growing 
up in different environments and time periods. Furthermore, broader social and 
economic macro circumstances also have an effect, as well as cultural variations 
between societies. From the viewpoint of Finnish generations, those cohorts born 
before World War II encountered digital technology only in their old age, after 
retirement. The Baby Boomers learned to use ICTs in their middle-age in the late 
1990s and 2000s while at work and with their children at school. The members 
of Generation X were exposed to digital technology in their young adulthood, 
as the consumption of ICTs grew remarkably in Finland in the 1990s (Wilska, 
2001, 2003). Even younger generations, the members of the Ys and the Zs, have 
in their turn grown up amidst digital technology and constant online communica­
tion, making their relation to ICTs unique compared with most other generations 
(Barbagallo, 2003; Valentine and Powers, 2013).
Differences between age cohorts might thus be considered likely to fade, 
particularly for items that have existed long enough and are thus incorporated 
as necessary elements sustaining the practices of everyday life. For instance, 
Hyde et al. (2009) found out that in the early 2000s, ‘older’ technical goods such 
as (landline) telephones and TVs were possessed almost equally often by both 
older and younger age cohorts, whereas the ownership of 1980s’ innovations 
like VCRs, microwave ovens and PCs remained low in old age cohorts even 
in the 2000s (Hyde et al., 2009, pp. 110–115). What is likely is that nowadays, 
since the diffusion of today’s technological innovations is so much faster than 
before, it has become much more difficult to predict how today’s middle-aged 
and elderly age cohorts will adopt the new technologies as part of the necessary 
architecture of modern lifestyles.
Research questions
Informed by the discussion above, we turn to our empirical research programme 
examining the perceived necessity of ICTs to those age cohorts frequently 
described as ‘digital immigrants’, those age cohorts that were 45–74 years old 
in 1999, 2004, 2009 and 2014. On the basis of previous research, it is obvious 
that over a 15-year period, many ICTs will have become part of everyday life 
and thereby the initial differences between age cohorts should be evened out over 
time. As people also tend to judge items that they already possess as necessities 
(e.g. Halleröd et al., 2006; Aro and Wilska, 2014), it might be expected that as 
the perceived necessity of ICTs has grown with time, ownership rates will also 
increase across all age groups. Given these considerations, we examine potential 
determinants of the perceived necessity of more recent ICT innovations as well 
as mobile internet and tablet computer use among all age groups (18–74) in 2014, 
since new technologies have previously been detected as being adopted first by 
younger age groups. We also examined the effects of socio-demographic varia­
bles on the perceived necessity of these goods, as previous studies in Finland have 
suggested that people with high income and education are more likely than poorer 
people to regard technological devices as necessities. Previous studies have also 

154  Terhi-Anna Wilska, Sanna-Mari Kuoppamäki
detected differences within the middle-aged and older adults in terms of house­
hold structure (life course stage) and gender (Räsänen, 2006; Aro and Wilska, 
2014; Piper et al., 2016; Räsänen and Koiranen, 2016; Taipale, 2016), so these 
factors were also taken into consideration in delineating possible digital divides.
The specific research questions are as follows:
1	
What is the perceived necessity of ICT products (mobile phone, PC and inter­
net connection) among different age/birth cohorts among 45- to 74-year-olds 
in 1999, 2004, 2009 and 2014?
2	
Can cohort- or generation-based differences be detected throughout the 
period 1999–2014 in the perceived necessity of ICTs?
3	
Can socio-demographic differences be detected across the various 45- to 
74-year-olds’ age cohorts regarding the perceived necessities of ICTs?
4	
Can socio-demographic differences be detected in the perceived necessity of 
more recent technology (mobile internet and tablet computers) in 2014 across 
all age cohorts?
Data and methods
The data used in this study are derived from a postal survey ‘Finland – 
Consumption and Lifestyle’ that was repeated 4 times within 15 years. The 
surveys covered a wide range of questions regarding attitudes and practices 
related to consumption, work, income, lifestyles and perceived problems in 
society. The first survey was carried out in 1999 (N=2,417), the next in 2004 
(N=3,574), five years later, in 2009 (N=1,202) and finally in 2014 (N=1,350). 
The size of the total sample of interviewees was N=8,543 (Koivula et al., 2015). 
The overall design was a repeated cross-sectional survey. Each year question­
naires were sent out to 18- to 74-year-old Finnish-speakers, randomly selected 
from the Finnish Population Register Database. In 1999, the response rate was 
61 per cent, in 2004, 60 per cent, in 2009, 49 per cent, and in 2014, 46 per cent 
(Erola et al., 2005; Sarpila et al., 2010; Koivula et al., 2015). In 2009 and 2014, 
the questionnaire could also be completed online (Koivula et al., 2015). In the 
final data sampling, older age groups and females were overrepresented, which 
was corrected by weighting the data by age and gender.
In this study, we analysed the question: Which of the following do you regard 
as necessities in your daily life? This was asked in respect of mobile phones, PCs 
and the internet for all years under examination. In 2014, the tablet computer and 
mobile internet were included as new items in the questionnaire. Responses were 
rated as: 1 = necessity; 2 = useful, but not a necessity, and 3 = not necessary at all. 
To simplify interpretation of the analyses, the responses were reverse-scored; a 
larger value representing a higher level of perceived necessity.
Two-way ANOVA models were used as analytical tools. The perceived 
necessities of the internet, PCs and mobile phones were used as the dependent 
variables in the analysis. First, the differences between age cohorts in years 1999, 
2004, 2009 and 2014 were measured by comparing the means of the perceived 

Necessities to all?  155
necessity of PC, internet connection and mobile phone in different age groups. 
The significance of the differences was tested with a two-way ANOVA model 
that included: (a) the interaction of the year of examination and age, (b) gender, 
(c) income quintile, (d) socio-economic status, (e) education and (f) absence/
presence of children (of any age) in the household as independent variables. The 
year and age interactions were significant in the overall models of all ICTs (sig. 
of F <0.05). The significance of age in each year were tested with unstandardised 
parameter estimates (B) that describe how much the means of the different cat­
egories of the independent variables deviate from the reference category. For the 
PC and internet connection, the differences between age groups were significant 
in 1999 and 2004 (sig. of B <0.05), but in 2009, only the differences between the 
two oldest age groups (aged 65–74) and the youngest age group were significant. 
For the mobile phone, the differences between age groups were all significant in 
1999 and 2004, but in 2009 and 2014, the differences were not significant in any 
age groups (Figures 11.1–11.3). Subsequently, the socio-demographic predictors 
of the necessity values were analysed in terms of mobile phone, PC and internet 
among the six age cohorts in all years under examination. Another ANOVA 
model was built to examine the predictors for the perceived necessity for tablet 
and mobile internet in all age groups in 2014.
The age groups were divided into six categories, those aged 45–49 years, 
50–54 years, 55–59 years, 60–64 years, 65–69 years and 70–74 years. In the anal­
yses, these age groups were turned into birth cohorts. The 5-year birth cohorts in 
our analyses are shorter than the generations that are typically regarded as 15–20 
years long, since we assumed that if the cohorts covered longer periods, it would 
be more difficult to detect differences in the perceived necessities of the products 
of the ICTs which typically spread rapidly, as new products flow constantly into 
the market (e.g. Dwyer 2009). Because the longitudinal data 1999–2014 were 
constructed from four cross-sectional datasets, it was not possible to do a proper 
cohort analysis. However, as the samples were large and nationally representa­
tive, it was possible to create pseudo cohorts of the individuals in the years under 
examination (see also Hyde et al., 2009). In 1999, the oldest age cohort of 45- to 
74-year-olds was born in 1925, and in 2014, the youngest cohort was born in 
1969. Thus, if interpreted as generations, the samples of individuals ranged from 
those belonging to the early 1900s generations to members of Generation X.
Results
The perceived necessity of PC, internet and mobile phones, 1999–2014
Figure 11.1 shows that in 1999, although 40 per cent of all households already 
owned a PC (Kangassalo, 2002), most did not regard it as very necessary. 
However, there were clear differences between the age cohorts. The oldest 
cohorts, those born before WW2, regarded the PC as almost totally unnecessary, 
whereas the post-war Baby Boomer cohorts were clearly more interested in PCs. 
The perceived necessity of PCs increased rapidly for members of all six birth 

156  Terhi-Anna Wilska, Sanna-Mari Kuoppamäki
cohorts during the 2000s, but the differences between the cohorts remained until 
2009, which suggests a slight cohort effect for most of the earlier period. But by 
2014, the perceived necessity had reached a high level for all the samples, and 
these age cohort differences had evened out as members of all age cohorts now 
regarded the PC as more or less a necessity. The differences between cohorts 
born after WW2 were small during the whole period, and by 2014, the oldest 
surviving cohort (those born in 1940–44, who were now aged 70–74 years old) 
rated the necessity of these goods and services at almost the same level as the 
younger cohorts.
The perceived necessity of the internet followed a similar pattern as that for 
the PC, as shown in Figure 11.2. It too started as a non-necessity, rated even less 
necessary than the PC in 1999, probably because only about 20 per cent of all 
households had an internet connection at home at the time (Kangassalo, 2002). 
However, its perceived necessity increased rapidly during the 15-year period. The 
differences between birth cohorts were slightly larger for the internet than for 
the PC, as its perceived necessity developed more slowly for the older cohorts 
who were born before WW2 than for the Baby Boomers and subsequent younger 
cohorts. The age cohorts born after 1955 differed clearly from older cohorts and 
in 2014, the youngest cohort – those born between 1965 and 1969, who were 
aged 45–49 years old in 2014, – stands out from all other older cohorts reporting 
a clearly higher perceived necessity for the internet. However, for all age cohorts, 
the internet was regarded as more or less a necessity by 2014.
1999
1
1,2
1,4
1,6
1,8
2
2,2
2,4
2,6
2,8
3
2004
2009
2014
–
–
1925–29
1950–54
1945–49
1940–44
1935–39
+
+
+
+
1955–59
1965–69
1960–64
1930–34
–
Figure 11.1  The mean perceived necessity of PCs among five-year pseudo cohorts aged 
from 45 to 74 between 1999–2014.
Note: Means in 1–3 scale, (1 = not a necessity at all, 2 = useful, but not a necessity, 3 = a necessity).

Necessities to all?  157
Changes in the perceived necessity of mobile phones developed rather differ­
ently (see Figure 11.3). In 1999, 80 per cent of all Finnish households already 
owned at least one mobile phone (Kangassalo, 2002), and in most families with 
children, there were as many mobile phones as there were members of the house­
hold (Wilska, 2003). Thus, the mean perceived necessity of a mobile phone was 
quite high in 1999 for all age cohorts (almost 1.9 on a 1–3 scale), even among 
the oldest age cohort (i.e. those born in 1925–29). Thus, at the start, even elderly 
people in Finland regarded the mobile phone as at least ‘useful’. During the whole 
period from 1999 to 2014, the differences between age cohorts remained small, 
although interestingly, the perceived necessity of mobile phones seemed to reach 
a saturation point around the year 2009. From then until 2014, the perceived 
necessity did not grow any more. This might have been because during this lat­
ter five-year period, alternative means of communication had developed, via the 
internet, such as video calling. In 2015, for example, almost 20 per cent of people 
across the age range 45 to 74 years old were reported to have used online or video 
call applications in Finland (Statistics Finland, 2015).
Socio-economic and demographic predictors of the perceived 
necessity of ICTs
Next, we report analyses on the effects of other socio-demographic variables on 
the perceived necessity of ICTs among age cohorts 45–74 years old. Differences 
1999
1
1,2
1,4
1,6
1,8
2
2,2
2,4
2,6
2,8
3
2004
2009
2014
–
–
1925–29
1950–54
1945–49
1940–44
1935–39
+
1955–59
1965–69
1960–64
1930–34
–
+
+
+
Figure 11.2  The mean perceived necessity of having internet connection at home among 
5-year pseudo cohorts aged 45 to 74 between 1999–2014.
Note: Means in 1–3 scale, (1 = not a necessity at all, 2 = useful, but not a necessity, 3 = a necessity).

158  Terhi-Anna Wilska, Sanna-Mari Kuoppamäki
–
–
1925–29
1950–54
1945–49
1940–44
1935–39
+
+
+
+
1955–59
1965–69
1960–64
1930–34
–
1999
1
1,2
1,4
1,6
1,8
2
2,2
2,4
2,6
2,8
3
2004
2009
2014
Figure 11.3  The mean perceived necessity of mobile phone among 5-year pseudo cohorts 
aged 45 to 74 between 1999–2014.
Note: Means in 1–3 scale, (1 = not a necessity at all, 2 = useful, but not a necessity, 3 = a necessity).
in the perceived necessity of the ICTs (using the range of 1–3) were explored 
in relation to: (a) year of examination, (b) age, (c) gender, (d) income quintile, 
(e) socio-economic status, (f) education and (g) absence/presence of children 
(of any age) in the household. Table 11.1 displays the results from the main-
effect tests in two-way ANOVA (F- and B-values). The (adjusted) coefficients of 
determination (R²) show the proportions of variance explained by all independent 
variables in the models.
As expected, Table 11.1 shows that the year of examination affected all 
perceived necessities of the ICTs. For the perceived necessity of both the PC 
and internet, the presence of children in the household was the most significant 
other determinant; even more significant than age. High levels of education 
and high income were significantly associated with higher ratings of the per­
ceived necessity of these ICTs. Gender and socio-economic status also showed 
some effects. Males, people in managerial or professional positions, and people 
with high income, rated the PC a necessity slightly more often than females, 
other socio-economic groups and people in lower income quintiles. However, 
the effects of gender and socio-economic position were clearly smaller than the 
effects of other predictors. For the perceived necessity of mobile phones, the 
year under examination was significant only in 1999 and 2004 while determi­
nants other than age and year had little significance. Males were slightly more 
likely to regard the mobile phone as a necessity as were people in the three high­
est income quintiles. The presence of children in the household had no effect.

Necessities to all?  159
Table 11.1  Determinants of the perceived necessity of PC, internet and mobile phone 
between 1999–2014 among 45- to 74-year-olds (two-way ANOVA).
Personal computer 
(PC) (B)
Internet (B)
Mobile phone 
(B)
Age (ref. 70–74 ) 
F=8.738***
F=11.262***
F=5.241***
45–49
.280***
.318***
.247***
50–54
.267***
.287***
.181***
55–59
.275***
.271***
.133**
60–64
.231***
.205***
.154**
65–69
.133**
.124***
.138**
Year of the study (ref. 2014) 
F=260.807***
F=423.451***
F=141.820***
1999
-.994***
-1.233***
-.687
2004
-.726***
-.835***
-.371
2009
-.235***
-.289***
n.s.
Children (ref. no children 
living at home) 
F=93.404***
F=130.190***
F=.006
Children living at home
.317***
.356***
n.s.
Gender (ref. male) 
F=7.323**
F=4.660*
F=6.400**
Female
-.068**
-.051*
-.060**
Education (ref. no education) 
F=36.553***
F=23.193***
F=1.923
Vocational training
.140***
.101**
n.s.
College degree or post- 
secondary education
.294***
.206***
n.s.
University degree
.465***
.361***
n.s.
Socio-economic position 
(ref. worker, building, 
industry) 
F=2.783*
F=2.819*
F=1.478
Manager
.148**
.099*
n.s.
Professional
.118**
.129***
n.s.
Worker, office, service 
or sale
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Farmer
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Net income/consumption 
unit (ref. quintile I) 
F=17.518***
F=25.795***
F=4.096**
Quintile II
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Quintile III
n.s. 
.109**
.095*
Quintile IV
.172***
.212***
.105*
Quintile V
.292***
.358***
.153***
R Squared (adjusted R²) 
.314 (.310)
.382 (.378)
.137 (.131)
*** p <0.001; **p < 0.01; *p < 0.05
The perceived necessity of mobile internet and tablet 
computers in 2014
Questions on the perceived necessity of the new ICTs, mobile internet and tablet 
computer were asked only in 2014. Figure 11.4 illustrates the mean perceived 
necessity of these goods across all age cohorts. In 2014, the oldest cohort was 
born between 1940 and 1944 and the youngest between 1990 and 1996. The per­
ceived necessity of mobile internet was highest in the two youngest cohorts and 
rated lower with increasing age, which is not surprising. Interestingly, however, 

160  Terhi-Anna Wilska, Sanna-Mari Kuoppamäki
the perceived necessity of tablet computers was not any higher among younger 
cohorts than among the middle-aged and the elderly. This indicates that while 
tablets and smartphones both have mobile internet, young people prefer the 
smartphone over the tablet for those purposes.
Socio-demographic factors seemed to have little influence on the perceived 
necessity of mobile internet and tablet computers in the age cohorts 45–74 
years old in 2014, as shown in Table 11.2. Age, gender and socio-economic 
position were not significant predictors for either tablet computers or mobile 
internet and thus they were omitted from the models. The strongest determinant 
for both technologies was the presence of children in the household, but also, 
education and income had some effect. College or university level education 
predicted higher perceived necessity ratings for both tablet computers and the 
mobile internet, and people in the highest income quintile also regarded both 
tablet computers and mobile internet as more necessary than those in the low­
est income quintile. This suggests that people in those professions that require 
higher education may be more likely to need tablets for their work than others. 
The influence of income was not very high though, as there were differences 
only between the highest and lowest income quintiles. Finally, the influence of 
young people in the household on these goods’ perceived necessity may mean 
that these devices are bought for them or that the youngsters influenced their 
parents’ needs.
Figure 11.4  The mean perceived necessity of mobile internet and tablet computers across 
all age cohorts in 2014.
Note: Means in 1–3 scale, (1 = not a necessity at all; 2 = useful, but not a necessity; 3 = a necessity).

Necessities to all?  161
Discussion and conclusions
In this chapter, we have analysed the perceived necessity of ICT for middle-aged, 
young-old and elderly people during the period 1999 to 2014 in terms of PCs, 
access to the internet and mobile phones – ICT resources that were available 
throughout the period of the surveys. The differences that existed at the beginning 
of the surveys between the different age cohorts had mostly evened out by the end. 
On the other hand, the differences between the pre and post WW2 age cohorts 
widened between 1999 and 2009. Since the pre-war cohorts were no longer in 
the age sampling frame by the end of the survey period in 2014, it is hard to say 
whether these differences might also have narrowed. This seems unlikely since 
the trend up to 2009 had been for a widening, not a narrowing of this particular 
‘generational gap’.
Differences between the age cohorts in the perceived necessity of mobile phones 
were smaller when compared with those for PCs and the internet throughout the 
whole period, which probably reflected the early and relatively more rapid diffu­
sion of mobile phones in Finland compared with most other countries. With regard 
to more recent ICTs, such as tablet computers and mobile internet, age cohort dif­
ferences in 2014 were small, and for the tablet computer, there were no significant 
differences between the younger and older age cohorts. ICTs were rated as increas­
ingly more necessary over time and this was the case for all age cohorts. However, 
between 1999 and 2009, differences between the very oldest pre-war birth cohorts 
and the younger, post-war birth cohorts remained clear and even grew wider (with 
the exception of the mobile phone). For all post-war generations, however, the 
differences in the perceived necessities of ICTs clearly evened out.
Table 11.2  Determinants of perceived necessity of tablet computer and mobile internet, 
2014, 45- to 74-year-olds.
Tablet computer
Mobile internet
Children (ref. no children living 
at home) (B)
F=11.979**
F=13.144***
Children living at home
.180**
.235***
Education (ref. no education) (B)
F=2.379*
F=5.490**
Vocational training
n.s.
n.s.
College degree or post- 
secondary education
.147*
.259**
University degree
.129*
.353**’
Income / per consumption unit 
(ref. quintile I) (B)
F=3.159*
F=3.961**
Quintile II
n.s.
n.s.
Quintile III
n.s.
n.s.
Quintile IV
n.s.
n.s.
Quintile V
.213**
.213*
R Squared (Adjusted R²) 
.036 (.027)
.057 (.048)
*** p <0.001; **p < 0.01; *p < 0.05

162  Terhi-Anna Wilska, Sanna-Mari Kuoppamäki
What should be noted is the significance of household composition, namely 
the presence of children in the household. This is consistent with the earlier dis­
cussion that pointed out the significance of life course stage in the engagement 
in ICTs. Our results suggest that younger generations exercise influence on their 
parents’ attitudes toward ICTs, which supports previous findings about the impor­
tant role young people play in the acquisition and use of ICTs within families 
(Haddon, 2005; Eynon and Helsper, 2015). Our findings strongly suggest that 
the use of and need for ICTs more often binds the generations together than cre­
ates gaps between them at least as it applies to successive post-war generations 
(see also Taipale, 2016). Gender differences were small in our study, although 
males regarded PC, internet access and mobile phone slightly more necessary 
than women. This is consistent with previous studies, which have suggested that 
women and girls have always been less interested in technical devices, although 
more in the social communication made possible with the ICTs (Gill and Grint, 
1995; Cooper and Weaver, 2003; Wilska, 2003; Taipale, 2016).
We also analysed socio-economic variables affecting the perceived necessity of 
ICTs, on the grounds that social status influences the perceptions of what consti­
tutes ‘decent’ living standards and consumption norms (Bauman, 1998; Halleröd 
et al., 2006). Since acquiring and using new technology require both economic 
resources and technical competence, ICTs are likely to become viewed as neces­
sities more rapidly among those in higher socio-economic groups (Räsänen, 2006; 
Aro and Wilska, 2014; Räsänen and Koiranen, 2016). Higher levels of education, 
income and socio-economic status were all associated with a higher perceived 
necessity for ICTs. For tablet computer and mobile internet, the effect of income 
was smaller. Some studies suggest that low socio-economic groups use only 
mobile devices to connect to the internet more than others, because they cannot 
afford both fixed and mobile broadband. Moreover, the different affordance of 
fixed use is not so much utilised by low-class and low-income people (Brown 
et al., 2013; Pearce and Rice, 2013; Taipale, 2014). Socio-demographic divisions 
became less important as the devices were increasingly adopted as essential com­
ponents of everyday life. The more our everyday life is shaped and constructed 
by technology, the more the perceived necessity of ICTs becomes part of people’s 
everyday practices, regardless of their age (again within the limits of the ages and 
age cohorts we have studied). Our results revealed, for instance, that older peo­
ple prefer tablet computers to smartphones to access the internet. This may have 
practical reasons as it is easier to operate larger screens and touchpads than with 
smartphones, which are preferred by younger people. Moreover, the requirements 
of ICTs at work may affect the perceptions of ICTs in leisure time too, as employ­
ees get used to certain practices, such as using tablet computers in meetings, while 
tablets are also used within families to entertain small children.
The obvious limitation of this study is that perceptions of the necessity of ICTs 
do not tell us much about the actual use of technology. Although ICTs are nowa­
days regarded as almost equally important to all age groups, the way technology 
is used varies between age groups. Different needs arise at different life course 
stages, which in turn affect the use of ICTs (see Oksman, 2006; Loos et al., 2012). 

Necessities to all?  163
Moreover, changes in consumer cultures over time need to be taken into account 
when interpreting generational differences. In this study, the youngest cohorts 
(born 1950–69) grew up in an expanding consumer society. This has undoubt­
edly had an effect on the adaptation of ICTs as consumer goods. The generational 
experience of material scarcity may be stronger for older cohorts (Hyde et al., 
2009), and for pre-war cohorts, ICTs were probably regarded throughout much of 
the period as unnecessary luxuries.
Although generational differences among post-war cohorts are undoubtedly 
narrowing in terms of ICT use, it is difficult to predict future developments. What 
makes research on any social aspects of ICTs difficult is the speed of new devel­
opments in ICTs. Technological innovations diffuse so rapidly that questions 
about the necessity of the internet, for instance, may soon become irrelevant. In 
the future, for both young and old, ICTs will be omnipresent along with other 
unforeseen innovations in the internet of things. We must recognise that the role 
of chronological age will only become ever more contingent as age too becomes 
an integral part of these cultural changes. New and more sensitive methods are 
thus needed for understanding the ways ICTs are perceived and appropriated in 
different age groups.
Notes
1	 In Finland, the Baby Boomer’s cohort is narrower in years than in many other countries 
such as in the UK (e.g. Karisto, 2007), The cohort born 1945-49 is disproportionately 
large in size compared to five-year cohorts born before or after that. However, the birth 
rate remained rather high in Finland during the whole 1950s, but started to decline 
rapidly in the 1960s.
2	 The name ‘Generation X’ was first used in Douglas Coupland’s (1991) novel Generation 
X: tales from an accelerated culture (New York: St. Martin’s Press).
References
Aro, R. and Wilska, T.-A., 2014. Standard of living, consumption norms, and perceived 
necessities. International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy, 34(9), pp. 710–728.
Barbagallo, P., 2003. Teens. Target Marketing, 26(4), pp. 65–68.
Bauerlein, M., 2011. The digital divide: arguments for and against Facebook, Google, 
texting, and the age of social networking. New York: Jeremy P. Tarcher/Penguin.
Bauman, Z., 1998. Work, consumerism and the new poor. Milton Keynes, UK: Open 
University Press.
Bolin, G., 2014. Media generation: objective and subjective media landscapes and nostal­
gia among generations of media users. Journal of Audience & Reception Studies, 11(2), 
pp. 108–131.
Bourdieu, P., 1984. Distinction: a social critique of the judgement of taste. London: 
Routledge.
Bradshaw, J., Middleton, S., Davis, A., Oldfield, N., Smith, N., Cusworth, L. and 
Williams, J., 2008. A minimum income standard for Britain: what people think. 
Loughborough, UK: Loughborough University/Joseph Rowntree Foundation.
Brown, K., Campbell, S. W. and Ling, R., 2013. Mobile phones bridging the digital divide 
for teens in the US? Future Internet, 3(2), pp. 144–158.

164  Terhi-Anna Wilska, Sanna-Mari Kuoppamäki
Carr, D. J., Gotlieb, M. R., Lee, N. J. and Shah, D. V., 2012. Examining overconsumption, 
competitive consumption and conscious consumption from 1994 to 2004: disentangling 
cohort and period effects. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social 
Science, 664(1), pp. 220–233.
Charles, S. T. and Carstensen, L. L., 2010. Social and emotional aging. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 61, pp. 383–409.
Cooper, J. and Weaver, K. D., 2003. Gender and computers: understanding the digital 
divide. London: Routledge.
Coupland, D., 1991. Generation X: tales for an accelerated culture. New York: St. Martin’s 
Press.
Dwyer, R. E., 2009. Making a habit of it: positional consumption, conventional action and 
the standard of living. Journal of Consumer Culture, 9(2), pp. 328–347.
Erola, J., Räsänen, P., Halenius, L., Vasunta, V. and Haapanen, T., 2005. Suomi 2004: 
aineistonkeruu ja tutkimusseloste sekä yhteiskunnan ja kulutuksen muutos 1999–2004. 
Keskustelua ja raportteja 5: 2005. Turku, Finland: Turun kauppakorkeakoulu.
Eynon, R. and Helsper, E., 2015. Family dynamics and internet use in Britain: what role 
do children play in adults’ engagement with the internet? Information, Communication 
and Society, 18(2), pp. 156–171.
Fortunati, L., 2011. ICTs and immaterial labour from a feminist perspective. Journal of 
Communication Inquiry, 35(4), pp. 426–432.
Gill, R. and Grint, K., 1995. The gender-technology relation: contemporary theory and 
research. London: Taylor & Francis.
Gilleard, C., Jones, I. and Higgs, P., 2015. Connectivity in later life: the declining age 
divide in mobile cell phone ownership. Sociological Research Online, 20(2), 3. www.
socresonline.org.uk/20/2/3.html
Gobé, M., 2001. Emotional branding: the new paradigm for connecting brands to people. 
New York: Allworth Press.
Green, L., 2010. Understanding the life course: sociological and psychological perspectives. 
Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Haddon, L., 2005. Personal information culture: the contribution of research on ICTs in 
everyday life. In: UNESCO between two phases of the World Summit on the Information 
Society. St. Petersburg, Russia: UNESCO.
Halleröd, B., Larsson, D., Gordon, D. and Ritakallio, V.-M., 2006. Relative deprivation: 
a comparative analysis of Britain, Finland and Sweden. Journal of European Social 
Policy, 16(4), pp. 328–345.
Helson, R., Soto, C. J. and Cate, R. A., 2006. From young adulthood through the middle 
ages. In: D. K. Mroczek and T. D. Little, eds. Handbook of personality development. 
Mahwah, NJ: Psychology Press, pp. 337–352.
Helsper, E. J. and Eynon, R., 2010. Digital natives: where is the evidence? British 
Educational Research Journal, 36(3), pp. 503–520.
Herold, D., 2012. Digital natives: discourses of exclusion in and inclusive society. In: 
E. Loos, L. Haddon and E. Mante-Meijer, eds. Generational use of new media. 
Farnham, UK: Ashgate, pp. 71–86.
Hutteman, R., Hennecke, M., Orth, U., Reitz, A. K. and Specht, J., 2014. Developmental 
tasks as a framework to study personality development in adulthood and old age. 
European Journal of Personality, 28(3), pp. 267–278.
Hyde, M., Higgs, P., Gilleard, C., Victor, C., Wiggins, D. and Rees Jones, I., 2009. Ageing, 
cohorts, and consumption: the British experience 1968–2005. In: I. R. Jones, P. Higgs 

Necessities to all?  165
and D. J. Ekerdt, eds. Consumption and generational change: the rise of consumer 
lifestyles. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, pp. 93–128.
Kangassalo, P., 2002. Matkapuhelin lähes kaikilla talouksilla. Uusin elektroniikka kuiten­
kin vielä harvinaista. Tietoaika 4/2002. Statistics Finland. www.stat.fi/tup/tietoaika/
tilaajat/ta_04_02_matkapuhelin.html.
Karisto, A., 2007. Finnish baby boomers and the emergence of the third age. International 
Journal of Ageing and Later Life, 2(2), pp. 91–108.
Koivula, A., Räsänen, P. and Sarpila, O., 2015. Suomi 2014 – kulutus ja elämäntapa. 
Tutkimusseloste ja ainestojen 2009 ja 2014 vertailua. Working Papers in Economic 
Sociology. Turku, Finland: University of Turku.
Kokko, K., 2010. Keski-iän määrittelyä ja kuvailua. In: L. Pulkkinen and K. Kokko, eds., 
Keski-ikä elämänvaiheena. Publications of the Department of Psychology, University 
of Jyväskylä. Jyväskylä: University of Jyväskylä.
Lehtinen, A.-R., Varjonen, J., Raijas, A. and Aalto, K., 2011. What is the cost of living? 
Reference budgets for a decent minimum standard of living in Finland. Working Papers 
132/2011. National Consumer Research Center, Helsinki. www.referencebudgets.eu/
budgets/images/finnland_refbud.pdf.
Lehtonen, T.-K., 2003. The domestication of new technologies as a set of trials. Journal of 
Consumer Culture, 3(3), pp. 363–385.
Livingstone, S., Van Couvering, E. and Thumin, N., 2005. Adult media literacy. A review 
of the research literature. https://core.ac.uk/download/files/161/4155054.pdf.
Loos, E., Haddon, l. and Mante-Meijer,E., eds., 2012. Generational use of new media. 
Farnham, UK: Ashgate.
Lugano, G. and Peltonen, P., 2012. Building intergenerational bridges between digital 
natives and digital immigrants: attitudes, motivations and appreciation or old and new 
media. In: E. Loos, L. Haddon and E. Mante-Meijer, eds. Generational use of new 
media. Farnham, UK: Ashgate, pp. 151–170.
Oksman, V., 2006. Young people and seniors in Finnish ‘mobile information society’. 
Journal of Interactive Media in Education, 2. http://dx.doi.org/10.5334/2006–3.
Parment, A., 2013. Generation Y vs. baby boomers: shopping behavior, buyer involve­
ment and implications for retailing. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 
20(2), pp. 189–199.
Pearce, K. E. and Rice, R. E., 2013. Digital divides from access to activities: comparing mobile 
and personal computer internet users. Journal of Communication, 63(4), pp. 721–744.
Piper, A. M., Cornejo Garcia, R. and Brewer, R. N., 2016. Understanding the challenges 
and opportunities of smart mobile devices among the oldest old. International Journal 
of Mobile Human Computer Interaction, (8)2, pp. 83–98.
Prensky, M., 2001. Digital natives, digital immigrants. On the Horizon, 9(5), pp. 1–6.
Räsänen, P., 2006. Consumption disparities in information society: comparing the tradi­
tional and digital divides in Finland. International Journal of Sociology and Social 
Policy, 26(1–2), pp. 48–62.
Räsänen, P. and Koiranen, I., 2016. Changing patterns of ICT use in Finland: the senior 
citizens’ perspective. In: J. Zhou and G. Salvendy, eds. ITAP 2016, Part I, LNCS 9754, 
pp. 226–237. http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-39943-0_22
Røpke, I., 2003. Consumption dynamics and technological change: exemplified by the 
mobile phone and related technologies. Ecological Economics, 45(2), pp. 171–188.
Rushkoff, D., 1996. Playing the future: how kids’ culture can teach us to thrive in an age 
of chaos. New York: HarperCollins.

166  Terhi-Anna Wilska, Sanna-Mari Kuoppamäki
Sarpila, O., Räsänen, P., Erola, J., Kekki, J. and Pitkänen, K., 2010. Suomi 2009. 
Tutkimusseloste ja aineistojen 1999–2009 vertailua. Turku, Finland: Turun yliopisto.
Shove, E., 2003. Comfort, cleanliness and convenience. The social organization of 
normality. Oxford, UK: Berg.
Smola, K. V. and Sutton, C. D., 2002. Generational differences: revising generational 
work values for the new millennium. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 23(4), 
pp. 363–382.
Spero, I. and Stone, M. 2004. Agents of change: how young consumers are changing the 
world of marketing. Qualitative Market Research: An International Journal, 7(2), 
pp. 153–159.
Statistics Finland, 2015. Väestön tieto- ja viestintäteknologian käyttö. Helsinki: Statistics 
Finland. http://tilastokeskus.fi/til/sutivi/2015/sutivi_2015_2015–11–26_fi.pdf.
Taipale, S., 2014. Do the mobile-rich get richer? Internet use, travelling and social differ­
entiations in Finland. New Media & Society, 18(1), pp. 44–61.
Taipale, S., 2016. Synchronicity matters: defining the characteristics of digital generations. 
Information, Communication and Society, 19(1), pp. 80–89.
Tapscott, D., 1998. Growing up digital: the rise of the net generation. New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
Tondeur, J., Sinnaeve, I., Van Houtte, M. and Van Braak, J., 2011. The ICT as cultural 
capital: the relation between socioeconomic status and the computer-use profile among 
young people. New Media & Society, 13(1), pp. 151–168.
Turkle, S., 1996. Life on the screen: Identity in the age of the internet. New York: 
Touchstone.
Valentine, D. B. and Powers, T. L., 2013. Generation Y values and lifestyle segments. 
Journal of Consumer Marketing, 30(7), pp. 597–606.
Van Deursen, A. and Helsper, E., 2015. A nuanced understanding of internet use and non-
use amongst older adults. European Journal of Communication, 30(2), pp. 171–187.
Warde, A., 2005. Consumption and theories of practice. Journal of Consumer Culture, 
5(2), pp. 131–153.
White, D. S. and Le Cornu, A., 2011. Visitors and residents: a new typology for online 
engagement. First Monday, 16(9). http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/
view/3171/3049.
Wilska, T.-A., 2001. The role of states in the creation of consumption norms. In: A. Warde 
and J. Gronow, eds. Ordinary consumption. Routledge, London, pp. 179–198.
Wilska, T.-A., 2003. Mobile phone use as part of young people’s consumption styles. 
Journal of Consumer Policy, 26(3), pp. 441–463.
Wilska, T.-A. and Pedrozo, S., 2007. New technology and young people’s consumer iden­
tities: a comparative study between Finland and Brazil. Young, 15(4), pp. 557–576.
Zickuhr, K. and Madden, M., 2012. Older adults and internet use. www.sainetz.at/
dokumente/Older_adults_and_internet_use_2012.pdf.

12	 A risk to privacy or a need for 
security?
Digital domestic technologies in the lives 
of young adults and late middle-agers
Sanna-Mari Kuoppamäki, Outi Uusitalo 
and Tiina Kemppainen
Introduction
In studies of consumption, it has been argued that different generations pos­
sess unique values and attitudes that significantly affect their daily consumption 
choices, preferences and behaviours (Carr et al., 2012; Chhetri et al., 2014; 
Eastman and Liu, 2012; Parment, 2011, 2013; Valentine and Powers, 2013). As 
a consequence of the development of digital devices, consumption is digitalis­
ing and new digital solutions are being provided for consumers regardless of 
age (Dholakia, 2012). This chapter investigates how digital technologies are 
perceived by young adults and late middle-agers in the daily contexts of housing 
and living in Finland. More specifically, we investigate what kinds of socially 
shared meanings young adults and late middle-agers, understood as members 
from different generations, have towards consumption of digital technologies in 
domestic environments.
Digitalisation of domestic environments refers to processes where new tech­
nologies, such as smart home solutions and other digital devices from smart 
phones to robot lawn mowers, are intertwined with the daily practices of home, 
housing and living (Balta-Ozkan et al., 2013; De Silva et al., 2012; Dholakia, 
2012). First, we discuss concepts of life course, generations and the digitalisa­
tion of domestic environments in terms of attitudes towards digital technologies. 
Second, we analyse qualitative data from 8 focus group interviews with 68 par­
ticipants. Third, we discuss the empirical results with respect to new approaches 
to generations and the marketing of digital devices, arguing that values and atti­
tudes towards technologies are affected by both shared generational aspects and 
individual life-course events. By utilising data collected in the Finnish Housing 
Fair environment, the chapter combines aspects of sociology and marketing with 
qualitative, interview-based research.
Life-course stages and new technologies
In life-course literature, the stages of life course are usually classified into young 
adulthood (years 18 to 30), middle age (years 31 to 45), late middle age (years 46 
to 65) and old adulthood (years 65 and over) (Hutteman et al., 2014). Each life 

168  Sanna-Mari Kuoppamäki et al.
stage involves particular transitions, such as changes in roles and statuses, and 
readjustments to new social roles and expectations (Hutchison, 2011). Young 
adulthood is characterised by identity formation, formation of romantic relation­
ships and the significance of peers. In late mid-life, transitions occur in work-life 
balance, in relationships towards ageing parents and children leaving home 
(Hutteman et al., 2014). In late mid-life, leisure time typically increases (Helson 
et al., 2006; Kokko, 2010). Consumer decisions, based on economic resources, 
social capital, health and wellbeing, lifestyle values and aspirations (Beer and 
Faulkner, 2011) are therefore necessarily affected by the life-course stage.
Use of new technologies is typically influenced by life experiences. Although 
late middle-aged adults are familiar with technologies such as the telephone, tel­
evision and radio, most of them have learnt to use computers, mobile phones 
and the internet as adults, and are less familiar with them than young adults who 
have grown up with these technologies (Green, 2010, p. 137; Haddon, 2005). In 
previous research, older adults are often represented as lacking skills in using new 
technologies (e.g. Barnard et al., 2013), and for expressing less comfort and ease 
in using technology, and less confidence in their abilities to use new technology 
(Chen and Chan, 2011; Smith, 2010). For older adults, communication with fam­
ily and loved ones, as well as access to social support have been the most common 
motivations for computer and internet use (Thayer and Ray, 2006). Other motiva­
tions include a safety link to others (Ling, 2004) and a way to support independent 
living (Mikkonen et al., 2002).
Today, the boundaries and lengths of each life stage are flexible and life-course 
transitions, such as transformations in roles and expectations in working life, do 
not necessarily appear as linear. People have ever more possibilities to transform 
and adjust their own biographies in non-conventional ways (Beck and Beck-
Gernsheim, 2002; Izuhara, 2015; Kohli, 2007). For young adults, for instance, 
accessing home ownership is often considered a rite of passage to full adulthood, 
backed by a stable income, career prospects and the need for space for a growing 
family (Izuhara, 2015). Today, many life-course transitions, including leaving the 
parental home, family formation and purchasing a home, which used to occur in 
the twenties, now often occur in the thirties. In old adulthood, as general living 
standards and life expectancies have risen, people have more possibilities to pursue 
a lifestyle that addresses quality of life and self-expression (Koivula et al., 2015). 
New technologies and social media applications focused on self-expression, for 
instance, provide opportunities for creating a life course of one’s own with indi­
vidualised and customised choices.
Generational archetypes
Studies of generations argue that consumption practices and use of new tech­
nologies are influenced by shared generational experiences. The concept of 
‘generation’ refers to a group of individuals who have experienced similar his­
torical events in their early adulthood that later constitute shared experiences or 
consciousness (Karisto, 2007; Mannheim, 1952; Purhonen, 2007). Generational 

A risk to privacy or a need for security?  169
experiences are said to remain unchangeable throughout the life course, although 
typically generational experiences are influenced by life-course transitions as 
well (Carr et al., 2012; Meredith and Schewe, 1994; Ryder, 1985). ‘Generation’ 
is also applied in marketing studies to understand consumer practices such as 
buyer involvement, brand loyalty and lifestyle segments of generations, arguing 
that generations are distinguishable in orientations towards adopting technolo­
gies, sustainable consumption practices and early adoption of new products 
(Chhetri et al., 2014; Eastman and Liu, 2012; Parment, 2011, 2013; Syrett and 
Lamminman, 2004; Valentine and Powers, 2013).
Studies of generations typically argue that each generation shares distinctive 
features, such as values and attitudes that would be somewhat typical for mem­
bers of each generation. Members of Generation Y, born approximately between 
the years 1979 and 1994, aged 21 to 36 in 2015, have spent their early adulthood 
in a period of economic growth and emergence of new media, and consequently 
appear as individualistic but well-educated and technologically skilled with posi­
tive orientations towards consumer culture and new technological innovations 
(Paul, 2001). Generation Ys are often illustrated as ‘digital natives’ who possess 
positive attitudes towards new technologies and carry well-developed technologi­
cal skills. Also called the ‘Millennials’, Generation Ys have grown up in a global 
mindset with unrestricted communication where mobile devices are instantly used 
for social networking (Parment, 2011).
Members of Generation X, born approximately between the years 1964 and 
1978, aged 37 to 51 in 2015, are rarely identified as a discrete group of individu­
als in the Finnish context and have not been empirically investigated to the same 
extent as other generations. Generation Xs lived their youth during the 1980s and 
became adults in the 1990s and consequently encountered the financial recession 
in adulthood; hence the lives of Generation Xs have been influenced by economic 
uncertainties (Smola and Sutton, 2002).
Prior to Generation Xs, Baby Boomers, born in the Finnish context between the 
years 1945 and 1950, represent the first post-war generation in Western societies. 
Growing up during a period of revolutionary societal changes, Boomers are often 
associated with untraditional and idealistic values (Karisto, 2007; Purhonen, 2007); 
marketers interpret Boomers as an extravagant and brand loyal generation. Unlike 
younger generations, Boomers were not influenced by technological innovations 
until the age of 35 to 40, indicating that they were not similarly engaged with 
emerging digital technologies as younger generations.
In Finland, those born in the 1960s and currently aged approximately 50 to 
55 are not usually acknowledged as members of any particular or well-defined 
generation based on international classifications. According to Finnish longitu­
dinal studies, the birth cohort born in the 1960s, aged approximately 50 and over 
in 2015, most value benevolence in the form of the promotion of the wellbeing 
of close relatives, and universalism in the form of taking care of other people 
and nature (Pulkkinen and Polet, 2010, pp. 82–83). People aged 50 and over also 
value safety, implying the security of society, personal relationships and life in 
general. As the values of different generations are examined, it becomes clear that 

170  Sanna-Mari Kuoppamäki et al.
orientations towards and shared meanings regarding digitalisation are diverse, 
indicating the possibility of identifying generational values towards digitalisation 
of domestic environments.
Digitalisation of domestic environments
Digitalisation of domestic environments refers to processes where daily contexts 
of housing and living are influenced by digital devices. Technology available 
to consumers has expanded, and consumer markets offer constantly changing 
products related to the digitalisation of households: new smart home solutions, 
for instance, are presented to consumers (Balta-Ozkan et al., 2013; De Silva 
et al., 2012; Ehrenhard et al., 2014). Content creation is not limited only to certain 
service providers; consumers have become the creators of technology via commu­
nication platforms which also aid consumers in organising their lives (Dholakia, 
2012, p. 17). Consumption of technologies occurs in households where socio-
cultural resources, as well as family dynamics, significantly influence the use 
and adoption of technologies (Livingstone and Lunt, 1991). In households, tech­
nologies are generally consumed for multiple purposes, including entertainment, 
online shopping, communication and household tasks. At the moment, these tech­
nologies are becoming digital, indicating that digital devices such as smartphones 
and tablet computers are used for the management of everyday living.
Often, digital technologies have different meanings for different social groups, 
and these meanings typically differ by age (Oksman, 2006). These meanings, such 
as values and attitudes regarding technologies, are typically negotiated, reflected 
and maintained in social relationships (Bijker and Law, 1992; Kline and Pinch, 
1999; Pinch and Bijker, 1984; Selwyn, 2012). In the remainder of this chapter, we 
investigate socially shared meanings concerning consumption of digital technolo­
gies in domestic environments. We also present empirical findings from group 
discussions to highlight the shared meanings among consumers at different life-
course stages. More specifically, we investigate:
1	
What kinds of socially shared meanings do young adults and late middle-agers 
express towards digitalisation of domestic environments, and consumption of 
new technologies in general, during group discussions?
2	
Can values and attitudes regarding digital technologies shared by members of 
each generation be interpreted as reflecting a generational experience or do 
they rather emerge from individual life-course events?
Data and methods
Data
This study analyses qualitative interview data from eight focus group discussions 
that were conducted in the context of the Finnish Housing Fair1 in 2015. Four of the 
groups consisted of people aged 50–65 and three groups of people aged 18–35. 

A risk to privacy or a need for security?  171
One group had both older and younger participants. A total of 68 participants 
attended the discussions. Each discussion, conducted as a semi-structured group 
interview, included 7 to 12 participants and lasted approximately 60 to 75 minutes.
Participants
About half of the participants belonged to the age group of 18- to 35-year-olds 
(N=31) and the other half to the age group of 50- to 65-year-olds (N=37). Over 
half of the participants were women (N=44). The majority lived in an urban area 
in an apartment building, and the participants were mainly employed and held a 
master’s or college degree. In terms of family relations, one-third were married 
or in co-habitation and did not have children living at home; another third were 
married or in co-habitation with children living at home. The participants were 
randomly selected for the focus groups so that each group contained both women 
and men. About half of the participants attended the interviews as couples or 
families. Concerning their socio-demographic background, the participants were 
a rather homogenous group, which indicates that the findings are limited to urban 
and educated people with a middle-class background.
Procedure
The data were collected in the following way. First, participants were recruited 
through an advertisement in a decoration magazine, on the Housing Fair’s website 
and on the website and Facebook site of the research project. In the advertisement, 
two focus groups based on age definitions were recruited: 18- to 35-year-olds 
(young adults) and 50- to 65-year-olds (late middle-agers). Out of approximately 
200 contacts, 70 participants were selected for the interviews. Selection of the 
participants was based on the order of registration, and participants were awarded 
free entrance to the Housing Fair area.
Group discussions were organised in the Housing Fair area. Participants were 
met at the entrance of the Housing Fair and informed of the basic principles of 
the study. Participants were given two hours to walk around the area, after which 
group discussions were conducted in a separate room. There were two researchers 
moderating the discussions, and two researchers made notes about the situation 
and the participants. After the discussions, participants were asked to fill in a 
background information form that included questions on socio-demographic vari­
ables (birth year, gender, residential area, form of dwelling, occupation, education 
and family relationships). The discussions were taped and transcribed, resulting in 
146 pages of transcribed text.
Methods
The analysis of focus group discussions in which participants represent a specific 
group of people, such as young adults or late middle-agers, aims to understand 
and explain shared meanings that participants produce during discussions 

172  Sanna-Mari Kuoppamäki et al.
(Halkier, 2010; Rabiee, 2004; Thomas et al., 1995). These shared meanings 
are considered to represent and describe the life stage of each participant and, 
within these shared meanings, it is possible to understand and explain orienta­
tions towards digital technologies among different consumer groups. The group 
discussions conducted during this research were semi-structured, covering three 
research areas derived from the literature (Carù and Cova, 2015; Coolen and 
Hoekstra, 2001; Dholakia, 2012): 1) customer experience related to the Housing 
Fair, 2) consumption behaviour related to housing, and 3) use of digital technolo­
gies in everyday life. The sub-questions varied according to situational factors, 
such as participants’ interests, group dynamics and the conversation process. The 
transcribed text was analysed with a qualitative content analysis method, which 
aimed to understand and explain meanings in the context of the text (see Hsieh 
and Shannon, 2005; Rabiee, 2004).
In the first phase of analysis, all data expressions related to use of technologies 
were separated from the main text. These data expressions comprised sentences 
and statements that the interviewees articulated during the group discussions. This 
analysis produced 121 statements related to use and adoption of new technolo­
gies. In the second phase, the raw data expressions were interpreted into upper 
categories that reflected shared meanings towards digital technologies in domes­
tic environments. In this phase, the sentences and statements were interpreted in 
terms of barriers and difficulties related to the adoption of technologies. This pro­
duced 24 upper categories of shared attitudes towards technologies. In the final 
phase, the upper categories were combined further into main categories in order 
to reduce the number of upper categories. A total of 15 main categories was for­
mulated. In all phases, the analysis was grounded in empirical data expressions 
and the analysis unit was a sentence or statement articulated by one interviewee.
Results
Among all participants, the digitalisation of housing and living aroused shared 
values and attitudes that varied from rejection to careful optimism towards 
technologies. Participants reflected on their relationship to technologies in an 
environment that represented housing and living in terms of the latest inno­
vations where new technologies of housing were characterised as expensive 
commodities. Many participants interpreted digital domestic technologies as 
non-necessities in daily life and, generally, they aroused more sceptical resist­
ance than positive orientations.
Shared meanings among young adults
During the interviews, it was generally easier for younger participants to reflect 
on the role of technology in their everyday lives than for participants represent­
ing older generations. Many young adults interpreted new technologies, already 
involved in many aspects of their lives, as inseparable from daily life. Despite 
this, many younger people saw obstacles to the use of new technologies in 

A risk to privacy or a need for security?  173
domestic surroundings, relating mostly to adopting and becoming familiar with 
them. Younger female respondents in particular saw the use of technology as 
requiring too much time to become familiar with and hence referred to the use of 
technologies in general as time-consuming:
I don’t want the whole house to be digital . . . It would take so much time to 
become familiar with it . . . My stress level would get higher if I had to know 
how to use all these.
(Female, 33)
If I got used to technology, it would be handy, but of course it takes time to 
adapt to it first.
(Female, 35)
Younger participants also perceived the digitalisation of housing as something 
they should have control over. The idea that “technology takes control over peo­
ple” came up among female participants who perceived the domestic environment 
as something that humans and not machines should have control over. Younger 
participants understood technology as smart and self-imposed: something that is 
inherently part of daily life and hence has to be controlled. Controlling the use 
of technologies was related to time spent with the devices and many shared the 
viewpoint that technology already occupies too much of their daily lives. Some 
participants described time spent without digital devices as ‘liberating’ and, espe­
cially, many young participants wanted to ‘shut down’ the technology that is 
already constantly close to them. For participants in their thirties, it was responsi­
bilities towards work, and for participants in their twenties, responsibilities towards 
social networks that created the need to control the time spent using technologies.
Many of the younger participants reflected on digital technologies with respect 
to social relationships; for younger people social aspects of digital technologies 
were not necessarily perceived as positive. Due to the intertwining of new tech­
nologies in domestic environments, maintaining boundaries between personal and 
social life was perceived as important, especially by younger females. The idea 
that new technologies risk privacy included negative evaluations of social media 
in domestic surroundings; from this framework, technologies were not perceived 
as something that could easily be adapted to private life. Rather, many wanted to 
make clear distinctions between private and social life with the use of technologies.
Male participants regarded digital technologies above all as consumer goods. 
New technologies were identified as incomplete when they lacked the qualities 
that would make them worth purchasing. In particular, younger male respondents 
in their thirties identified new technologies as inadequate in terms of functionality 
and technical characteristics, and they wanted “to see how they develop” and not 
be “the first one to buy them”. They were conscious of the marketing and pro­
duction processes of digital technologies and represented themselves as careful 
consumers of the latest innovations. This reflects a critical attitude of young males 
towards purchasing digital technologies in general.

174  Sanna-Mari Kuoppamäki et al.
Shared meanings among late middle-agers
Many late middle-agers identified new technologies in domestic surroundings as 
something they often lack skills in using. Male and female respondents shared 
experiences of new technologies as difficult and something they need help with. 
Whereas young adults understood difficulties in adopting new technologies in 
terms of time management, late middle-agers perceived the difficulties as origi­
nating from their own inner qualities:
When my computer breaks, I don’t know what to do. My kids will help me.
(Male, 59)
If I have problems with technology, I need help. It’s difficult to solve the 
problems by myself.
(Female, 52)
I am a technically unskilled person. I have my own support person; he is 
my son.
(Female, 51)
Late middle-agers relied on family members, and especially their children, for 
help in using technologies. Many older respondents share the perception of their 
children as ‘digital natives’ who will help them in the adoption and use of tech­
nologies. Digital technologies in domestic environments were thus perceived as 
‘common’ to the whole family and something the whole family shares together 
through experiences, meanings and practices between generations (Piper et al., 
2016; Selwyn, 2004; Zickuhr and Madden, 2012). The obstacles and also the 
motivations were related to how they are used in interactions between family 
members and how the whole family is engaged in their use.
In addition to lack of skills, many late middle-agers recognised characteristics 
of technologies as not fitting with their lifestyle. In general, older generations, and 
female respondents in particular, understood technologies to be too complicated 
and dysfunctional and recognised that “technologies have to be simple” in order 
to fit their own values. From this viewpoint, technologies were not seen as valu­
able in themselves but only by virtue of their functions:
But I don’t want to get it [digital device] for myself, if it’s complicated. It has 
to be good and functional, so that I can utilise it. Making things simple, that’s 
a good thing nowadays.
(Female, 53)
In many cases, late middle-agers did not want to see themselves as too dependent 
on technologies. For older generations, functionality was perceived as a core value 
for digital devices: digital devices are used for banking, purchasing and shopping, 
information and communication with others (Dholakia, 2012). Dysfunctionality, 

A risk to privacy or a need for security?  175
on the other hand, was conceptualised as a key feature for most devices: “Now 
when it’s all digital, the system does not work in our house” (Male, 52). Also, 
power cuts were mentioned as a risk factor in digital technologies. Whereas 
younger respondents understood technologies as developing devices that are con­
stantly under construction, among older generations it was scepticism towards the 
qualities of the devices in general that caused the critical attitudes towards them.
Late middle-agers significantly differed from young adults in their viewpoints 
on safety. For older generations, digitalisation was connected to values of safety, 
such as safety of domestic appliances or safety of housing and living in general. 
Late middle-agers reflected on safety in terms of their relationships with their own 
parents, and the connection between digitalisation and safety was associated with 
old adulthood rather than middle age. Safety, besides referring to the safety of 
digital technologies, was defined through personal relationships:
In the future, older people can live a longer life with digitalisation . . . 
nowadays, it is known that some floors can identify whether a person has 
fallen or is standing, this kind of increases safety to the living of old people.
(Male, 51)
I was thinking of my mom, she lives alone. It would be a good thing to have 
digital devices that create safety in living.
(Male, 51)
For late middle-agers, digital technologies represented something that constituted 
generational experiences and differences between younger and older genera­
tions. Although young adults did not recognise themselves as digital natives, 
for late middle-agers younger adults were represented as the digital generation 
that utilises new technologies in a different way compared to their own gen­
eration. Late middle-agers identified that generational experiences during early 
adulthood, for instance growing up with a technology in one’s twenties, have a 
significant influence on the ways people use technologies in later life. In their 
discussion, late middle-agers composed generational experiences and boundaries 
and their identities through technologies:
We belong to that age group that it [technology] didn’t belong to our lives 
when we were in our 30s. When I’m thinking about my own kids, who are 25 
to 30, they take a shower with their cell phones. Let alone the kids in school. 
They live in a totally different world.
(Female, 57)
Last year our son announced that he would like to have a television for a 
Christmas present, he told me all the models and all. Together we went to see 
it, and he used the television through a tablet . . . his generation utilises the 
possibilities in a completely different way.
(Female, 63)

176  Sanna-Mari Kuoppamäki et al.
Shared meanings among all participants
Despite the fact that participants shared some values, ideals or attitudes that 
were age or generation specific, attitudes towards digital domestic technologies 
also connected participants across generation, age and life-course boundaries. 
Notably, female participants – regardless of age – shared the experience that 
they are “not interested in technology”, and that technologies in general are not 
a part of their lifestyle. The use of technologies was interpreted as something 
that people should naturally have an interest in, and in these respondents’ lives, 
technologies did not have a significant role. These opinions varied from “I’m not 
at all a digi-person” (Female, 32) to “I’m not at all interested in technology, I use 
it as little as possible” (Female, 52).
Fears and anxieties related to digital technologies were common among 
participants regardless of age, generation, life course and gender. Use of new 
technologies was perceived as a risk not only in terms of power cuts but also in 
terms of health, wellbeing and general safety. In addition, unfamiliarity about 
the health risks that use of technology involves, such as risk of radiation, was 
mentioned. The use of digital technologies, and especially smart phones, was 
also conceptualised as addictive; digital devices have already become necessi­
ties in most people’s lives and therefore “you are anxious when it is not in your 
pocket” (Male, 65). Digital devices break boundaries in everyday life practices, 
and in online shopping, for instance, a fear of losing control appeared in some 
respondents’ discussions:
It is very scary. Many of my friends buy clothes every week on the internet. 
They just click and it’s very scary, how easy the shopping has become.
(Female, 32)
Moreover, respondents in the different age groups identified the information flow 
of digital technologies as exhausting. This was especially connected to the use of 
smartphones associated with the working environment: “My phone rings, I am on 
the phone all day. After that I want to be in a quiet place” (Male, 57). In today’s 
lifestyles, people perceived not having technologies at home as necessary for their 
wellbeing, and especially in the domestic environments, living without technolo­
gies was perceived as ideal:
I think the information flow is very exhausting. Now when I have the smart­
phone, I’m stuck to it all the time. It would be better for me to claim a place 
in my house which doesn’t involve technology.
(Female, 30)
For all participants, not having technologies at home was justified by the idea 
that “people can do it by themselves”. For late middle-agers, managing daily 
lives without technologies was almost a matter of a pride: “I can manage to turn 
off the light by myself” (Female, 55) and “I can manage to switch the lighting 

A risk to privacy or a need for security?  177
on and off and push the vacuum cleaner by myself” (Male, 61). Late middle-
agers understood technologies in domestic environments as assisting, meaning 
that technologies will assist the lives of elderly people, with whom they don’t 
identify. In the lives of young adults, managing their lives without technologies 
was associated with the future: “We will plant such a small lawn that we can cut it 
by ourselves” (Female, 27). In both young adults and late middle-agers, a prefer­
ence for living without technologies was associated and justified with a desire for 
physical activity.
In the context of housing and living, new technologies are still perceived as a 
vanity. When technologies are presented in domestic surroundings, people do not 
acknowledge them as necessities but rather as outcomes of the markets. In partici­
pants’ speech, a need for technologies is negotiated between concepts of ‘vanity’, 
‘necessity’, ‘need’ and ‘desire’. Consumption of technologies is conceptualised in 
terms of a moral framework (Silverstone and Hirsch, 1992) where the use of new 
technologies is comprehended as “splurging on non-necessities” which, in terms 
of housing and living, have negative connotations. Simultaneously, this symbol­
ises the profound distinction between consumer desires and normative restrictions, 
where consuming technologies for hedonistic purposes is conceptualised as morally 
suspicious (Lehtonen, 1998, pp. 224, 229–231; Sarantola-Weiss, 2003, pp. 37–39). 
Therefore, throughout the group discussions, interviewees reassured us and each 
other of their ability to manage their home without technologies, although they 
identified the addictive features of them.
Conclusions and discussion
In many previous studies, Finnish people are typically represented as technologi­
cally skilled consumers who adopt and orient themselves positively towards new 
technologies (Desai et al., 2002). When consumption of digital technologies is 
discussed in groups, digital technologies arouse more negative resistance than 
positive attitudes. Well-educated, urban and middle-class consumers are very 
conscious of the markets and the life cycles of products and services, which may 
result in critical attitudes towards marketing of new technologies. In Finland, 
consumer attitudes in general, and those of ageing consumers in particular, high­
light values and attitudes of ecological and ethical consumption over the values 
of self-indulgent and hedonistic consumption (Nyrhinen and Wilska, 2012; 
Wilska, 2002). This, due to an understanding of digital technologies as expensive 
commodity goods, might lead to perceiving them as ‘non-necessities’ and ‘van­
ity’ in daily lives. Additionally, cultural interpretations of technology reflect the 
binary codes and symbolic good versus bad, and, therefore, this can connote the 
profound tendency of consumers to label technologies as something suspicious 
(Mick and Fournier, 1998; Pantzar, 2000, p. 242). The study asked whether these 
values and attitudes reflect generational experiences or if they emerge from indi­
vidual life events. The perception of digital technologies as a vanity connected 
consumers regardless of generational boundaries, which might imply that these 
attitudes are not greatly affected by generational experiences.

178  Sanna-Mari Kuoppamäki et al.
Although digital domestic technologies are predicted to expand in the future 
(Ehrenhard et al., 2014), participants in our study understood the digitalisation of 
domestic environments as a risk to privacy and general wellbeing. Moreover, the 
participants perceived technology as a risk in different ways, depending on their 
age and life-course stage. Young adults highlight the risk to privacy and independ­
ence whereas late middle-agers perceive technology as a risk to security. These 
perceived risks can reflect the life course and generation membership of each 
consumer: members of Generation Ys are said to value independence (Parment, 
2011, 2013; Paul, 2001), which may lead to their need to emphasise privacy in the 
use of technologies. Millennials, being affected by technologies starting in early 
childhood (Green, 2010), have experienced the all-encompassing effects of tech­
nologies in their social relationships and therefore might highlight privacy as a 
core value and similarly a risk of technologies.
Moreover, the lives of young adults, involving transitions in social relation­
ships from student to employee or from single to married couples and later on to 
parents (Green, 2010; Hutteman et al., 2014) are characterised by rapid changes 
and juggling different social roles and responsibilities; thus technologies can also 
be perceived as a risk in terms of time management, pointing to the need to have 
control over them. Hence, the commonly known stereotype of those born in the 
1980s and early 1990s as ‘digital natives’ (Dulin, 2008) is not supported in this 
study; rather, many participants aged 25 to 35 speak about technologies in a 
belittling way. In young adults’ speech, generational experiences or conscious­
ness in the use of digital appliances seemed nevertheless stronger than among 
late middle-agers, indicating that young adults might have a stronger genera­
tional identity in terms of digital technologies than late middle-agers.
Older adults – those aged 50 and over – generally value safety (Pulkkinen 
and Polet, 2010), and new technologies represent functions related to safety 
(Ling, 2004; Mikkonen et al., 2002). In our discussions, late middle-agers con­
nected digital technologies to ideals of security, and in the case of smart home 
solutions, ‘digital security’ is connected to old adulthood in late middle-agers’ 
speech. Moreover, late middle-agers were much more insecure about their abil­
ity to manage technology which resulted in a careful orientation towards it. Late 
middle-agers became engaged with technologies in their thirties so they might not 
have had the opportunity to integrate technologies into their already established 
daily routines (Haddon, 2005). From this perspective, the use of digital technolo­
gies seems to be a matter of generation or cohort experience (Ling, 2008).
In our group discussions, however, insecurities towards technologies were 
interpreted by participants as stemming from inadequate skills. Rather than 
generational or cohort experience, attitudes towards digital technologies reflect 
the life-course stage of late middle-agers: with ageing, maintaining satisfac­
tory social relationships becomes important (Charles and Carstensen, 2010; 
Hutteman et al., 2014), and for ageing consumers, digital technologies rep­
resent means of maintaining relationships and communication with family 
members (Thayer and Ray, 2006). In this study, late middle-agers recognised 
generational differences in terms of technological skills, but in themselves the 

A risk to privacy or a need for security?  179
differences did not represent a generational consciousness as much as the indi­
vidual life events related to changes in personal relationships and the need to 
‘stay in touch’ with their family members.
The findings of this study highlight the importance of understanding the par­
ticularities of different generations as market segments. Although young adults 
and middle-agers seem to adhere to similar values and meanings concerning the 
digitalisation of domestic environments, the subtle differences in perceived risks 
and benefits of technology provide a basis for cohort-based differentiation of 
marketing practices. Product design, branding and communication could create 
personal appeal and a sense of familiarity (Parment, 2013) among middle-agers 
by demonstrating that digitalised products result in benefits such as safety and the 
wellbeing of others. Conversely, privacy and independence are focal concerns for 
young adults, and thus brand, product design and communication personalised to 
this cohort could be designed accordingly.
Note
1	 The Housing Fair is an annual event in Finland that showcases ongoing trends in the 
housing industry, such as building, architecture and interior design. The Housing Fair 
is a set area where the houses are built and decorated for the audience to visit (www.
asuntomessut.fi).
References
Balta-Ozkan, N., Davidson, R., Bicket, M. and Whitmarsh, L., 2013. Social barriers to the 
adoption of smart homes. Energy Policy, 63, pp. 363–374.
Barnard, Y., Bradkey, M. D., Hodgson, F. and Lloyd, A. D., 2013. Learning to use new 
technologies by older adults: perceived difficulties, experimentation behaviour and 
usability. Computers in Human Behaviour, 29, pp. 1715–1724.
Beck, U. and Beck-Gernsheim, E., 2002. Individualization. London: SAGE.
Beer, A. and Faulkner, D., 2011. Housing transitions through the life course: aspirations, 
needs and policy. Bristol, UK: The Policy Press.
Bijker, W. and Law, J., 1992. Shaping technology/building society: studies in sociotechni­
cal change. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Carr, D. J., Gotlieb, M. R., Lee, N. J. and Shah, D. V., 2012. Examining overconsumption, 
competitive consumption and conscious consumption from 1994 to 2004: disentangling 
cohort and period effects. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social 
Science, 664(1), pp. 220–233.
Carù, A. and Cova, B., 2015. Co-creating the collective service experience. Journal of 
Service Management, 26 (2), pp. 276–294.
Charles, S. T. and Carstensen, L. L., 2010. Social and emotional aging. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 61, pp. 383–409.
Chen, K. and Chan, A. H. S., 2011. A review of technology acceptance by older adults. 
Gerontechnology, 10(1), pp. 1–12.
Chhetri, P., Hossain, M. I. and Broom, A., 2014. Examining the generational differences in 
consumption patterns in South East Queensland. City, Culture & Society, 5(4), pp. 1–9.
Coolen, H. and Hoekstra, J., 2001. Values as determinants of preferences for housing 
attributes. Journal of Housing and Built Environment, 16(3–4), pp. 285–306.

180  Sanna-Mari Kuoppamäki et al.
Desai, M., Fukuda-Parr, S., Johansson, C. and Sagasti, F., 2002. Measuring the technology 
achievement of nations and the capacity to participate in the network age. Journal of 
Human Development, 3(1), pp. 95–122.
De Silva, L. C., Morikawab, C. and Petra, I. M., 2012. State of the art of smart homes, 
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, 25(7), pp. 1313–1321.
Dholakia, R. R., 2012. Technology and consumption: understanding consumer choices 
and behaviors. New York: Springer.
Dulin, L., 2008. Leadership preferences of a Generation Y cohort: a mixed-method inves­
tigation. Journal of Leadership Studies, 2(1), 43–59.
Eastman, J. K. and Liu, J., 2012. The impact of generational cohorts on status consumption: 
an exploratory look at generational cohort and demographics on status consumption. 
Journal of Consumer Marketing, 29(2), pp. 93–102.
Ehrenhard, M., Kijl, B. and Nieuwenhuis, L., 2014. Market adoption barriers of multi-
stakeholder technology: smart homes for the aging population. Technological 
forecasting and social change, 89, pp. 306–315.
Green, L., 2010. Understanding the life course: sociological and psychological perspec­
tives. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Haddon, L., 2005. Personal information culture: the contribution of research on ICTs in 
everyday life. In: UNESCO between two phases of the World Summit on the Information 
Society. St. Petersburg, Russia: UNESCO.
Halkier, B., 2010. Focus groups as social enactments: integrating interaction and content in 
the analysis of focus group data. Qualitative Research, 10(1), pp. 71–89.
Helson, R., Soto, C. J. and Cate, R. A., 2006. From young adulthood through the middle 
ages. In: D. K. Mroczek and T. D. Little, eds. Handbook of personality development. 
Mahwah, NJ: Psychology Press, pp. 337–352.
Hsieh, H. F. and Shannon, S. E., 2005. Three approaches to qualitative content analysis. 
Qualitative Health Research, 15(9), pp. 1277–1288.
Hutchison, E. D., 2011. Dimensions of human behaviour: the changing life course, 4th ed. 
Los Angeles, CA and London: SAGE.
Hutteman, R., Hennecke, M., Orth, U., Reitz, A. K. and Specht, J., 2014. Developmental 
tasks as a framework to study personality development in adulthood and old age. 
European Journal of Personality, 28(3), pp. 267–278.
Izuhara, M., 2015. Life-course diversity, housing choices and constraints for women of the 
‘lost’ generation in Japan. Housing Studies, 30(1), pp. 60–77.
Karisto, A., 2007. Finnish Baby Boomers and the emergence of the third age. International 
Journal of Ageing and Later Life, 2(2), pp. 91–108.
Kline, R. and Pinch, T., 1999. The social construction of technology. In: D. MacKenzie and 
J. Wajcman, eds. The social shaping of technology. 2nd ed. Milton Keynes, UK: Open 
University Press, pp. 113–115.
Kohli, M., 2007. The institutionalization of the life course: looking back to look ahead. 
Research in Human Development, 4(3–4), pp. 253–271.
Koivula, A., Räsänen, P. and Sarpila, O., 2015. Suomi 2014 –kulutus ja elämäntapa. 
Tutkimusseloste ja aineistojen 2009 ja 2014 vertailua. Working Papers in Economic 
Sociology. Turku, Finland: Turun yliopisto.
Kokko, K., 2010. Keski-iän määrittelyä ja kuvailua. In: L. Pulkkinen and K. Kokko, eds. 
Keski-ikä elämänvaiheena. Jyväskylän yliopiston psykologian laitoksen julkaisuja 352. 
Jyväskylä, Finland: Jyväskylän yliopisto.
Lehtonen, T. K., 1998. Rajallista ostamista: itsekuri, omatunto ja mielihyvä. In: J. P. Roos 
and T. Hoikkala, eds. Elämänpolitiikka. Tampere, Finland: Gaudeamus.

A risk to privacy or a need for security?  181
Ling, R., 2004. The mobile connection: the cell phone’s impact on society. San Francisco, 
CA: Morgan Kaufman.
Ling, R., 2008. Should we be concerned that the elderly don’t text? The Information 
Society, 24, pp. 334–341.
Livingstone, S. M. and Lunt, P. K., 1991. Generational and life cycle differences in experi­
ences of ownership. Journal of Social Behaviour and Personality, 6(6), pp. 229–242.
Mannheim, K., 1952. Essay on the problem of generations. In: P. Kecskemeti, ed. Essays 
on the sociology of knowledge by Karl Mannheim. New York: Routledge & Kegan 
Paul.
Meredith, G. and Schewe, C. D., 1994. The power of cohorts. American Demographics, 
16(12), pp. 22–31.
Mick, D. G. and Fournier, S., 1998. Paradoxes of technology: consumer cognizance, emo­
tions, and coping strategies. Journal of Consumer Research, 25(2), pp. 123–143.
Mikkonen, M., Väyrynen, S., Ikonen, V. and Heikkilä, M. O., 2002. User and concept stud­
ies as tools in developing mobile communication services for the elderly. Personal and 
Ubiquitous Computing, 6, pp. 113–124.
Nyrhinen, J. and Wilska, T.-A., 2012. Kohti vastuullista ylellisyyttä? Eettiset ja ekologiset 
trendit sekä luksuskulutus Suomessa. Kulutustutkimus.Nyt, 6(1), pp. 20–41.
Oksman, V., 2006. Young people and seniors in Finnish mobile information society. 
Journal of Interactive Media in Education, 2, pp. 1–21.
Pantzar, M., 2000. Tulevaisuuden koti: arjen tarpeita keksimässä. Helsinki, Finland: Otava.
Parment, A., 2011. Generation Y in consumer and labor markets. New York: Routledge.
Parment, A., 2013. Generation Y vs. Baby Boomers: shopping behavior, buyer involve­
ment and implications for retailing. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 20(2), 
pp. 189–199.
Paul, P., 2001. Getting inside Generation Y. American Demographics, 23(9), pp. 42–49.
Pinch, T. and Bijker, W., 1984. The social construction of facts and artefacts: or how 
the sociology of science and sociology of technology might benefit each other. Social 
Studies of Science, 14, pp. 399–441.
Piper, A. M., Cornejo Garcia, R. and Brewer, R. N., 2016. understanding the challenges 
and opportunities of smart mobile devices among the oldest old. International Journal 
of Mobile Human Computer Interaction, 8(2), pp. 83–98.
Pulkkinen, L. and Polet, J., 2010. Tyydytystä ja huolta aiheuttavat asiat elämässä. In: 
L. Pulkkinen and K. Kokko, eds. Keski-ikä elämänvaiheena. Jyväskylän yliopiston 
psykologian laitoksen julkaisuja 352. Jyväskylä, Finland: Jyväskylän yliopisto.
Purhonen, S., 2007. Sukupolvien ongelma: tutkielma sukupolven käsitteestä, sukupolviti­
etoisuudesta ja suurista ikäluokista. PhD. Research Reports No. 251. Helsinki, Finland: 
University of Helsinki.
Rabiee, F., 2004. Focus-group interview and data analysis. Proceedings of the Nutrition 
Society, 63, pp. 655–660.
Ryder, N. B., 1985. The cohort as a concept in the study of social change. In: W. M. Mason 
and S. E. Fienberg, eds. Cohort analysis in social research. New York: Springer.
Sarantola-Weiss, M., 2003. Sohvaryhmän läpimurto: kulutuskulttuurin tulo suomalaisiin 
olohuoneisiin 1960- ja 1970-lukujen vaihteessa. Helsinki, Finland: Suomalaisen 
Kirjallisuuden Seura.
Selwyn, N., 2004. The information aged: a qualitative study of older adults’ use of infor­
mation and communications technology. Journal of Aging Studies, 18(4), pp. 369–384.
Selwyn, N., 2012. Making sense of young people, education and digital technology: the 
role of sociological theory. Oxford Review of Education, 38(1), pp. 81–96.

182  Sanna-Mari Kuoppamäki et al.
Silverstone, R. and Hirsch, E., 1992. Consuming technologies: media and information in 
domestic spaces. London: Routledge.
Smith, A., 2010. Home Broadband 2010. Washington, DC: Pew Internet and American 
Life Project.
Smola, K. V. and Sutton, C.D., 2002. Generational differences: revising generational work 
values for the new millennium. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 23(4), pp. 363–382.
Syrett, M. and Lamminman, J., 2004. Advertising and millennials. Young Consumers, 5(4), 
pp. 62–73.
Thayer, S. E. and Ray, S., 2006. Online communication preferences across age, gender and 
duration of internet use. CyberPsychology & Behaviour, 9(4), pp. 432–440.
Thomas, L., MacMillan, J., McColl, E., Hale, C. and Bond, S., 1995. Comparison of focus 
group and individual interview methodology in examining patient satisfaction with 
nursing care. Social Sciences in Health, 1, pp. 206–219.
Valentine, D. B. and Powers, T. L., 2013. Generation Y values and lifestyle segments. 
Journal of Consumer Marketing, 30(7), pp. 597–606.
Wilska, T.-A., 2002. Me – a consumer? Consumption, identities and lifestyles in today’s 
Finland. Acta Sosiologica, 45(3), pp. 195–210.
Zickuhr, K. and Madden, M., 2012. Older adults and internet use. www.sainetz.at/
dokumente/Older_adults_and_internet_use_2012.pdf.

13	 Personality traits and computer 
use in midlife
Leisure activities and work 
characteristics as mediators
Tiia Kekäläinen and Katja Kokko
Background
Nowadays, computers and the internet are part of everyday life. According to a 
survey conducted by Eurostat (2015) in 2014, 78 per cent of adults in European 
Union countries had used the internet during the previous three months. The sur­
vey found that the younger the age group, the greater the proportion of internet 
users. The reasons for using the internet appear similar across age, and the most 
common reasons are: information searches, email and other communications, and 
internet banking (Keenan, 2009; Statistics Finland, 2015). The most noteworthy 
difference between age groups is in the use of social networking sites (SNS); in 
Finland, 87 per cent of people aged 25–34, 51 per cent of people aged 45–54 
and 19 per cent of people aged 65–74 used the internet for social networking 
(Statistics Finland, 2015).
In addition to age, gender has some link to computer and internet use such 
that although the frequency of internet use is similar between men and women, 
they use the internet for somewhat different purposes (Keenan, 2009; Statistics 
Finland, 2015). For example, men use internet for reading news and seeking 
information about goods and services more than women, whereas women use 
it for reading blogs and seeking information about health issues more than men 
(Statistics of Finland, 2015). It is noteworthy that the reasons for computer use 
in general extend beyond the use of the internet, but then, internet use is no 
longer linked solely to computers. In this chapter, we present research in both 
domains: computer use and internet use. Research has increasingly focused 
on the use of SNS, Facebook in particular, which is the most popular social 
networking site in the world, with over one billion users in December 2015 
(Facebook Company Info, 2016). 
Computer, internet and SNS use have been widely studied, and many indi­
vidual factors predict their use, for example age, life satisfaction and social 
resources (education, income) are linked to computer use in different age groups 
(Hills and Argyle, 2003; Kim and Jeong, 2015; Livingstone and Haddon, 2009; 
Papacharissi and Rubin, 2000; Wagner et al., 2010). In addition to age, genera­
tion and age cohort contribute to computer and internet use such that younger 
generations, X (born 1965–1979) and Y (born 1976–1994) use computers and 

184  Tiia Kekäläinen, Katja Kokko
the internet much more than older generations, such as baby boomers (born 
1946–1964) (Anderson et al., 2010). Generations differ in when they started 
using modern digital technology: generation Y since they were kids, generation 
X before entering the working life and baby boomers in their midlife. Hence, 
according to Shah et al. (2001), the most important media for generation X is the 
internet, whereas for baby boomers it is television, which reflect their perceptions.
The biggest difference between generations is in the use of SNS, but studies 
have mainly been conducted among children, youth and young adults (Amichai-
Hamburger and Vinitzky, 2010; Guadagno et al., 2008; Kuo and Tang, 2014; 
Özgüven and Mucan, 2013; Tuukkanen et al., 2013; Wilson et al., 2010). 
Relatively little attention has been paid to middle-aged adults’ use of computers 
and SNS, particularly from the viewpoint of personality. Therefore, this chapter 
focuses on middle-aged adults and their individual characteristics as predictors 
of computer use. The chapter also investigates whether leisure activities or work 
characteristics mediate the associations between personality and computer use 
among middle-agers.
Personality traits
Besides socio-demographic factors such as age and education, computer use is 
associated with other characteristics of an individual. In this chapter, we analyse 
personality, which describes the ways individuals think, feel and behave (McCrae 
and Costa, 2003), as a potential antecedent of computer use. We conceptualise 
personality here using the Big Five taxonomy (also known as the five-factor 
model), where the five personality traits are extraversion, neuroticism, agreeable­
ness, conscientiousness and openness to new experiences (Goldberg, 1993; John 
and Srivastava, 1999; McCrae and Costa, 2003).
Every personality trait can be seen as a continuum. For example, McCrae and 
Costa (2003) and John and Srivastava (1999) describe typical characteristics of 
individuals who are in extremes of a continuum, in other words high or low in 
the traits. According to them, extraversion is a personality trait reflecting activ­
ity, optimism and the desire to be with other people, while individuals with low 
extraversion are reserved and quiet. Individuals who score high in neuroticism 
typically have negative feelings, whereas individuals with low scores in neuroti­
cism have high emotional stability and can handle difficult and stressful situations 
well. Furthermore, McCrae and Costa note that openness to new experiences is 
related to a desire to seek new experiences and broaden a way of thinking, whereas 
individuals with low scores are down-to-earth and prefer routine. People with 
high scores in conscientiousness are well-organised, hardworking and dutiful, 
and those with low scores are aimless and negligent. Agreeableness, on the other 
hand, is a trait related to good-natured, unselfish and altruistic behaviour, whereas 
individuals with low agreeableness are critical, antagonistic and hardheaded.
An individual´s personality is considered to be quite stable across situations 
and the life course (Caspi et al., 2005; McAdams and Olson, 2010). With respect 
to the relative stability in the rank-ordering of the Big Five, the same longitudinal 

Personality traits, computer use in midlife  185
data used in the present study show a high level of continuity in adulthood (Kokko 
et al., 2013). There is also significant continuity from childhood temperamen­
tal characteristics to adult personality traits; for example, behavioural activity in 
childhood contributes to extraversion-related characteristics in adulthood, par­
ticularly in males (Pulkkinen et al., 2012). As regards absolute stability, some 
general changes in the levels of the personality traits take place over time in adult­
hood, as conscientiousness and agreeableness tend to increase in midlife, whereas 
neuroticism tends to decrease (Kokko et al., 2013; Roberts and Mroczek, 2008).
Personality traits and computer use
The links between the Big Five personality traits and computer or internet use 
have been analysed in several studies. Recently, the role of personality traits in 
social media use has also been studied, although mostly among younger adults. 
In the majority of previous studies, extraversion has not been linked to internet 
use in general (Berner et al., 2012; Chen and Persson, 2002; Hills and Argyle, 
2003; Kim and Jeong, 2015; Swickert et al., 2002). However, extraversion has 
specifically been linked with more frequent use of social media (Correa et al., 
2010; Ryan and Xenos, 2011; Wilson et al., 2010), especially for communica­
tion (Ryan and Xenos, 2011). Moreover, this association was similar among both 
young (aged 18–29) and older adults (aged 30+) (Correa et al., 2010). The stud­
ies also suggest that individuals with high and low scores in extraversion use 
social media for different purposes (Orchard and Fullwood, 2010); individuals 
high in extraversion may use social media to communicate with friends and to 
broaden their social network, while individuals low in extraversion may also use 
social media because they prefer online communication to real-life communica­
tion (Orchard and Fullwood, 2010).
Like extraversion, neuroticism was not correlated with computer or internet use 
in general (Berner et al., 2012; Chen and Persson, 2002; Hills and Argyle, 2003; 
Landers and Lounsbury, 2006), but it has been linked to social media use. Several 
studies found that individuals who are high in neuroticism use social media more 
than individuals low in neuroticism (Correa et al., 2010; Kuo and Tang, 2014; Ryan 
and Xenos, 2011). However, according to Correa et al. (2010), this association has 
been found only in adults aged 30 and over, and only in men. Individuals who have 
high or low scores in neuroticism may, like individuals with high or low scores in 
extraversion, have different motives for using Facebook: individuals high in neurot­
icism may use it to boost their self-assurance, while individuals low in neuroticism 
share information for self-actualisation (Amichai-Hamburger and Vinitzky, 2010). 
It has also been reported that individuals high in neuroticism perceive Facebook as 
a part of their everyday lives and feel lost if they have not used it for a while (Kuo 
and Tang, 2014). It may be that the resemblance between individuals who have high 
scores in neuroticism and low scores in extraversion is explained by a preference for 
both types for online communication to real-life communication.
Openness to new experiences has been positively associated with internet 
use (Chen and Persson, 2002; Kim and Jeong, 2015) and especially with social 

186  Tiia Kekäläinen, Katja Kokko
media use (Correa et al., 2010; Guadagno et al., 2008; Kuo and Tang, 2014). 
Correa et al. (2010), observed that high openness predicts social media use in 
individuals aged 30 and older, but not in younger adults, and only in women. 
These results may not come as a surprise since it can be assumed that the adop­
tion of new technologies interests individuals with intellectual curiosity and 
willingness to engage in new activities, but why the association is found only 
among older adults remains unclear.
For conscientiousness, again, the results are somewhat inconsistent. Some stud­
ies show that individuals with high scores in conscientiousness use computers for 
academic purposes (Landers and Lounsbury, 2006; Orchard and Fullwood, 2010), 
but less frequently for leisure purposes (Landers and Lounsbury, 2006), and less for 
social media (Hughes et al., 2012; Ryan and Xenos, 2011; Wilson et al., 2010). In 
other studies, no associations were found between conscientiousness and internet 
use (Berner et al., 2012; Chen and Persson, 2002; Swickert et al., 2002). These 
results on computer use are reasonable considering individuals who are character­
ised by high conscientiousness may want to do their jobs well and carefully, and use 
the computer more for those purposes than for recreation.
Moreover, in previous research, agreeableness has shown no associations with 
computer or internet use in general (Berner et al., 2012; Kim and Jeong, 2015; 
Swickert et al., 2002) or with social media use (Guadagno et al., 2008; Özgüven 
and Mucan, 2013; Ross et al., 2009; Ryan and Xenos, 2011; Wilson et al., 2010). 
In studies where some significant associations have been found, high agreeable­
ness has been linked to infrequent use of computers (Landers and Lounsbury, 
2006) and Facebook (Kuo and Tang, 2014).
Leisure activities as possible mediators between personality 
traits and computer use
Although different personality traits seem to have associations with different 
types of leisure activities, to the best of our knowledge no previous research has 
been published on the factors mediating personality traits and computer and inter­
net use. We hypothesise that leisure might be one such mediator since it is linked 
to both personality and computer use (Figure 13.1). In order to function as media­
tor, certain criteria need to be met, as suggested by Baron and Kenny (1986). 
First, the personality traits in question and computer use have to correlate with 
each other. Second, the personality traits have to correlate with the mediator vari­
ables, and finally, the mediators have to correlate with computer use. As described 
above, personality traits show some significant, though inconsistent, associations 
with computer, internet and social media use, but they are also associated with 
other types of leisure activities. Extraversion and openness to new experiences, 
in particular, are positively associated with different kinds of leisure activities, 
such as sports activities and outdoor leisure (Jopp and Hertzog, 2010; Kuo and 
Tang, 2014). Conversely, high neuroticism is associated with less frequent par­
ticipation in outdoor leisure and fitness (Kuo and Tang, 2014) and in experiential 
activities (e.g. gardening, reading) (Jopp and Hertzog, 2010). Furthermore, both 

Personality traits, computer use in midlife  187
agreeableness and conscientiousness have been positively associated with reli­
gious activities and experiential activities (Jopp and Hertzog, 2010).
A few studies investigated the associations between computer use and other 
leisure activities. One key suggestion is that a high level of internet use is asso­
ciated, although not linearly, with more active leisure (Näsi et al., 2011; Zhou 
et al., 2014). Janković et al. (2016) found an association between Facebook use 
and higher participation in other leisure activities among students, but only to 
a certain extent; if Facebook takes too much time, then that time is taken away 
from other activities. According to Näsi et al. (2011), having a higher number 
of other leisure activities predicted more frequent internet use among a sample 
of elderly persons (aged 60–79). In general, older adults use computers less than 
younger people, which may reveal what an active life means at different ages. 
Associations may also depend on the types of activities engaged in: according 
to Zhou et al. (2014), internet users go to movies and amusement parks more 
often than others, but are less active in the domain of physical exercise. One 
reason for the inconsistencies in the results may be the method of measurement. 
For example, Robinson (2011) compared three national samples and found that 
according to self-assessment data, internet users were also more active in other 
leisure activities, whereas diary-based data showed no differences between 
internet users and non-users in the amount of leisure activities.
We found that with the exception of Kuo and Tang (2014), no studies have 
investigated personality traits, leisure activities and Facebook simultaneously. In 
addition, to the best of our knowledge, the same applies to computer and internet 
use in general. Kuo and Tang (2014) found an association between high extra­
version and higher frequency of Facebook use and a higher number of friends 
on Facebook, which in turn was positively associated with participation in team 
sports. It follows that openness to new experiences, number of Facebook friends 
and participation in team sports are all positively correlated with each other. On the 
other hand, neuroticism correlates positively and agreeableness negatively with 
the frequency of Facebook use, which in turn correlated negatively with fitness 
activities. Hence, diverse paths may exist between personality, leisure activities 
and the use of Facebook. However, Kuo and Tang (2014) did not analyse them in 
the same model, and they recommended the use of structural equation modelling 
in future studies.
Work characteristics as possible mediators between personality 
traits and computer use
While computer and social media use are obviously a way of spending leisure 
time, for middle-aged adults computer use does not mean leisure entertainment 
alone, as it is also used for work-related activities. Accomplishing work-related 
tasks is one of the most common reasons for computer use among middle-agers 
(Mann et al., 2005), and for this group, with the diffusion of technical devices and 
the internet, the boundary between work and leisure has become blurred, as per­
sonal computers have made it possible to work during leisure time and at home. 

188  Tiia Kekäläinen, Katja Kokko
According to Berkowsky (2013), 86 per cent of adults check work-related emails 
at least sometimes at home. Therefore, we analyse computer use for business mat­
ters outside of working hours along with computer use for leisure purposes and 
social media use.
Studies show that personality contributes to many aspects of the working 
career, such as occupational status and income (Judge et al., 1999; Viinikainen 
et al., 2010). Openness to new experiences, extraversion and conscientiousness 
have been associated with higher occupational status and better job performance 
(Barrick and Mount, 1991; Judge et al., 1999), and extraversion is also associated 
with higher income (Judge et al., 1999; Viinikainen et al., 2010). Both the studies 
by Viinikainen et al. 2010, which is based on the same data as the present article, 
and by Judge et al. (1999) found that even childhood personality correlated with 
adulthood career success. Thus, because business-related computer use could be 
hypothesised to depend on work characteristics, we also consider them as pos­
sible mediating factors between personality traits and computer and internet use 
(Figure 13.1).
The purpose of this study
Previous studies have analysed the associations between personality traits, leisure 
activities, work characteristics and different types of computer use as single links. 
Those studies were based mainly on cross-sectional data, yet the present study anal­
yses these different variables simultaneously, using longitudinal data. Figure 13.1 
shows our study design, where we hypothesise that personality traits, measured at 
age 42, are linked to computer and social media use, assessed at age 50. We further 
assume that work characteristics and leisure activities, measured at age 42, mediate 
this direct link; that is, personality traits are associated with these mediating factors, 
which for their part, relate to computer and social media use. The moderating role 
Figure 13.1  Hypothesised path model.

Personality traits, computer use in midlife  189
of gender in the associations between personality and computer use has remained 
unclear, as some studies found no differences between men and women (Kim and 
Jeong, 2015; Özgüven and Mucan, 2013) while others did (Amichai-Hamburger 
and Vinitzky, 2010; Correa et al., 2010; Guadagno et al., 2008). Therefore, we also 
studied the gender differences in the associations.
Our research questions were as follows:
1	
Which personality traits contribute to different kinds of computer use in 
midlife?
2	
Do work characteristics and leisure activities mediate the associations 
between personality traits and computer use?
Methods
Participants
This study is based on the Jyväskylä Longitudinal Study of Personality and Social 
Development (JYLS). The JYLS was started in 1968 by Professor Lea Pulkkinen 
and the same participants have thus far been followed from age 8 to 50 (initial 
N=369) (Pulkkinen, 2009; 2017). Most participants were born in 1959 and are rep­
resentative of their respective Finnish age cohort (Pulkkinen and Kokko, 2010), 
belonging to the tail of baby boomers, also called the younger baby boomers 
(Reisenwitz and Iyer, 2007). In these analyses for this study, we use information 
gathered in 2001 when the participants were 42 years old (N=285) and in 2009 
when they were 50 (N=271). The number of participants varied as a function of 
missing information on different variables in a range from 213 to 279. Data were 
collected using life situation questionnaires (LSQ), semi-structured psychological 
interviews (in the context of which several self-report inventories were filled in) 
and a medical examination.
Measures and variables
The main outcome variables in this study are different types of computer use at 
age 50. First, the participants answered in the LSQ whether they used or had used 
a computer (1) or not (0). They were also asked how many hours a week they used 
a computer for business matters outside of working hours and how many hours a 
week they used a computer for personal matters or enjoyment. Based on the distri­
bution of responses, computer use for business matters was categorised into 0 (1), 
1–2 (2) and >3 (3) hours per week, and computer use for personal matters into <1 
(1), 2–4 (2) and >5 (3) hours per week. The use of social media (Facebook, chat, 
blogs) was elicited as part of a more extensive leisure time and activity self-report 
inventory and utilised a response scale from 1 (not at all or very seldom) to 4 (twice 
a week or more frequently). Response categories were dichotomised into non-users 
and users. Non-users represented category 1, who answered not at all or very 
seldom (0), and users categories 2 to 4 (1).

190  Tiia Kekäläinen, Katja Kokko
Antecedents of computer use were measured at age 42 and personality was 
measured with the NEO-FFI1 (Costa and McCrae, 1989; Kokko et al., 2013), 
a shortened 60-item version of the NEO-PI2 questionnaire (Costa and McCrae, 
1985; Pulver et al., 1995). Each personality trait was measured by 12 statements 
with a response scale from 1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree, and mean 
scores calculated. Cronbach’s alphas for the traits were .87 for neuroticism, .75 
for extraversion, .78 for openness to new experiences, .78 for conscientiousness 
and .79 for agreeableness (Kokko et al., 2013).
Occupational status and weekly working hours were used as work-related char­
acteristics, and we used three categories of occupational status: 1 = blue-collar, 
2 = lower white-collar and 3 = higher white-collar (Pulkkinen et al., 1999). 
Acquired using the LSQ, weekly working hours ranged from 0 to 100 and leisure 
activities were elicited as frequency of participation in 22 different activities using 
a self-report inventory with a response scale from 1 (daily) to 5 (never) and the 
participants’ responses were reverse-scored (Pulkkinen, forthcoming). New mean 
scores were formed: ‘watching TV’ (watching informative or topical TV series, 
entertainment programmes, crime or action programmes, videos), ‘reading’ (read­
ing books, visiting a library) and ‘attending events’ (going to see a film, attending 
cultural events). The variable ‘creative activities’ includes writing, visual activities, 
playing a musical instrument and singing, and was dichtomised into 0 (never doing 
any of these) and 1 (doing at least one of them) with the remaining leisure activity 
variables based on single questions. Based on their distribution, ‘religious activity’ 
and ‘organisational activities’ were dichotomised into 0 (never) and 1 (all other 
options) and ‘socialising’, ‘handicrafts’, ‘outdoor activities’ and ‘exercise’ were 
used with the original categorisation. Exercise was measured with a 7-category 
scale from 0 (never) to 6 (practically every day).
Data analyses
We carried out the analyses using IBM SPSS Statistics 22.0 (IBM Corp., 2013) 
with the exception of the path analyses, for which we used Mplus 7-software 
(Muthén and Muthén, 1998–2015). First, for descriptive statistics, differences 
between men and women were estimated by independent samples t-test and chi-
square test, then Pearson’s rank-order correlations separately for men and women 
for all the personality traits, work characteristics, leisure activities, and computer 
use variables. Furthermore, gender differences were tested using Fisher´s r-to-z 
transformation (McNemar, 1969).
Based on the previously mentioned mediator criteria (Baron and Kenny, 1986), 
we chose variables for the path analyses according to their correlations. Here, per­
sonality traits that did not correlate with any computer use variable were excluded, 
and only work characteristics and leisure activities that correlated with at least one 
personality trait and one computer use variable were included. In the path analy­
sis, we used weighted least squares (WLSMV) as the estimator method, which is 
a robust method when a model includes categorical dependent variables (Muthén 
and Muthén, 1998–2015). Lastly, the parametrisation used was theta.

Personality traits, computer use in midlife  191
Results
Descriptive statistics
The frequency of computer use for different purposes and the number of overall 
users are reported in Table 13.1. Men and women differed significantly only in 
computer use for business matters, which men did more. With respect to personal­
ity traits, as previously reported by Kokko et al. (2013), women had significantly 
higher openness to new experiences and agreeableness, but there were also some 
gender differences in work characteristics and leisure activities.
Table 13.1  Frequencies and means with gender differences.
All
(n=213–279)
Women 
(n=109–132)
Men
(n=104–147)
x2-test/
t-test p
Have used a computer %
.581
No
5.8
5.0
6.6
Yes
94.2
95.0
93.4
Social media %
.294
No
80.8
78.0
83.7
Yes
19.2
22.0
16.3
Computer use for 
business matters %
.011
0 h/w
58.0
57.1
58.8
1–2 h/w
24.2
31.4
17.6
3≤ h/w
17.9
11.4
23.5
Computer use for 
personal matters %
.281
1≥ h/w
29.1
33.0
25.8
2–4 h/w
34.5
35.9
33.3
5≤ h/w
36.3
31.1
40.8
Neuroticism 
2.37
2.40
2.33
.475
Extraversion 
3.30
3.33
3.24
.469
Openness 
3.32
3.45
3.17
<.001
Conscientiousness 
3.69
3.75
3.60
.063
Agreeableness 
3.63
3.72
3.48
.005
Occupational status %
.001
blue-collar
34.6
12.8
54.0
lower white-collar
38.9
62.4
24.5
higher white collar
26.5
24.8
28.0
Weekly working hours 
38.80
36.46
40.90
.032
Watching TV 
4.08
3.93
4.22
.001
Reading 
2.69
2.95
2.46
.001
Attending events 
1.91
1.99
1.84
.009
Socialising 
3.55
3.45
3.64
.041
Handicrafts 
2.94
2.80
3.07
.026
(continued)

192  Tiia Kekäläinen, Katja Kokko
Table 13.2  Differences in personality traits between computer users and non-users, 
independent samples t-test.
Have used a computer
No (n=15)
Yes (n=243)
p
Neuroticism
2.95
2.34
.004
Extraversion
2.80
3.31
.006
Openness to new experiences
2.87
3.36
.010
Agreeableness
3.42
3.64
.200
Conscientiousness
3.52
3.69
.320
Note: Statistically significant (p<.05) coefficients are in bold.
All
(n=213–279)
Women 
(n=109–132)
Men
(n=104–147)
x2-test/
t-test p
Outdoor activities 
3.27
3.44
3.12
.007
Exercise 
3.07
3.18
2.97
.332
Creative activities %
.057
No
68.5
62.9
73.5
Yes
37.1
26.5
31.5
Religious activity %
.014
No
68.9
62.6
76.2
Yes
30.2
37.4
23.8
Organisational activity %
No
65.1
67.2
63.3
.495
Yes
34.9
32.8
36.7
Note: Computer use was measured at age 50, and personality traits, work characteristics and leisure 
activities at age 42.
Table 13.1  (continued)
In studying whether the small group of computer non-users (n=15) differed 
from users (n=243) in personality traits (Table 13.2), we found three significant 
differences: the non-users have higher scores in neuroticism, lower scores in 
extraversion and openness to new experiences than the computer users. Because 
the non-user group was so small, further analyses were not considered reasonable.
Correlations between computer use, personality traits, work characteristics and 
leisure activities for men and women are presented in Table 13.3. As already men­
tioned, to meet the criteria for mediators (Baron and Kenny, 1986), first, personality 
has to correlate with computer use, and, second, both personality and computer 
use have to relate to potential mediators, that is, work characteristics and leisure 
activities. In women, we discovered that the only association between personality 
traits and computer use was between extraversion and computer use for business 
matters. In men, however, extraversion and openness correlated positively with 
computer use for business matters, agreeableness negatively with computer use 
for personal matters, and openness positively with social media use. Work char­
acteristics and leisure activities had several correlations with personality traits and 

Table 13.3  Correlations between personality, computer use, work characteristics and leisure activities for women/men.
N
E
O
A
C
CB
CP
SM
CB
−.12/−18
.24*/.37*
.15/.27*
−.16/.01
−.03/.15
—
—
—
CP
.08/−.07
−.05/−.03
.06/.10
−.12/−.17*
.00/.00
−.02/.24*a
—
—
SM 
−.02/.06
−.04/−.03
.16/.32*
−.03/−.04
−.01/−.18
.16/.98
−.34*/.33*
—
W1
−.42*/−.32*
.28*/.26*
.31*/.24*
.04/.11
.03/.21
.24*/.31*
.08/.23*a
.02/.15*a
W2
−.08/−.04
.18/.27*
−.04/.08
−.04/−.13
.06/.03
.36*/.29*
−.09/−.01
.18/.07
A1
.01/−.06
.16/.06
.17/.17
.11/−.04
.11/.01
.08/.06
−.08/−.20*
−.08/−.02
A2
−.03/−.18
.15/.24*
−.09/.18
−.03/.17a
−.07/−.05
.20*/.14
.26*/.09
.32*/.23*
A3
−.08/−.15
.05/.09
.05/.12
.01/−.02
−.17/.18a
−.05/.07
−.00/.05
.15/.02
A4
−.07/−.01
.08/.21*
.05/.16
.25*/.20*
.01/−.22*a
−.04/.01
−.17/−.04
−.04/.03
A5
−.08/−.01
.08/−.10
.09/−.06
.21*/.20*
.14/.09
.04/−.08
−.20*/−.01
−.03/−.05
A6
−.08/−.02
.10/.07
−.12/−.05
.00/.11
−.00/−.13
−.10/.04
.01/.06
−.04/−.07
A7
.17/.13
.04/−.06
.00/.13
−.21*/.00a
−.07/−.10
−.01/.13
−.10/.00
−.17/.20*a
A8
.03/.11
−.04/−.07
−.25*/−.14
−.00/−.08
−.03/−.06
−.10/−.18
.14/−.03
.06/.08
A9
.09/−.07
.10/.17
.35*/.25*
−.07/.18a
−.09/.02
.21*/.19
.04/.22*
.16/−.07a
A10
.00/−.06
−.12/.06
.38*/.25*
−.04/.23*a
−.13/.01
.01/−.05
−.02/.01
−.07/.00
Notes: N=neuroticism, E=extraversion, O=openness, A=agreeableness, C=conscientiousness, CB=computer use for business matters, CP=computer use for personal 
matters, SM=social media, W1=occupational status, W2=weekly working hours, A1=religious activity, A2=organisational activity, A3=handicrafts, A4=socialising, 
A5=outdoor activities, A6=going out, A7=exercise, A8=watching TV, A9=creative activities, A10=reading; *p<.05; a significant difference between men and women 
(Fisher´s z-test).

194  Tiia Kekäläinen, Katja Kokko
computer use. However, only work characteristics and leisure activities that met 
the criteria for the mediator according to their correlations were included in the 
path analysis. Occupational status correlated positively with extraversion, open­
ness to new experiences, computer use for business matters and social media use 
for men. In addition, weekly working hours correlated positively with extraversion 
and computer use for business matters. Regarding leisure activities, organisational 
activities correlated positively with extraversion and computer use for business 
matters, and outdoor activities correlated positively with agreeableness and nega­
tively with computer use for personal matters.
In summary, we included variables in the path analyses according to their 
significance, as shown by their correlations; independent variables included 
were extraversion, agreeableness and openness to new experiences. As possi­
ble mediator variables, we included occupational status, weekly working hours, 
participating in organisational activities and outdoor activities, and dependent 
variables incorporated in the analyses were computer use for business matters, 
computer use for personal matters and social media use.
Path analysis
To see whether the differences in structural paths across gender were statistically 
significant, we conducted multiple group path analysis.3 We first estimated a model 
with no constraints on gender, but according to the indices,4 the model fit was not 
satisfactory. Because of their high modification indices, the variable measuring par­
ticipation in organisational activities was allowed to correlate with computer use 
for personal matters and social media, while the measure for occupational status 
was allowed to correlate with computer use for personal matters only. With these 
changes, the free baseline model showed a good fit to the observed data,5 so next, 
we compared the fit of this baseline model with no constraints to a model where all 
paths were constrained to be equal for men and women. Using these results,6 the 
Figure 13.2  The mediator path model between personality traits and computer use.

Personality traits, computer use in midlife  195
final model was then estimated with the whole sample. Given the high modification 
index, weekly working hours and outdoor activities were also allowed to correlate 
with each other. The fit of the final model was good,7 and the results of the mediator 
model are presented in Figure 13.2 with standardised coefficients.
In the path model, openness to new experiences was directly linked to 
social media use (p=.041) and agreeableness to computer use for personal mat­
ters (p=.033), as already shown by the correlations. Conversely, extraversion 
showed insignificant associations with business-related computer use (p=.135). 
It was linked to higher occupational status and weekly working hours which, in 
turn, were related to computer use for business matters. Hence, the association 
between extraversion and computer use for business matters was mediated by 
work characteristics.
Discussion
The purpose of this study was to investigate which personality traits predict 
computer use in midlife, and whether work characteristics and leisure activities 
mediate these associations. The chapter also discussed the moderating role of 
gender. Some significant results are presented here. First, a small group of com­
puter non-users differ from computer users in their personality, and the study 
found that high neuroticism, low extraversion and low openness to new expe­
riences predicted non-use of a computer at age 50. These results indicate that 
personality relates to whether or not technology is adopted. Second, the hypoth­
esis that gender would moderate the associations is not supported in this study 
because it is possible that gender differences are more significant among other 
age groups than middle-agers.
Third, we found that computer use for business matters outside of working 
hours is predicted by extraversion mediated by work characteristics, thereby sup­
porting our hypothesis. Extraversion appears to contribute to having the kind of job 
where computer use for business matters is also necessary during leisure time. On 
the other hand, contrary to our expectations, conscientiousness is not associated 
with computer use for business matters.
Fourth, computer use for personal matters was predicted by agreeableness: 
individuals with high scores in agreeableness used computers for personal mat­
ters less than individuals with low scores in agreeableness. The results are in line 
with those of Landers and Lounsbury (2006), who suggest that agreeableness cor­
relates negatively with internet use among students. They assume that students 
low in agreeableness are less popular and therefore have more time to spend on 
the internet. Agreeable people are, for example, altruistic and compliant (McCrae 
and Costa, 2003), hence it is possible that in midlife, agreeable individuals prefer 
other types of activities, such as those focused on the needs of others through 
personal interaction. Therefore, the only possible mediator between agreeableness 
and computer use is outdoor activities, but it does not mediate the association. It 
seems that the association between agreeableness and leisurely computer use is 
either direct or is mediated by other factors that remain unidentified in this study.

196  Tiia Kekäläinen, Katja Kokko
Furthermore, our hypotheses that computer use for personal matters would 
show a negative association with conscientiousness and a positive associa­
tion with openness to new experiences, did not receive support. In addition, 
our further, unreported, ANOVA comparison shows that computer use for 
personal matters was average among individuals with high scores in extraver­
sion, whereas for low-scoring individuals, it was either on a low or high level. 
Hence, the association between extraversion and personal computer use may 
not be linear. This may be one reason why previous studies found hardly any 
associations between extraversion and computer or internet use (Berner et al., 
2012; Chen and Persson, 2002; Swickert et al., 2002), and why in this study no 
significant correlation was found between extraversion and personal computer 
use. Because extraverts are sociable and active persons, they may spend some 
of their leisure time using a computer, but their interest also extends to other 
leisure activities.
Fifth, the only personality trait that predicted social media use was openness 
to new experiences. This is consistent with previous results, where openness 
was associated with Facebook and other social media use (Kuo and Tang, 2014; 
Özgüven and Mucan, 2013). Contrary to our expectations, extraversion and neu­
roticism showed no associations with social media use. One explanation for this 
may be that at the time of data collection (2009) social media was a recent phe­
nomenon, especially for middle-agers and older adults. This would also explain 
the finding that only one-fifth of our sample reported using social media at least 
sometimes. Therefore, openness to new experiences, in particular, may have been 
a significant predictor of adoption of this phenomenon, new in 2009. The only 
possible mediator between openness and social media use in this study was occu­
pational status, and it did not mediate the association. Hence our hypothesis that 
leisure activities would mediate personality and leisure computer or social media 
use was not supported.
When interpreting the results of this study, it is important to bear in mind that 
the data were collected in 2009, hence the results are not directly applicable to the 
50-year-olds of today. The development of technology is so rapid that its use will 
have characteristics specific to every age cohort. For example, in the recent past, 
using the internet was clearly connected to the use of a stationary computer; this 
is no longer the case. Nevertheless, this study offers interesting information on the 
seldom-studied longitudinal associations between personality and computer use 
using representative data, and deepens our knowledge on the individual character­
istics underlying adoption and use of technology.
In addition, even though these results may not be completely applicable to 
the 50-year-olds of today, they may be interpreted within the present generation. 
The present participants represent their respective Finnish age cohort group 
born in 1959. Those born in 1959 belong to young baby boomers, and most of 
them used the internet for the first time in their thirties (Reisenwitz and Iyer, 
2007). As the results showed, personality clearly has some effect on how that 
generation responds to new technology and how they use it. In future research, 
it would be important to analyse whether similar individual characteristics 

Personality traits, computer use in midlife  197
link to the adoption of other types of recent technology (e.g. intelligent 
domestic appliances) than computer and internet use, and whether the current 
middle-aged adults use computers for similar reasons as the present partici­
pants. Furthermore, it would be important to replicate the results with different 
age cohorts and a larger sample size.
In light of these findings, personality should be seen as a meaningful topic of 
research in connection with the adoption of new technologies and/or the motives 
driving their uses. It would also be interesting to investigate personality profiles 
instead of single personality traits. Combinations of personality traits may reveal 
even more about the associations between personality and behaviour than per­
sonality traits separately. Kinnunen et al. (2012) found five longitudinally stable 
personality profiles in the same sample that was used in this study: for exam­
ple, resilient individuals low in neuroticism and high in all the other traits and 
under-controlled individuals high in extraversion and openness and low in con­
scientiousness. It is noteworthy that even though personality is quite stable over 
the life course (Caspi et al., 2005; McAdams and Olson, 2010), there are some 
general changes in personality traits during adulthood. Agreeableness, which 
was linked to lower personal computer use in this study, tends to increase during 
adulthood, and openness, which was linked to higher social media use, tends to 
decrease (Kokko et al., 2013; Roberts and Mroczek, 2008). These personality 
differences between age groups may also play a role in computer use differences 
between age groups. Moreover, in future research, it should be borne in mind 
that personality traits may also have non-linear associations with the use of tech­
nologies, as individuals with different personalities may have different reasons 
for using the same technology. It will also be interesting to see how personality 
directs technology use among baby boomers and generations X and Y, as they age 
and technology changes.
Acknowledgments
The Jyväskylä Longitudinal Study of Personality and Social Development (JYLS) 
has been funded by the Academy of Finland, most recently in 2009 through grants 
#127125 and #118316. We appreciate Professor Lea Pulkkinen’s contribution to 
the JYLS over the years. The use of the NEO Personality Inventory in Finnish in 
the JYLS is based on the permission granted to Professor Pulkkinen.
Notes
1	 Neuroticism-Extraversion-Openness Five-Factor Inventory
2	 Neuroticism-Extraversion-Openness Personality Inventory
3	 Model fit was evaluated by the chi-square test of model fit and other indices: RMSEA 
(Root mean square error of approximation), CFI (Comparative Fit Index), TLI (Tucker 
and Lewis Index), and WRMR (Weighted root mean square residual). The values indi­
cating good fit are ≥.95 for the CFI and TLI, ≤.06 for the RMSEA (Hu and Bentler, 
1999), and ≤1 for the WRMR (Yu, 2002).
4	 x2 (50)=95.816, p<.001, RMSEA=.08, CFI=.78; TLI=0.61, WRMR=1.20.
5	 x2 (44)=43.67, p=.486, RMSEA=.00, CFI=1.00; TLI=1.00, WRMR=.76.

198  Tiia Kekäläinen, Katja Kokko
6	 According to the difference test, the constrained model did not differ from the uncon­
strained model: x2(30)=38.43, p=.144, suggesting that there were no significant gender 
differences in the paths.
7	 x2(21)=21.38, p=.436, RMSEA=.01, CFI=1.00; TLI=1.00, WRMR=.53.
References
Amichai-Hamburger, Y. and Vinitzky, G., 2010. Social network use and personality. 
Computers in Human Behavior, 26(6), pp. 1289–1295.
Anderson, J., Reitsma, R., Sorensen, E. and Munsell, M., 2010. The state of consumers and 
technology: benchmark 2010, US. Cambridge, MA: Forrester Research.
Baron, R. M. and Kenny, D. A., 1986. The moderator–mediator variable distinction in 
social psychological research: conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51(6), pp. 1173–1182.
Barrick, M. R. and Mount, M. K., 1991. The Big Five personality dimensions and job 
performance: a meta-analysis. Personnel Psychology, 44(1), pp. 1–26.
Berkowsky, R. W., 2013. When you just cannot get away. Information, Communication & 
Society, 16(4), pp. 519–541.
Berner, J., Rennemark, M., Jogreus, C. and Berglund, J., 2012. Distribution of personality, 
individual characteristics and internet usage in Swedish older adults. Aging & Mental 
Health, 16(1), pp. 119–126.
Caspi, A., Roberts, B. W. and Shiner, R. L., 2005. Personality development: stability and 
change. Annual Review of Psychology, 56, pp. 453–484.
Chen, Y. and Persson, A. 2002. Internet use among young and older adults: relation to 
psychological well-being, Educational Gerontology, 28(9), pp. 731–744.
Correa, T., Hinsley, A. W. and De Zúñiga, H. G., 2010. Who interacts on the Web?: The 
intersection of users’ personality and social media use. Computers in Human Behavior, 
26(2) pp. 247–253.
Costa, P. T. J. and McCrae, R. R., 1985. The NEO Personality Inventory manual. Odessa, 
FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Costa, P. T. J. and McCrae, R. R., 1989. The NEO/NEO-FFI manual supplement. Odessa, 
FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Eurostat, 2015. Information society statistics: households and individuals. http://ec.europa.
eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Information_society_statistics_-_house
holds_and_individuals#Internet_usage.
Facebook Company Info, 2016. http://newsroom.fb.com/company-info/.
Goldberg, L. R., 1993. The structure of phenotypic personality traits. The American 
Psychologist, 48(1), pp. 26–34.
Guadagno, R. E., Okdie, B. M. and Eno, C. A., 2008. Who blogs? Personality predictors of 
blogging. Computers in Human Behavior, 24(5), pp. 1993–2004.
Hills, P. and Argyle, M., 2003. Uses of the internet and their relationships with individual 
differences in personality. Computers in Human Behavior, 19(1), pp. 59–70.
Hu, L. and Bentler, P. M., 1999. Cutoff criteria for fit indexes in covariance structure 
analysis: conventional criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation Modeling: 
A Multidisciplinary Journal, 6(1), pp. 1–55.
Hughes, D. J., Rowe, M., Batey, M. and Lee, A., 2012. A tale of two sites: Twitter vs. 
Facebook and the personality predictors of social media usage. Computers in Human 
Behavior, 28(2), pp. 561–569.
IBM Corp., 2013. IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, Version 22.0. Armonk, NY: IBM Corp.

Personality traits, computer use in midlife  199
Janković, B., Nikolić, M., Vukonjanski, J. and Terek, E., 2016. The impact of Facebook 
and smart phone usage on the leisure activities and college adjustment of students in 
Serbia. Computers in Human Behavior, 55, pp. 354–363.
John, O. P. and Srivastava, S., 1999. The Big-Five trait taxonomy: history, measure­
ment, and theoretical perspectives. In: L. Pervin and O. P. John, eds. Handbook of 
personality: theory and research. 2nd ed. New York: Guilford, pp. 102–138.
Jopp, D. S. and Hertzog, C., 2010. Assessing adult leisure activities: an extension of 
a self-report activity questionnaire. Psychological assessment, 22(1), pp. 108–120.
Judge, T. A., Higgins, C. A., Thoresen, C. J. and Barrick, M. R., 1999. The Big Five per­
sonality traits, general mental ability, and career success across the lifespan. Personnel 
Psychology, 52(3), pp. 621–652.
Keenan, T. A., 2009. Internet use among midlife and older adults. AARP Bulletin Poll. 
Washington, DC: AARP.
Kim, Y. and Jeong, J. S., 2015. Personality predictors for the use of multiple internet func­
tions. Internet Research, 25(3), pp. 399–415.
Kinnunen, M., Metsäpelto, R., Feldt, T., Kokko, K., Tolvanen, A., Kinnunen, U., 
Leppänen, E. and Pulkkinen, L., 2012. Personality profiles and health: longitudinal evi­
dence among Finnish adults. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 53(6), pp. 512–522.
Kokko, K., Tolvanen, A. and Pulkkinen, L., 2013. Associations between personality traits 
and psychological well-being across time in middle adulthood. Journal of Research in 
Personality, 47(6), pp. 748–756.
Kuo, T. and Tang, H., 2014. Relationships among personality traits, Facebook usages, and 
leisure activities: a case of Taiwanese college students. Computers in Human Behavior, 
31, pp. 13–19.
Landers, R. N. and Lounsbury, J. W., 2006. An investigation of Big Five and narrow 
personality traits in relation to internet usage. Computers in Human Behavior, 22(2), 
pp. 283–293.
Livingstone, S. and Haddon, L., 2009. EU kids online: final report. London: LSE, EU Kids 
Online.
Mann, W. C., Belchior, P., Tomita, M. R. and Kemp, B. J., 2005. Computer use by middle-
aged and older adults with disabilities. Technology and Disability, 17(1), pp. 1–9.
McAdams, D. P. and Olson, B. D., 2010. Personality development: continuity and change 
over the life course. Annual Review of Psychology, 61, pp. 517–542.
McCrae, R. R. and Costa, P. T. J., 2003. Personality in adulthood: a five-factor theory 
perspective. 2nd ed., New York: The Guilford Press.
McNemar, Q., 1969. Psychological statistics. 4th ed. New York: Wiley.
Muthén, L. K. and Muthén, B. O., 1998–2015. Mplus user’s guide. 7th ed. Los Angeles, 
CA: Muthén & Muthén.
Näsi, M., Räsänen, P. and Sarpila, O., 2011. ICT activity in later life: internet use and 
leisure activities amongst senior citizens in Finland. European Journal of Ageing, 9(2), 
pp. 169–176.
Orchard, L. J. and Fullwood, C., 2010. Current perspectives on personality and internet 
use. Social Science Computer Review, 28(2), pp. 155–169.
Özgüven, N. and Mucan, B., 2013. The relationship between personality traits and social 
media use. Society for Personality Research, 41(3), pp. 517–528.
Papacharissi, Z. and Rubin, A. M., 2000. Predictors of internet use. Journal of Broadcasting 
& Electronic Media, 44(2), pp. 175–196.
Pulkkinen, L., 2009. Personality: a resource or risk for successful development. 
Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 50(6), pp. 602–610.

200  Tiia Kekäläinen, Katja Kokko
Pulkkinen, L., 2017. Growing up to the middle-aged: a longitudinal study on human 
development (in collaboration with Katja Kokko). London: Routledge.
Pulkkinen, L. and Kokko, K., eds., 2010. Keski-ikä elämänvaiheena. Reports from the 
Department of Psychology 352. Jyväskylä, Finland: University of Jyväskylä.
Pulkkinen, L., Kokko, K. and Rantanen, J., 2012. Paths from socioemotional behavior 
in middle childhood to personality in middle adulthood. Developmental Psychology, 
48(5), pp. 1283–1291.
Pulkkinen, L., Ohranen, M. and Tolvanen, A., 1999. Personality antecedents of career ori­
entation and stability among women compared to men. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 
54(1), pp. 37–58.
Pulver, A., Allik, J., Pulkkinen, L. and Hämäläinen, M., 1995. A Big Five personality 
inventory in two non-Indo-European languages. European Journal of Personality, 9(2), 
pp. 109–124.
Reisenwitz, T. and Iyer, R., 2007. A comparison of younger and older baby boomers: 
investigating the viability of cohort segmentation. Journal of Consumer Marketing, 
24(4), pp. 202–213.
Roberts, B. W. and Mroczek, D., 2008. Personality trait change in adulthood. Current 
Directions in Psychological Science, 17(1), pp. 31–35.
Robinson, J. P., 2011. IT use and leisure time displacement. Information, Communication 
& Society, 14(4), pp. 495–509.
Ross, C., Orr, E. S., Sisic, M., Arseneault, J. M., Simmering, M. G. and Orr, R. R., 2009. 
Personality and motivations associated with Facebook use. Computers in Human 
Behavior, 25(2), pp. 578–586.
Ryan, T. and Xenos, S., 2011. Who uses Facebook? An investigation into the relationship 
between the Big Five, shyness, narcissism, loneliness, and Facebook usage. Computers 
in Human Behavior, 27(5), pp. 1658–1664.
Shah, D. V., Kwak, N. and Holbert, R. L., 2001. ‘Connecting’ and ‘disconnecting’ 
with civic life: patterns of internet use and the production of social capital. Political 
Communication, 18(2), pp. 141–162.
Statistics Finland, 2015. Use of information and communications technology by individuals. 
www.stat.fi/til/sutivi/tau_en.html.
Swickert, R. J., Hittner, J. B., Harris, J. L. and Herring, J. A., 2002. Relationships among 
internet use, personality, and social support. Computers in Human Behavior, 18(4), 
pp. 437–451.
Tuukkanen, T., Wilska, T. A., Iqbal, A. and Kankaanranta, M., 2013. Children’s social par­
ticipation in virtual worlds. International Journal of Virtual Communities and Social 
Networking (IJVCSN), 5(4), pp. 59–73.
Viinikainen, J., Kokko, K., Pulkkinen, L. and Pehkonen, J., 2010. Personality and labour 
market income: evidence from longitudinal data. Labour, 24(2), pp. 201–220.
Wagner, N., Hassanein, K. and Head, M., 2010. Computer use by older adults: a multi-
disciplinary review. Computers in Human Behavior, 26(5), pp. 870–882.
Wilson, K., Fornasier, S. and White, K. M., 2010. Psychological predictors of young adults’ 
use of social networking sites. Cyberpsychology, behavior and social networking, 13(2), 
pp. 173–177.
Yu, C., 2002. Evaluating cutoff criteria of model fit indices for latent variable models with 
binary and continuous outcomes. Ph.D. University of California.
Zhou, R., Fong, P. S. and Tan, P., 2014. Internet use and its impact on engagement in leisure 
activities in China. PloS one, 9(2). http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0089598.

14	 Electronic emotions, age and 
the life course
Jane Vincent
Introduction
In the late 1990s, the World Wide Web (WWW) and digital mobile phones were 
in their infancy; email and text messaging were the new mass market opportunity. 
The United Kingdom’s BT Cellnet, a mobile phone network operator and service 
provider had launched an innovative lifestyle service ‘Genie’ (BT Group, 1998) 
which, for the first time, combined mobile phone use with internet access and text 
messaging. Targeted at a new audience of younger people, Genie was designed to 
attract a new generation of customers, typically male students, who were seen as 
the trail blazers for technology-rich products that converged mobile phones with 
the WWW and data services. The marketing team were thus puzzled, and some a 
little dismayed, to find that early adopters of their services also included women 
in their late forties – why would they want a product tailored to a much younger 
generation of male users? Recalling this anecdote is a reminder that regardless 
of marketing expectations, people of all ages will buy products if they meet their 
emotional and practical needs, whether they are within the target audience or 
identify with the advertising image.
The telecommunications industry is not alone in targeting age and generation 
cohorts as the focus of marketing activity but, as I will show in this chapter, 
age specific advertising is not the only criteria people use when choosing infor­
mation and communication technology (ICT) products and services. It was the 
conundrum of the role of emotion in the mismatch between targeted customers 
and actual customers that prompted the research, which since 2002 and together 
with colleagues from across the globe, has explored people’s social practices with 
regard to ICTs and in particular mobile phone use. Early on in the research into 
the social shaping of technology, it became apparent that emotion played a sig­
nificant role in the adoption and use of mobile phones (Vincent, 2003; Vincent 
and Harper, 2003) and, working with Leopoldina Fortunati, these studies led to 
the development of the concept of ‘electronic emotions’ (Vincent and Fortunati, 
2009) – emotions that occur as a result of human interaction with ICTs.
Electronic emotions are felt and expressed directly as a result of interaction 
with a machine – often this is the presence of the mobile phone at a particular 
moment – either physically handled, or felt, or just being thought about. Expressed 

202  Jane Vincent
emotionally, this melding of awareness of what the device contains and how it is 
used combines with the role of the mobile phone in the presentation of self, and 
the inner thoughts and feelings of each individual mobile phone user.
Electronic emotions are not different emotions from those we experience in 
everyday life (sadness, joy, anger, frustration and so on) but they occur directly 
as a consequence of an interaction uniquely enabled or elicited when using ICTs. 
People turn to their mobile phones in moments of anxiety; they use apps on 
smartphones or tablets to relive happy memories of loved ones, and social media 
and emails to express emotions about all kinds of things. They feel emotions 
when they think about their mobile phone or other ICT device, when it enables 
them to do their job better, to solve a problem, or reduce stress, but the emotions 
can also be negative, such as if unwanted calls and communications are received 
or anticipated.
One of the findings from studying older age mobile phone users (Vincent, 
2011a, p. 145) is that the emotions associated with their mobile phone use 
were influenced by activities related to their life stage and were irrespective of 
age, for example parenting or grandparenting young children, juggling home 
and work life, and death of loved ones. Subsequent studies of children aged 
9–16 and their ICT use also highlight emotions in relation to their life course 
and life stages that influenced how they used ICTs, e.g. change of school year, 
moving schools and friendship groups (Vincent, 2004, 2010, 2015; Vincent 
and Haddon, 2004; Mascheroni and Cuman, 2014; Haddon and Vincent, 
2015; Mascheroni and Vincent, 2016). What appears to be emerging from my 
research findings, and what I will expand upon in this chapter, are similarities 
with regard to electronic emotions in the social practices of ICT users, and 
mobile phone users in particular, that relate to life events regardless of age. 
Furthermore, as research about ICT use is frequently conducted using age as 
the main typology, there appears to be less known about these generational and 
life course aspects, especially with regard to emotion. The launch of mobile 
phones in its various generations over the years has meant that people have had 
to grapple with unfamiliar devices, technologies and interfaces on a regular 
basis. That they do so willingly is a consideration for this present analysis, 
which highlights that the life course of the mobile phone in particular and the 
length of time ICT devices have been used might also be factors in the electronic 
emotions experienced (Vincent, 2011a).
In this chapter I thus draw upon 12 years of primary qualitative research data 
gathered in Europe, mostly in the UK, to explore these findings further. The key 
studies from this research portfolio used to explicate this chapter are listed in 
Table 14.1.
I aim to use these data to understand more about the links between the elec­
tronic emotions elicited by ICTs, especially mobile phones, in relation to age 
and the life course by exploring two research questions. First: How do electronic 
emotions relate to the life course and life stages of ICT and especially mobile and 
smartphone users? Second: Are there similarities and differences in the electronic 
emotions experienced by respondents from different generations of ICT users?

Electronic emotions, age, life course  203
Table 14.1  Summary of primary research sources on mobile phone and ICT users cited in 
this chapter.
Research topic and date 
Methodology and 
number of respondents
References and comment
Social shaping 
of 3G mobile 
communications 
technology (2002/03)
Questionnaires, focus 
groups, interviews.
120 adults
(Vincent and Harper, 2003; 
Vincent, 2003)
Study for UMTS Forum 
and EITO 2003 (included 
respondents from Germany)
Social shaping 
of mobile 
communications 
(2003/04)
Focus groups, diaries,
interviews
41 adults
3×3 generations of one 
family
(Vincent and Haddon, 2004)
Study for UMTS Forum
11 to 16 year olds’ use 
of mobile phones 
(2004)
Diaries, focus groups, 
interviews
105 children
(Vincent, 2004; Haddon and 
Vincent, 2007)
Children from the same 
schools were used for 
both studies conducted for 
Vodafone
11 to 16 year olds’ use 
of mobile phones and 
ICT (2006/07)
Diaries, focus groups, 
interviews
80 children
Emotions and mobile 
phones (2007/08)
Open ended interviews
40 adults
(Vincent, 2010, 2011; Vincent 
and Fortunati, 2009)
Respondents older than 
40 (average age 50). 
Doctoral thesis 
‘Net Children Go 
Mobile’ Children 
aged 9–16 safe use 
of mobile internet 
(2012–2015)
(3,500 questionnaires)
Interviews, focus 
groups
327 children and adults
(EU Kids Online)
(Haddon and Vincent, 2015; 
Vincent 2015; Livingstone 
et al., 2014a; Mascheroni 
and Cuman, 2014)
Comparative data from EU 
Kids Online also used in 
reports 
Following this introduction and overview of contextual literature and research, 
this chapter first outlines the methodological approach used in the data sources 
for this present analysis; it then explores the theoretical perspectives that frame 
the studies regarding both the data sources cited in this chapter and in the broader 
context of this volume. The two research questions are then explored by draw­
ing on illustrative examples from the aforementioned research projects and this 
discussion leads to final conclusions in response to these questions.
Methodology
This chapter uses a content analysis approach (Altheide, 1996) to examine and 
analyse published reports, articles and data content from primary research studies 
which the author has led or participated in since 2002. The chapter is informed by 
these studies, outlined in Table 14.1, and in particular, by two studies conducted 
for the industry body The UMTS Forum (Vincent and Harper, 2003; Vincent 

204  Jane Vincent
and Haddon, 2004); by the author’s Doctoral research (Vincent, 2011a), and by 
the Net Children Go Mobile project (Mascheroni and Ólaffson, 2014; Vincent, 
2015; Vincent and Haddon, 2015). Each of these studies involved qualitative 
research gathered variously in questionnaires, interviews, diaries, focus groups 
and observational studies. The first UMTS study was conducted in the UK and 
Germany and involved focus groups and interviews with adults, including stu­
dents. The second study conducted in the UK included a diary record made 
by three generations of three families who were also interviewed about their 
ICT use, as well as interviews with industry and academic experts. Published 
as reports for The UMTS Forum membership and in the European Information 
Technology Observatory 2003, these studies were used by industry to contrib­
ute to the planning for the launch of 4G mobile communications services. The 
Doctoral research explored emotion in the social practices of mobile phones 
users, and was based on 40 open-ended interviews with people aged 45–80 liv­
ing in the UK. The findings from this study inspired this present chapter. Funded 
by the European Commission’s Better Internet for Kids Programme, the ‘Net 
Children Go Mobile’ project examined children’s use of mobile internet and fol­
lowed a larger study, EU Kids Online that explored children’s use of the internet 
on personal computers. Both studies commenced with quantitative research in 
European countries, followed by qualitative research including interviews and 
focus groups with children, parents, teachers and youth workers (Livingstone 
et al., 2014b). In conjunction with these studies, I concurrently explored and 
developed the notion of electronic emotion and the emotional attachment people 
have to their mobile phones. These additional studies also inform this present 
chapter (cf. Vincent, 2003, 2009, 2013; Vincent and Sugiyama, 2013). The stud­
ies of social shaping and electronic emotion followed a sociological and social 
psychological approach, and the studies of children, media and communication 
studies, and social psychology.
Theoretical perspectives: balancing generation and emotion 
studies among ICT users
The exploration of people’s use of mobile phones and ICTs touches on many 
aspects of individual and societal identities. The foundational theoretical litera­
ture for the analysis of many mobile phone and ICT research projects is found 
in interactionist theory, and my own studies have similarly focused on the 
dramaturgical approach of Goffman, and also on the understanding of the inner 
self expounded by Mead (1967 [1943]) and later by Hochschild (2003 [1983]). 
Indeed, much of the research cited in this chapter was framed by interaction­
ist theory: Goffman’s (1969 [1959]) presentation of self; the domestication 
approach of Silverstone and Hirsch (1992) and Silverstone and Haddon (1996); 
and Hochschild’s (2003 [1983]) emotion management and feeling rules. This 
volume, in exploring generations and the life course, opens the door to contrast­
ing these interactionist perspectives with Mannheim’s sociological analysis of 
generations (Mannheim, 1927), and the work of others on age and life course 

Electronic emotions, age, life course  205
(e.g. Hepworth, 1998; Burnett, 2010; Green, 2010; Bristow, 2015), as well as 
studies of digital technologies and generation (e.g. Colombo and Fortunati, 2011; 
Loos et al., 2012; Garattini and Prendergast, 2015) and mobilities (Urry, 2000; 
Taipale, 2014). These mutually inclusive theoretical and conceptual perspectives 
highlight how communications technology use, such as the mobile phone, has 
cut through the sociological analysis of society according to generations and 
class, with those that explore the role of individual interactions and mobility.
Furthermore, following Urry’s definition of ‘scapes’: “the networks of 
machines, technologies, organisations, texts and actors that constitute various 
interconnected nodes” (Urry, 2000, p. 36), one could argue that infrastructures 
of ICTs now provide for a constant ‘always on’ mobility that has an effect on 
all aspects of society and the self (see also Taipale, 2014 for his analysis of the 
dimensions of mobilities). Examining electronic emotions and ICT use is no 
longer a matter of exploring individual experiences such as absence and presence, 
time and space, presentation of self and emotion management. Now, one must 
add constant co-presence enabled via devices such as smartphones, laptops and 
wi-fi connectivity. All these combine to effectively eliminate the stark rawness of 
physical separation and the strong feelings that this elicits. Described by Bassett 
in the context of travel, she posits:
For the mobile phone user, travel no longer presumes a broken connection. 
There is no dislocation between the world of the train and the world beyond: 
not even the temporary dislocation the journey used to produce. Each world 
is shot through with the other.
(Bassett, 2005)
Framing many research studies is the notion that ICTs – especially mobile 
phones – bring together multitudes of individual temporal and spatial worlds 
into a carousel of connectivity, delivering social relationships whenever and 
wherever needed. Note, however, that much of this research, including my own, 
is based on gathering data about the individual’s use of mobile phones and 
other ICTs and extrapolating a societal, or at least, cohort perspective using age, 
generation and/or gender typologies. This is where the theoretical perspectives 
of exploring the presentation of self and domestication begin to intersect with 
Mannheim’s exposition on the role of generations in society. His argument does, 
indeed, hold sway when exploring ICT use from an age perspective, and espe­
cially when one introduces technology into the mix. Young Europeans below 
the age of 20 have lived their entire lives with mobile phones freely available, 
whereas their grandparents would have experienced adulthood without a mobile 
phone or other forms of digital communication devices such as laptops and 
smartphones. Their contextual influencing generational experiences are bound 
to be different as, indeed, it will for every individual within that generation.
The challenge to Mannheim’s approach comes when one considers how peo­
ple are responding to the electronic emotions associated with the communicative 
affordances of mobile phones. Defined as “an interaction between subjective 

206  Jane Vincent
perceptions of utility and objective qualities of the technology that alters commu­
nicative practices or habits” (Schrock, 2015, p. 1130), communicative affordances 
highlight the likelihood for similar responses to new technology irrespective of 
age. This is especially the situation when it is introduced simultaneously (as in the 
case of a new generation of mobile technology), or adopted by people experienc­
ing the same life stage, regardless of age.
An interesting point of convergence between the domestication and genera­
tional approaches discussed herein is with regard to the speed of change within 
the respective human and technological generations. Mannheim argues that a new 
generation entelechy, in other words a new generation style, can occur when old 
traditions are overcome by new impulses. Just such a situation occurs when the 
mobile phone is simultaneously encountered for the first time by all generations 
and ages in relation to a life stage event such as a new baby, divorce, house move 
and so on.
Nevertheless, and notwithstanding Mannheim’s emphasis only on men as 
his subjects, his arguments are set forth in The sociological problem of genera­
tions (1927), which assume throughout that older generations must compensate 
for the lack of experience of youth – an attitude being turned on its head now 
by some who believe that children have overtaken the technological experience 
of their forebears and are more advanced and competent with their ICT use. A 
2016 advertising campaign by Bartle Bogle Hegarty for Virgin Media inferred 
that operating a television is so complicated that children are now needed to help 
older people change a channel.
The ad . . . features six children, portrayed as being sinisterly powerful due 
to their innate understanding of technology. The last child to speak, a boy 
wearing a hoodie, approaches the camera saying: “We are the masters of 
entertainment because we are seven, and you are not. You need help”.1
Our research of children (Livingstone et al., 2014a; Mascheroni and Cuman, 
2014; Haddon and Vincent, 2015) showed that although some people, particularly 
young children, do believe children are more competent when using smartphones 
and the internet, this is not necessarily the case as they may be more knowledge­
able about a few aspects but not wholly competent.
Two in three children say they know more than their parents about the inter­
net, and 86% claim to know more than their parents about smartphones. 
However, 9- to 10-year-olds generally think their parents know more about 
using the internet than they do.
(Livingstone et al., 2014a, p. 4)
We do know that as each generation is located differently, they will inevitably 
experience the same events in different ways. I contend that whilst this is true 
for many aspects of everyday life, the first encounter of mobile phone and ICT 

Electronic emotions, age, life course  207
services – as in the earlier example of Cellnet’s Genie – is not necessarily dif­
ferentiated by generation, age or gender but by other life events. Furthermore, 
if we consider the electronic emotions engendered by the constant presence of 
mobile phones and the always on connectivity it affords its users, the emotional 
attachment that quickly builds between the user and their ICT device is similar 
across all generations.
Electronic emotions and life stages of mobile phone users
As illustrated by the theoretical and conceptual perspectives that frame the dis­
course on generation, age and life course, emotions are present in all layers of 
technology adoption and appropriation. Furthermore, the ‘communicative affor­
dances’ of the mobile phone present extraordinary opportunities to stimulate 
or trigger electronic emotions (Mascheroni and Vincent, 2016). This apparent 
omnipresence of emotion or emotional associations that occur when using ICTs 
is associated with uses of the device that are not necessarily particular to age 
cohorts or generations, but rather are in relation to similarity of use to which the 
device is put, such as keeping in contact with an absent loved one or keeping a 
child safe en route to school. In this regard, the question of the similarities and 
differences in the electronic emotions experienced by different generations of 
ICT users is now considered.
Smartphones, tablets, laptops and ICT devices are now integral to daily life 
in this second decade of the twenty-first century. As we walk through towns, 
cities and countryside, everywhere people are using their smartphones: talk­
ing, texting, messaging on social media, taking photos, using satnav (satellite 
navigation), playing games, or simply holding the phone in anticipation of use. 
Research of mobile phone users shows that many people hold their phone in 
their hand at all times, others keep it close to hand in a bag or their pocket, ready 
for quick access to deal with incoming communications or to make contact with 
someone themselves. Ensuring the mobile phone is close to hand is something 
respondents have commented upon:
I always check in my handbag that it’s there. It’s very rare I haven’t got it 
with me. If I go to the gym, because I literally take my keys and my phone 
and that’s it, so I put the phone along with my keys, which I have to obvi­
ously have for the car and the house; the next thing is the mobile phone. 
I’d leave a purse quite happily but I wouldn’t leave my phone behind, 
strangely enough.
June, 45 (Vincent, 2011a, p. 94)
I’ve got to have my mobile phone; it’s like you having your keys. You 
don’t leave home without your keys and you don’t leave home without your 
mobile phone.
John, 46 (Vincent, 2011a, p. 76)

208  Jane Vincent
In the case of this young girl she will have it with her in bed, and then cannot 
resist using it:
Even when I have to go to bed and it’s school, I’m not allowed to use the 
phone, only so it can wake me up in the morning, because I put an alarm on 
it, so it can wake me up. And when it’s in the night, I’ll go under the covers 
and start playing games or looking at my pictures to delete, things like that.
Angela, 9–10 (Vincent, 2015, p. 48)
In the research of UK mobile phone and ICT users, and in that of others (Lasen, 
2004; Baron, 2008; Turkle, 2008) this ‘always on’ link between the user and their 
mobile phone has been a constant theme; some studies also explore the emotion 
associated with this attachment between user and device (Vincent, 2003; Cumiskey, 
2005; Vincent and Fortunati, 2014). In this section I draw on my research to explore 
how emotions have been shown to be key triggers for mobile phone use throughout 
the life course and in so doing challenge the preponderance of age typologies in 
academic analysis of mobile phone use. Fewer and fewer people never use a mobile 
phone, or never contact someone who is using a mobile phone, and this techno­
logical and communicative turn in the everyday life of UK (and global) society is 
shaping a new understanding of why and for what people use mobile phones.
The bond between mobile phone and user is driven by emotions, and indeed I 
have argued that the combination of the personalised mobile phone and individual 
user creates a personalised social robot (Vincent, 2013). The ability to remain in 
constant contact with friends and family, as well as care workers and commercial 
and business users, elicits positive emotions, but there are also negative emotions 
experienced such as from ended relationships, bullying or bad deals. The emo­
tional response to the mobile phone – and now smartphone or tablet computer – is 
immediate and constant from the moment it is acquired. Whether it is in constant 
use or kept for emergencies, the mobile phone is now an integral part of the every­
day lives of most Europeans over 10 years old – although, perhaps, not yet among 
all those aged over 80. The respondents in the first of the UMTS Reports certainly 
considered that mobiles were so important for them that an emotional paradox of 
it being too important to lose had begun to emerge:
But [I] might be getting too dependent on them . . . the importance is so great 
it makes the mobile too valuable: I don’t take it to the club ‘cause it would 
be terrible if I lost it.
(Vincent and Harper, 2003, p. 18)
Other respondents have made the mobile phone an integral part of their everyday 
life, especially regarding child minding responsibilities:
I’ve just adapted my life around the phone to some extent, and happily so 
because I think it’s more me.
Christine, 45 (Vincent, 2011a, p. 134)

Electronic emotions, age, life course  209
To ring friends to say, you know, to get you to just keep an eye on the girls, I 
may or may not be back in time, and that’s when I tend to use a mobile phone.
Martha, 70 (Vincent, 2011a, p. 80)
Whilst personal computers, laptops and tablets are often used and shared by all 
ages from toddlers onwards, mobile phones are rarely shared and are acquired as 
a direct result of a planned or unexpected life event. Looking first at the children 
in the UK, acquisition typically occurs during the transition to secondary school 
such as in the final years of primary school; in some other European countries, a 
mobile phone is given as a gift on religious confirmation. Now that smartphones 
offer child friendly applications allowing safe access online, gaming and some 
social media, they are also being acquired at the start of school or sooner. Older 
people acquiring them for the first time do so as birthday gifts, as a result of 
family crisis, for work or due to family pressures to be contactable, as in the 
example of one respondent, Nina (80), who has a mobile phone for use in emer­
gencies although she does not rely on it (Vincent, 2011a, p. 80). For both older 
and younger users, mobile phones may be donated or gifted from other family 
members, a practice that was re-affirmed by recent research (Piper et al., 2016). 
These examples are life events that involved the transition from one life stage to 
another, and it appears that the first acquisition of a mobile phone has become 
a rite of passage; itself an emotionally charged event. Adult children with new 
responsibilities for ailing parents and parents who are letting go of being wholly 
in control of their children’s lives use the mobile phone as a safety net or digital 
leash (Ling, 2004). Once at secondary school the children use their mobiles for 
social contact, and their parents use them to keep in touch and to know where they 
are at all times. This emotional attachment to their mobile phone was evident in 
the study I conducted in 2004 of 11–16 year olds and in the more recent European 
studies of children, as well as in the other studies involving adults. The only recent 
change is that the children are acquiring their phones at a younger age. Here we 
see that the mobile phone has a different function for parents and children, but the 
role it performs in placating their emotional need to stay connected is common 
and age is immaterial. One of the respondents found, to her cost, that relying on 
the mobile phone to keep connected with young sons who had gone off alone 
shopping failed when there was no coverage:
[s]o I had to start thinking about where they might be. And then I started 
panicking because I thought if I can’t get them on his mobile, I don’t quite 
know where we’re going to meet in this massive, great big shopping centre.
Margaret (Vincent, 2011a, p. 93)
Another respondent, George, lost his smartphone whilst on a business trip and 
after a week without it he missed the intimacy of calls to his family at the end 
of a busy day, and the inability to communicate with business colleagues or 
access his contacts. He said: “And I went onto Facebook having been away a 
week at this time and I updated my profile to say: ‘George is missing his wife 

210  Jane Vincent
and family but at this moment he is actually missing his mobile more’” George 
50 (Vincent, 2011a, p. 100).
Children’s attachment to their mobile phones is highlighted in these comments 
from a teacher and, second, from a mother:
We’ve got quite a few new teachers from Ireland and Australia, and one of 
the Australian teachers was saying to me that, in the end, their school was so 
big, it was [had] over 2,000 pupils, they said, we more or less have given up 
on it. We just couldn’t fight the battle of phones in lessons anymore, it was 
just too difficult.
Alex, Teacher at secondary school, UK 
(Haddon and Vincent, 2015, p. 30)
All the time, if I say that you’ve had enough on the PlayStation, they will 
go and pick up an iPad. If I say, you’ve had enough on the iPad and the 
PlayStation, they’ll go and find a laptop, and then I end up saying, no, it’s just 
no screens whatsoever, no screen, nothing with a screen.
Sally, mother of boys aged 10 and 7, UK 
(Haddon and Vincent, 2015, p. 29)
Current research by the European COST Action IS1402 on ageism highlights 
that among the older age population, ICTs, not just mobile phones, have become 
integral to everyday life. Keeping connected with family, friends and care work­
ers becomes more challenging with the frailties of age and there are increasing 
interventions for healthcare and support. There is evidence that older people are 
appropriating smartphone technology such as in Spain where WhatsApp is used to 
socialise with peers and family members (Fernández-Ardèvol and Rosales, forth­
coming). There is still work to be done to ensure ease of accessibility, but the use 
of ICTs for monitoring and safety are commonplace, and accompanying this are 
the electronic emotions associated with using devices such as personal alarms, or 
carrying a portable or mobile phone everywhere in case of a fall. That adaptive 
mobile phones and emergency buttons must become part of everyday life is a 
watershed for many, and this passive surveillance of the frail elderly highlights 
the tensions between people’s willingness to accept assistive technologies such 
as a personal alarm and their denial of the impact of ageing on their mobility 
or cognitive skills (see Garattini and Prendergast, 2015). The additional stresses 
associated with wearing a surveillance device elicit further electronic emotions as 
the touch of the button on the skin provides reassurance at moments of anxiety as 
well as alarm if or when it has to be used.
These ‘watershed’ life stages are more often considered in the context of old 
age, but, as has been shown already, they are not exclusive to this older genera­
tion. In the small study of three generations of family users conducted in 2004, the 
mobile phone had acquired a key role in the household. It was significant in the 
communicative relationship between the generations who all used their mobiles, 
albeit for different purposes, as this extract from the Report findings explains:

Electronic emotions, age, life course  211
The families had needs for mobile phones that differed a little between 
generations but in principle were based on the same needs of connectiv­
ity, reassurance and to avoid risk. They used them quite differently within 
their own social groups. For example the oldest generation tended not to use 
their mobile phone to call friends whilst the children’s volume of use would 
have been greater had they not been influenced by their tariff, budgetary and 
parental control. The middle generation mothers were the most intensive 
users calling friends during the day and keeping their mobile phone with 
them because their friends used it to contact them.
(Vincent and Haddon, 2004, p. 33)
Nowadays children mostly use smartphones, and their attachment to their device 
develops very quickly, so much that they cannot imagine life without it. Mobile 
phone applications such as WhatsApp and Snapchat are constantly in use and pre­
sent the children with challenges for keeping up to date to continue to be included 
in friendship groups – especially if their parents are unwilling to allow them free 
rein on when and where they can use their mobile. A quarter of the children admit­
ted they missed “eating or sleeping because of their use of the internet, and nearly 
two-thirds say that the internet gets in the way of time they should spend with fam­
ily, friends or schoolwork” (Mascheroni and Cuman, 2014, p. 5). A 16-year-old 
girl, Bea, said she could manage an hour without her mobile, but when her younger 
sister asked if she could manage a week she said “A week, oh gosh, I’d die, I 
couldn’t live with that” (Haddon and Vincent, 2014, p. 30). Another 16-year-old 
described how she managed the high volume of social media on her smartphone:
I follow so many people on Twitter that I can’t actually physically read 
everything that they say, so what I do . . . I probably go onto my mentions 
because my mentions are full of the people that I want to see their tweets 
and I . . . then I just go through that and look at the people’s tweets I want to 
see, instead of reading everyone’s, so I probably just go through my Twitter 
but it takes so long.
Eliza, 16 (Vincent, 2015, p. 5)
The adult respondents may not be as voracious users of mobile applications as the 
children but they are similarly attached to their mobile phones as a response to 
being in contact with whomever they want, anywhere and at any moment. Juggling 
the work-life balance is frequently managed via the mobile phone, which augments 
the emotional attachment to the device, but it can also be a means of checking up 
on one’s partner or spouse, and for some the freedom it affords is tempered by this 
unwanted contact. Maria describes misunderstandings over mobile phone acces­
sibility that occurred in the long-distance relationship with her boyfriend:
So he says “Why aren’t you answering your phone?” – Because I didn’t hear 
it and I was walking – “But you had it in your pocket!” – Yes but my trousers 
are loose what do you want me to do? Hold it in my hand all the time? – “YES 

212  Jane Vincent
I want you to hold it in your hand! I know that the breakdown in communica­
tion frustrates him but I get frustrated when he gets frustrated. I get annoyed 
because when he gets frustrated he switches off his phone and doesn’t speak 
to me and then I have the big space, no, a void, of not being able to commu­
nicate with him and then I get frustrated and so I’d rather hold my phone and 
check it every single moment all the time rather than go through that roller 
coaster of him being annoyed, switching his phone off, me trying to contact 
him, then ending up just having a fight for some stupid reason.
Maria, 42 (Vincent, 2011a, p. 128)
Another respondent uses his mobile phone to keep in touch with his mates whilst 
he is overseas, and he shares moments with them over the phone in the same way 
as if they were together, such as the excited celebration of a team win en route 
home from a rugby match he had attended with another friend:
We had to talk to somebody so we rang my rugby mate’s son who’d obvi­
ously been watching it and we had rather a long and amusing conversation 
which helped the time pass.
Nigel, 62 (Vincent, 2011a, p. 134)
Emotions in relation to mobile phone use are not always acknowledged or real­
ised by the users – rather, they are simply expressed in words or behaviours as 
they talk about their mobile phone use such as about holding the phone in a hand, 
having conversations on it, keeping it close to hand, or referring to the potential 
loss of the device with horror.
These quotes from the respondents of the various studies show how emotion 
words are used when they talk about their mobile phones and about other ICTs. They 
express their feelings spontaneously and mostly these are positive, but their reaction 
was often one of discomfort if asked to think about not having their mobile phone. It 
was unusual for a respondent to be immediately negative about their mobile phone, 
instead they would share how they used it and then occasionally they would give 
examples of problems they had to overcome to continue to make it work for them.
Conclusion
Based on this analysis, review of literature and the illustrative quotes, this section 
draws some conclusions regarding the challenges presented by the theoretical 
perspectives framing the discussion, as well as the outcome of this development 
of summative material from studies based on age and cohort typologies. This 
approach is pertinent to understanding how it can be that people of all genera­
tions are now comfortable using mobile phones, despite those who are older 
having to change their communicative practices from already domesticated 
modes of communications such as the telephone and paper mail.
One of the challenges is against the frame on which to analyse this ICT use 
when exploring the life course. In effect, we have two axes – on the one hand, 

Electronic emotions, age, life course  213
the longitudinal Mannheimian view that places generations apart from each other, 
each influenced only by their life experience which collectively, is similar for each 
generation or member of a generation. On the other, is the more dynamic indi­
vidual who encounters technological opportunities as they appear on the market. 
One such opportunity is the affordance of mobile phones and other ICT taken up 
at particular life stages irrespective of the generation, age or class. What began as 
a problem-solving device purchased irrespective of generation, albeit influenced 
by peer groups which include one’s generation, goes on to penetrate the intimacy 
of everyday life in ways for which they were not originally designed or perhaps 
acquired. The electronic emotion, the utility, the communicative affordances of 
the device and the essential role it plays in an individual’s emotion management 
of their everyday lives, cuts through familiar age and generational analysis that is 
so popular. The categorisations such as Millennials, Generation Y, Silver Surfers, 
Elders, Youth, Adolescents and Children are designed to monetise a product, or 
for cohort analysis are valid research structures, which are less effective when 
exploring electronic emotions. Each have their similarities and differences that 
create the cohort but when it comes to the electronic emotions elicited via their 
mobile phones, and their attachment to their mobile phone or other ICT, these are 
transparent of generation. People long for contact, touch the phone, take and store 
photos, phone or text a friend for advice, clutch the phone when anxious, use it to 
play games, use it for identity management, social media and for so many things 
that are not necessarily age or generation specific.
Whilst it is clear from Mannheim’s articulation of the sociological problem of 
generations that each new generation has a different experience from that which 
comes after them, further honed by differences in education, life stage and so on, 
when it comes to examining electronic emotions there is another contributory 
factor – the technological input. Each generation of ICT and mobile phone espe­
cially (1G through to the forthcoming 5G, Android or iOS operating system and 
so on), will be delivered as a new experience at a point in time that is separated by 
fewer years than human generations. Following Bassett’s articulation of mobile 
phone use on trains (2005) we can see that ICT use cuts through the everyday 
scapes of every generation and, furthermore, depending on the content and services 
used, each technology generation stimulates electronic emotions regardless of the 
age of the user. These emotions are the glue linking technology with users: the 
desirability, the usefulness, the importance of not losing a contact or missing an 
important communication or being able to limit accessibility, are all enabled by the 
ability to implement and use the new generation of technology. Notwithstanding 
the myth that a child of seven is always better informed about technology than 
adults, this is transparent to the traditional age and class generations described by 
Mannheim and is, instead, associated with the communicative affordance of the 
device (Schrock, 2015; Mascheroni and Vincent, 2016). Thus, it would appear the 
combination of electronic emotions, technological savviness and needs for particu­
lar communicative affordances are not necessarily related to human generations.
I wrote previously about the feral nature of mobile phones (Vincent, 2011b); 
following the domestication approach of Silverstone and Hirsch (1992) and 

214  Jane Vincent
Silverstone and Haddon (1996), it is this capturing, ‘taming’ and tailoring of 
the communicative affordances of the mobile phone and other ICT to meet 
the needs of users that cuts through the generational divisions. A new mother, 
be she 16 or 46, or a bereaved friend, be he 10, 20 or 80, will use their mobile 
phone to express their feelings and to manage their emotions in these new life 
stage situations. George, for example, has not been able to remove the contact 
details from his mobile phone for his friend who has died: “Well it’s just, well 
why is that? It’s not logical; there’s no logical reason why, it’s almost like 
he’s still here if he is in my address book . . . Weird”. (Vincent, 2011a, p. 110). 
Electronic emotions such as those experienced by George, are not differentiated 
by the age or generation of the user, but rather by the life stage or life event that 
prompts the emotions.
The ICT machines and the technologies that enable electronic emotions are a 
perturbation that cuts orthogonally through the existing architecture of life course 
analysis. The emotional attachment to devices, especially mobile and smart­
phones, and the electronic emotions they engender refute the experience of the 
heredity of generation and prevents it from dominating actions, linking it instead 
with new found knowledge and shared experience available simultaneously to all 
ages and without prior experience. How one responds to a new technology may 
well be influenced by generational life experience and one’s position in the life 
course; but explored through the lens of electronic emotions it is neither one thing 
nor the other. Rather, it is a combination of individual and collective generational 
experience across the human life course.
Note
1	 www.campaignlive.co.uk/article/virgin-media-brings-all-powerful-children-screen-
new-campaign-tv/1408452#.
References
Altheide, D. L., 1996. Qualitative media analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Baron, N. H., 2008. Always on: language in an on line and mobile world. Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press
Bassett, C., 2005. How many movements? Open, Cahier on Art and the Public Domain, 
9, pp 38–48.
Bristow, J., 2015. Baby boomers and generational conflict. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave, 
Macmillan
BT Group, 1998. Annual report and accounts. www.btplc.com/report/1997-98/pdfs/full
report.pdf.
Burnett, J., 2010. Generations: the time machine in theory and practice. Farnham, UK: 
Ashgate.
Colombo, F. and Fortunati, L., eds., 2011. Broadband society and generational changes. 
Berlin: Peter Lang.
Cumiskey, K., 2005. “Can you hear me now?” Paradoxes of techno-intimacy resulting 
from the public use of mobile communication technology. In: K. Nyiri, ed. A sense 
of place: the global and local in mobile communication. Vienna, Austria: Passagen 
Verlag, pp 151–158.

Electronic emotions, age, life course  215
Fernández-Ardèvol, M. and Rosales, A., forthcoming. Older people, smartphones and 
WhatsApp. In: J. Vincent and L. Haddon L., eds. Smartphone cultures. Abingdon, UK: 
Routledge.
Garattini, C. and Prendergast, D., 2015. Introduction: critical reflections on ageing and 
technology in the twenty-first century. In: D. Prendergast and C. Garattini, eds. Aging 
and the digital life course. Oxford, UK: Berghahn.
Goffman, E., 1969 [1959]. The presentation of self in everyday life. Harmondsworth, UK: 
Penguin Books.
Green, L., 2010. Understanding the life course: sociological and psychological perspectives. 
Cambridge, UK: Polity.
Haddon, L. and Vincent, J., 2007. Growing up with a mobile phone: learning from the 
experiences of some children in the UK. DWRC Report for Vodafone UK. www.lse.
ac.uk/media@lse/WhosWho/AcademicStaff/LeslieHaddon/Date.aspx.
Haddon, L. and Vincent, J., eds., 2014. European children and their carers’ understanding 
of use, risks and safety issues relating to convergent mobile media Report D4.1. Milan, 
Italy: Unicatt.
Haddon, L. and Vincent, J., 2015. UK children’s experience of smartphones and tablets: 
perspectives from children, parents and teachers. Net Children Go Mobile. London: 
The London School of Economics and Political Science. http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/62125/.
Hepworth, M., 1998. Ageing and emotions. In: G. Bendelow and S. J. Williams, eds. 
Emotions in social life: critical themes and contemporary issues. London: Routledge.
Hochschild, A. R., 2003 [1983]. The managed heart commercialization of the human 
feeling. 20th ed. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Lasen, A., 2004. Affective technologies: emotions and mobile phones. Receiver #11 
Vodafone UK. www.academia.edu/472410/Affective_Technologies._Emotions_and_
Mobile_Phones.
Ling, R., 2004. The mobile connection. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
Livingstone, S., Haddon, L., Vincent, J., Mascheroni, G. and Ólafsson, K., 2014a. Net 
Children Go Mobile: the UK report. London: London School of Economics and 
Political Science.
Livingstone, S., Mascheroni, G., Ólafsson, K. and Haddon, L., with the networks of EU 
Kids Online and Net Children Go Mobile, 2014b. Children’s online risks and oppor­
tunities: comparative findings from EU Kids Online and Net Children Go Mobile. 
http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/60513/.
Loos, E., Haddon, L. and Mante-Meijer, E., 2012. Generational use of new media. 
Farnham, UK: Ashgate.
Mannheim, K., 1927. The sociological problem of generations. http://mediaspace.new
museum.org/ytjpressmaterials/PDFS/ARTICLES_ABOUT_THE_GENERATION/01_
The_Sociological_Problem.pdf.
Mascheroni, G. and Cuman, A., 2014. Net Children Go Mobile. Final report deliverables 
D6.4 & D5.2. Milan, Italy: Educatt.
Mascheroni, G. and Ólafsson, K., 2014. Net Children Go Mobile: risks and opportunities. 
2nd ed. Milan, Italy: Educat.
Mascheroni, G. and Vincent, J., 2016. Perpetual contact as a communicative affordance: 
opportunities, constraints, and emotions. Mobile Media and Communication, 4(3), 
pp. 310–326.
Mead, G. H., 1967 [1943]. Mind, self and society. Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press.
Piper, A. M., Cornejo Garcia, R. and Brewer, R. N., 2016. Understanding the challenges 
and opportunities of smart mobile devices among the oldest old. International Journal 
of Mobile Human Computer Interaction, (8)2, pp. 83–98.

216  Jane Vincent
Schrock, A., 2015. Communicative affordances of mobile media: portability, avail­
ability, locatability, and multimediality. International Journal of Communication, 
9, pp. 1229–1246.
Silverstone, R. and Haddon, L., 1996. Design and the domestication of information and 
communication technologies: technical change and everyday life. In: R. Silverstone and 
R. Mansell, eds. Communication by design. the politics of information and communica­
tion technologies. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, pp. 44–74.
Silverstone, R. and Hirsch, E., eds. 1992. Consuming technologies: media and information 
in domestic spaces. London, Routledge.
Taipale, S., 2014. The dimension of mobilities: the spatial relationship between corporeal 
and digital mobilities. Social Science Research 43, pp. 157–167.
Turkle, S., 2008. Always-on/always-on-you: the tethered self. In J. E. Katz, ed. Handbook 
of mobile communication studies. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Urry, J., 2000. Sociology beyond societies: mobilities for the twenty-first century. London: 
Routledge.
Vincent, J., 2003. Emotion and mobile phones. In: K. Nyiri, ed. Mobile democracy: essays 
on society, self and politics. Vienna, Austria: Passagen Verlag, pp. 215–230.
Vincent, J., 2004. 11–16 mobile: examining mobile phone and ICT uses amongst children 
aged 11 to 16. DWRC Report funded by Vodafone UK. www.lse.ac.uk/media@lse/
WhosWho/AcademicStaff/LeslieHaddon/Date.aspx.
Vincent, J., 2009. Emotion, my mobile, my identity. In: J. Vincent and L. Fortunati, eds. 
Electronic emotions: the mediation of emotions via information and communications 
technologies. Oxford, UK: Peter Lang, pp 187–206.
Vincent, J., 2010. Living with mobile phones. In: J. R. Höflich, G. F. Kircher, C. Linke 
and I. Schlote, eds. Mobile media and the change of everyday life. Berlin: Peter Lang, 
pp. 155–170.
Vincent, J., 2011a. Emotion in the social practices of mobile phone users. PhD. University 
of Surrey http://epubs.surrey.ac.uk/770244/.
Vincent, J., 2011b. The mediation of emotion: taming the mobile phone. In: ICA 
(International Communications Association), 61st Annual ICA Conference, Division 
of Communication and Technology, Structural Transformation of the Private Sphere. 
Boston, MA, 26–30 May 2011. Washington, DC: ICA.
Vincent, J., 2013. Is the mobile phone a personalised social robot? Intervalla, 1, pp. 60–70.
Vincent, J., 2015. Mobile opportunities: exploring positive mobile media opportunities for 
European children. London: London School of Economics and Political Science.
Vincent, J. and Fortunati, L., eds. 2009. Electronic emotions: the mediation of emotions via 
information and communications technologies. Oxford, UK: Peter Lang.
Vincent, J. and Fortunati, L., 2014. The emotional identity of the mobile phone. In: 
G. Goggin and L. Hjorth, eds. The Routledge companion to mobile media. Abingdon, 
UK: Routledge, pp. 312–331.
Vincent, J. and Haddon, L., 2004. Informing suppliers about user behaviours to better 
prepare them for their 3G/UMTS. Customers Report 34 for UMTS Forum. www.umts-
forum.org.
Vincent, J. and Harper, R., 2003. Social shaping of UMTS: preparing the 3G Customer 
Report 26 for UMTS Forum. www.umts-forum.org.
Vincent, J. and Sugiyama, S., 2013. Social robots and emotion: transcending the boundary 
between humans and ICTs. Intervalla 1, pp. 1–6.

15	 Conclusions
Chris Gilleard, Terhi-Anna Wilska 
and Sakari Taipale
This edited volume is concerned with the changing relationships that are 
emerging between the new digital technologies, generational identity and the 
life course. Both theoretical models and empirical research findings have been 
reported in the diverse contributions that illuminate particular aspects of these 
relationships. They have been examined through the lens of family and intergen­
erational relations as well as from what might be called a consumerist perspective 
and have drawn upon both quantitative and qualitative, cross-sectional, longitudinal 
and cross-sequential studies of age groups, life stages and birth cohorts. Its central 
concern has been to evaluate how these technologies are instrumental in effecting – 
or realising – social and cultural change.
If modernity can, as Ulrich Beck believed, be broadly periodised into a ‘first’ 
and a ‘second’ modernity, there is no doubt that these new technologies form part 
of the ‘second’ modernity (Beck et al., 2003). They are penetrating the systems 
and the life world in equal measure, in ways that the technologies of the first 
modernity barely dreamed of. The concerns of the first generation of European 
sociologists were with the processes of industrialisation, urbanisation and the 
struggle for citizenship and solidarity within the nation state. Among the pan­
theon making up sociology’s founding fathers, Karl Mannheim alone evinced an 
interest in generational location as a source of social change. Georg Simmel was 
perhaps the lone figure of that era who evinced a similar interest in culture, media 
and technology (Bouchet, 1998; Frisby, 1997). In the second modernity, socio­
logical interests have expanded to give increasing prominence to questions of 
identity and lifestyle within what is now termed ‘the network society’ (Castells, 
1996; Rainie and Wellman, 2012).
Both generation and technology are closely linked to topics of identity and 
lifestyle. If the generational schism of the long 1960s witnessed new demands 
in Western societies, not for universal or class-based rights, but for the rights 
to equal citizenship of previously under-recognised groups, this brought to 
prominence and gave power to what were effectively new generational demands. 
These included demands for equal recognition for women, for racial and eth­
nic minorities, for sexual minorities and for people with disabilities. Framed as 
either cultural politics or identity politics, this transformation in social political 

218  Chris Gilleard et al.
life was interwoven with socio-economic changes that saw increases in the stand­
ard of living, the rise of mass consumerism and the marketing of ‘lifestyle’. This 
combination of cultural, economic and political change made this not so much a 
generational phenomenon as a wider and more profound generational schism. In 
the process, there has been a steady breaking down of previously solid age and 
generational boundaries.
Since this break, the second modernity has witnessed further changes, not 
least in the penetration of new technologies into the home, changing the nature 
of families and of intergenerational relationships. While the earlier changes fos­
tered a degree of generational separation such as the introduction of transistor 
radios and portable TVs, the new technologies seem to have first created and 
then collapsed new sites of distinction. A pervasive individualisation of society 
seems to be coinciding with new forms of connectivity. Time and space no 
longer serve as the coordinates of social division. Generation as a more or less 
fixed unit of social time seems to have been rendered a fluid imaginary. As a 
social location determined by age and chronology, it pre-occupies the media 
and the market and – perhaps not yet so prominently – the political classes, but 
Mannheim’s question remains unanswered – namely ‘what can and what cannot 
be attributed to the generation factor as one of the factors impinging upon the 
social process’ (Mannheim, 1997, p. 61).
Several chapters in this volume have been exercised by this question. Some 
have considered how the term ‘generation’ should best be framed, particularly as 
a social identity and location within Europe’s cosmopolitan networked societies; 
and assuming it functions as such a structuring influence, others have sought to 
explore how far the new digital technologies have penetrated the system world 
of the workplace and the market and the life world of home and family, and in 
the process, how far new generational identities have emerged based upon the 
consumption and engagement with this digital technology. As Göran Bolin has 
shown in his research, technologies and media play important roles in forming 
generational identities in developed countries, in what could be termed a ‘gen­
erationing’ process (Bolin, 2016; Chapter 3 in this book). The increasing role 
played by the media and technology in such processes, however, compounds their 
structuring influence. Their very generationing power requires new definitions, 
new boundaries, new formations – recalling what Simmel described as modern 
culture’s transformation of ‘life’ into ‘more life’ into ‘more than life’ (Oakes, 
1984). Time and again, the empirical evidence confounds attempts at generational 
delineations; other contingencies arise, whether concerning the differential use 
and meanings of the technology according to age, gender or life stage; position 
within the workforce or ‘generational role’ within the family; or whether as a 
result of individual differences in personality, temperament and experience; or 
simply time itself.
Seeking to apply Marx’s model of class consciousness to generational 
identity, Mannheim emphasised both the ‘objective’ location of generational 
identity based upon the confluence of birth cohorts and distinct historical events 
(generation-in-itself) and the collective consciousness of being of a generation 

Conclusions  219
(generation-for-itself). Such understandings remain of value, but his underlying 
assumptions are too essentialist for these more liquid times. Generational identities 
are co-constructed through cultural narratives, and the new technologies – and their 
marketing – have stimulated an outpouring of such accounts. But as Mannheim 
recognised, attempts to establish generations through a sort of sociology of chron­
ological tables [Geschichtstabelensoziologies] risks giving birth to an inexorably 
jumbled up set of categories (Mannheim, 1997, p. 53). Equal caution needs to be 
exercised in assuming that engagement with technology by one age group at one 
point in time also constitutes a generational identity (see Buckingham, 2013, p. 1). 
Their ‘generationing’ power both creates and undermines generational identities 
and formations.
What then of generational identities within the family? As several chapters 
have noted, and as has long been recognised (cf. Kertzer, 1983), there clearly 
exist generational identities within families based upon kinship. This appeared 
as particularly pronounced in the study on rural India. What several of the stud­
ies reported here have shown, however, is that the exchanges afforded by the 
new technologies (of buying them, using them, offering help and assistance) 
seem as likely to be forging new bonds between older and younger family mem­
bers as they are to developing new divisions within the family. While such 
interchanges are not necessarily significant in fashioning a social generational 
identity, they do indicate the contingencies that operate in making, breaking and 
reshaping generational boundaries within families.
In the introduction to this book, we noted that our approach is ‘post-
Mannheimian’, arguing that digital technologies have the potential to shape 
generational experiences in ways that are no longer confined to youth. 
Increasingly, these experiences are taking place at later stages of life, with 
very different consequences. This is happening at the same time as the staging 
of the life course is itself undergoing change. This theme was strongly present 
in all chapters of this book that described how the new technologies impact 
on different domains of life, in different ways among differing cultural and social 
groups. Indeed, the shared experiences related to technology among middle-aged 
and older people in communication with family members, peers and relatives, in 
their organisation of time and work, and in consumption and lifestyle were shown 
to be strongly related both to the life situation and also to the particular period 
under examination. What is becoming evident now is likely to become much 
more so in future as identities and lifestyles are continuously renegotiated in and 
through these evolving information and communication technologies.
One final point perhaps can be made and that concerns the changing nature of 
time that is afforded by the new technologies. Several authors reporting on lon­
gitudinal or pseudo cohort cross-sequential studies that track changes in attitudes 
towards or the use of these new technologies have observed how differences dis­
cerned between age groups or cohorts at one point of time no longer appear so 
marked or so salient at a later point. Divides that once seemed solid ‘melt into air’ 
(or statistical insignificance) over relatively short periods of time. This indicates 
that as ICTs spread they become perceived as necessities in people’s everyday life 

220  Chris Gilleard et al.
and acquire a ‘taken-for-granted’ status that is central to the lifestyles of ‘second’ 
modernity (Ling, 2012). Of course, as long as the use of new technology con-
tinuously demands both economic and human capital resources, socio-economic 
divides are likely to remain influential, particularly in emerging economies and 
developing countries. Even so, the changes that can be anticipated and that indeed 
are already emerging within many developed economies – in education and life-
long learning, in the ‘immateriality’ of labour, the ‘democratisation’ of the internet, 
the ageing of ageing societies, and the steady diffusion and diversification of 
families and households – make even the long-lasting divisions of capital and 
class seem more precarious points of reference.
Not only are such ‘between groups’ differences becoming more fluid over 
time, but the technologies’ own generational identities seem to be increasingly 
short-lived. Nowhere is this more noticeable than in the rapid ‘generational’ tra-
jectories of mobile telephony networks, so that the time from 1G to 5G occupies 
more or less the same chronological space of what was traditionally thought of 
as just one ‘social’ generation (Berger, 1960). Given such asynchronies, it seems 
improbable that whatever influences technology has upon the identity of social 
generations, they are unlikely to be strong stable or secure. Moreover, along with 
the rapid development of digital networks, most services in social and health 
care, culture, education and local governance will operate in digital marketplaces 
in the future, using different digital platforms.
In the digital societies of the future, the rapidly evolving tools and frameworks 
based upon the internet will frame and channel the economic and social lives of 
individuals over the whole life course. Naturally, people at different life stages 
will derive different meanings and experiences from their digital devices, and act 
differently in online environments. However, as people’s everyday lives gradu-
ally shift from digital networks into the Internet of Things and further, into the 
Internet of Everything (including Virtual Reality), the positions, interactions and 
power relations of generations as well as the meanings associated with differ-
ent life stages will be constantly redefined and reimagined. While we would not 
advocate abandoning the endeavour to understand the relationship between gen-
erations, life stages and the new digital technologies, we would argue that we 
need now to move beyond Mannheimian thinking, to embrace a more contingent 
and fluid understanding of these relationships. The work reported in this volume 
provides a rich resource from which to take that project forward.
References
Beck, U., Bonss, W. and Lau, C., 2003. The theory of reflexive modernization: prob-
lematic, hypotheses and research programme. Theory, Culture and Society, 20(2), 
pp. 1–33.
Berger, B. M., 1960. How long is a generation? The British Journal of Sociology, 11(1), 
pp. 10–23.
Bolin, G., 2016. Media generations: experience, identity and mediatised social change. 
London and New York: Routledge.

Conclusions  221
Bouchet, D., 1998. Information technology, the social bond and the city: Georg 
Simmel updated – about the changing relationship between identity and the city. 
Built Environment, 24(2/3), pp. 104–133.
Buckingham, D., 2013. Is there a digital generation? In: D. Buckingham and R. Willett, 
eds. Digital generations: children, young people and new media. London: Routledge, 
pp. 1–17.
Castells, M., 1996. The rise of the network society: the information age: economy, society, 
and culture. London: Wiley-Blackwell.
Frisby, D., 1997. Introduction to the texts. In: D. Frisby and D. Featherstone, eds. Simmel 
on culture: selected writings. London: SAGE, pp. 1–28.
Kertzer, D. L., 1983. Generation as a social problem. Annual Review of Sociology, 9, 
pp. 125–149.
Ling, R., 2012. Taken for grantedness: the embedding of mobile communication into society. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mannheim, K., 1997. The problem of generations. In: M. A. Hardy, ed. Studying aging 
and social change: conceptual and methodological issues. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
SAGE, pp. 22–65.
Oakes, G., 1984. The problem of women in Simmel’s theory of culture. In: G. Oakes, 
ed. G. Simmel: on women, sexuality and love. New Haven, CT and London: Yale 
University Press, pp. 3–62.
Rainie, L. and Wellman, B., 2012. Networked: the new social operating system. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.

Index
accountability 128, 130
actuality, generation as 25, 35
adaptive digital technologies 17, 210
addiction 176
advertising 206
affectivity 91
affectual solidarity 70, 76–77, 82, 83
affordances 91, 99, 143, 205–206, 
213–214
ageing 13–14, 220; ageing populations 
4–5, 102; care of old people 126, 129; 
generational analysis 39; ‘successful’ 
17; see also older people
agency 71, 87, 89, 134, 135, 144
agreeableness 184–187, 190–195, 197
agriculture 136
ambivalence, intergenerational 71
Anttila, T. 5, 55–68
anxiety 125
apps 202
archetypes 168–169
Aroldi, P. 41
assistive technologies 4, 121
associational solidarity 70, 75–76, 82, 83
attitudes 167, 169, 219; digitalisation 
of domestic environments 170, 172, 
176, 178; Finnish consumers 177; 
generational analysis 38, 40
autonomy 14, 99, 126; care professionals 
128–129; older people 129; women’s 
mobile phone use 92
Baby Boomers 150, 153, 155–156, 163n1, 
169, 183–184; generational analysis 28, 
32, 34–35, 38–39, 40; personality traits 
and computer use 189, 196, 197
Bakardjieva, M. 80, 106, 111, 140
Baron, R. M. 186
Bassett, C. 205, 213
Beck, U. 11–12, 15, 217
beliefs 38, 77
Bengtson, V. L. 70, 71, 74, 104
Beniger, J. 27
Berkowsky, R. W. 188
Berman, M. 25
Big Five personality traits 184–188, 
190–195, 196, 197
‘biological rhythm’ 2
Bittman, M. 59
the body 14
Bolin, G. 2, 5, 23–36, 218
boundaries 126, 219
Bourdieu, P. 14, 40
Brannen, J. 60
BT Cellnet 201, 207
Byrne, D. 123
Calhoun, C. 11
Calnan, M. 129
cameras 94, 95, 97, 98, 152
card games 114
care of old people 6, 119–133
care professionals 120, 122, 123–124, 
127–129
caste 6, 134–135, 137–138, 139, 142, 144
Castells, M. 56, 89
Castoriadis, C. 17, 19n2
Cathcart, R. 23
cellphones see mobile phones
change 25, 28, 34; see also social change
children: computer use 45; democratic 
families 78; emotions and mobile 
phone use 202, 203–204, 208, 209–211, 
213; generational analysis 41; India 
135–136, 140, 144; intergenerational 
solidarity 72; knowledge of technology 
206; middle-aged and elderly people in 
Finland 155, 158–159, 160–161, 162; 

Index  223
mothers’ mobile phone use 94–95; 
multiple influences 13; time 
coordination 65; see also youth
China 42, 103, 140
class 12, 134, 137, 142, 220; see also 
middle class
co-presence 205
coevals 25, 26
cohorts 12, 150, 153, 213; generational 
analysis 38, 40; media behaviour 
28–29; middle-aged and elderly people 
in Finland 153–163; technology 
generations 15; see also generational 
analysis
collective memory 37–38
Colombo, F. 41
communication: care of old people 
121–122, 130; digitalisation of domestic 
environments 170, 178; family 71, 72, 
74, 75–82, 83; internet 183; personality 
traits 185; ‘second’ modernity 15–16; 
synchronised 58; technology-mediated 
59, 69
community 12, 15
comparative approach 26–27
computers (PCs) 16, 149, 183–184; 
avoidance of time contamination 61; 
care of old people 120–121; children 72; 
consumption norms 152; generational 
analysis 44–45, 48; intergenerational 
solidarity 72–73; late middle-agers 168; 
leisure activities 187; middle-aged and 
elderly people in Finland 154–156, 
158–159, 161–162; older people 106, 
107, 108, 113; personality traits and 
computer use 185–186, 188–197; work-
related use 187–188
Connidis, I. A. 71
conscientiousness 184–188, 190–193, 
196, 197
consensual solidarity 70, 77–78, 82
consumerism 3, 12–13, 14, 18, 218; 
consumer society 152, 163; 
resistance to 59
consumption 3, 12, 43, 48, 169, 219; 
digitalisation of domestic environments 
170; India 138; middle-aged and elderly 
people in Finland 154; moral framework 
of 177; norms 151–153, 162; studies of 
167; third age 14
content analysis 74, 105–106, 203
control 91, 99
Correa, T. 185
Costa, P. T. J. 184
costs 142, 143
Coupland, D. 163n2
creativity 91
cultural capital 17, 131
cultural context 26, 28, 151
cultural fields 40
cultural identity 37
cultural practices 55, 138
cultural turn 13–14
Cuman, A. 211
daily schedules 56, 58–59, 63–65, 66, 71
data security 79–80
de-digitalisation 114–115
Deacon, D. 24
democratic family concept 78
demographic changes 134, 135–136
dependency 91
‘destandardisation’ 11, 12, 14
diffusion of innovations 104, 115–116, 
153, 163
digital divide 17, 143, 150
Digital Generation 1
digital global generation 41
digital housekeeping 5, 103, 104, 111–113, 
115, 116
digital immigrants 41, 149, 153
digital natives 41, 149, 150, 169, 174, 178
digital spectrum 1
digital technology 2, 149, 153, 167, 
219, 220; accelerating pace of life 56; 
adaptive 17, 210; children’s use of 140; 
cultural context 151; digitalisation of 
domestic environments 167, 170–179; 
networked society 11; older people 
18–19, 102–118; public services 119; 
resistance to 106–107, 108, 111–112, 
177; see also computers; information 
and communication technologies; 
internet; mobile phones
digital television 109–110, 111, 114, 152
disability studies 19
discrimination 137–138
dispositions 40
distinction 14
Dolničar, V. 5, 69–86
domestic appliances 108, 110
domestic environments 6, 167, 170–179
domestication 41–49, 104, 106–109, 
114–115, 204–206, 213–214
Donner, J. 143
‘dotnets’ 28
‘dutifuls’ 28
dysfunctionality 174–175

224  Index
e-book readers 3
e-Generation 150
e-health/e-welfare services 130
Edmunds, J. 41
education 122, 152, 183, 220; India 138, 
140, 142–143, 144n3; middle-aged 
and elderly people in Finland 153, 155, 
158–159, 160–161, 162
elderly people see older people
electronic emotions 6, 201–216
electronic patient records 127–128, 130
email 65, 183; communication norms 
81; emotions 202; intergenerational 
solidarity 74, 79, 81; mobile phone use 
in India 143; older people 106, 113; 
work-related 188
emotions: electronic 6, 201–216; 
hyper-coordination 64
empty nesters 90, 91, 98–99
entelechy 14, 206
entertainment: digitalisation of domestic 
environments 170; intergenerational 
solidarity 72; mobile phone use in India 
142; older people 151; women’s mobile 
phone use 91
Estonia 4–5, 24, 26–27, 28, 30–33, 35n3
ethnicity 13, 83, 217
EU Kids Online 203, 204
Eurostat 183
events 25, 28–29, 31, 38
exclusion 75, 77
extended families 69, 73–74, 82
Extended Group Interview (EGI) 
73–74, 83
extraversion 184–188, 190–195, 196
face-to-face communication 59, 120, 
122, 128, 129
Facebook 18, 61–62, 63, 183, 209–210; 
generational analysis 32, 33; impact 
on other leisure activities 187; 
intergenerational solidarity 74, 75–76, 
77, 78; Messenger 62; mobile phone 
use in India 143; older people 108, 113, 
115; personality traits and computer use 
185, 187, 196
family 3, 5; care of old people 121, 123–127, 
130–131; digitalisation of domestic 
environments 171, 174; generational 
identities 219; household structure 
151; India 134, 141; intergenerational 
solidarity 69–86, 104; time issues for 
middle-aged employees 55, 58–61, 
64–65; see also grandparents; parents
feminism 87–88
fields 14, 40
filial piety 80, 103
financial circumstances 42–43, 48, 142
Finland 4–5, 151; care of old people 
119–133; consumption norms 152, 
153; digitalisation of domestic 
environments 167, 170–179; 
intergenerational solidarity 70, 72, 
73–83; middle-aged and elderly people 
149–150, 153–163; personality traits 
and computer use 189–197; social 
networking sites 183; time issues for 
middle-aged employees 57–66
Fonda, J. 14
Fortunati, L. 5, 102–118, 201
Foucault, M. 14
fourth age 17, 18, 124
functional solidarity 70, 78–79, 82, 83
functionality 173, 174
gaming 72, 108, 114, 207
Ganito, C. 5, 60, 87–101
gender 12, 13; digital housekeeping 103; 
India 135–136, 138–139; life course 
transitions 151; middle-aged and elderly 
people in Finland 154, 155, 158–159, 
162; mobile phone use 87–101; older 
people 103, 110–111, 115, 116; 
personality traits and computer use 
188–189, 194, 195; purpose of internet 
use 183; social generations 134; 
temporal experiences 65, 66; see also 
men; women
generation gap 26, 34, 38, 40, 109
Generation X 150, 155, 163n2, 169, 213; 
computer and internet use 183–184; 
first exposure to ICTs 153; generational 
analysis 28, 38–39; personality 
traits 197
Generation Y 150, 153, 169, 178; 
computer and internet use 183–184; 
generational analysis 38; India 
142; personality traits 197; see also 
Millennials
Generation Z 150, 153
generational analysis 24, 26–27, 28–35, 
37–51
generational archetypes 168–169
generational consciousness 2, 25–26, 32, 
37, 114, 178–179
generational dispositions 40
generational divide 11, 14, 149
generational entelechy 14, 206

Index  225
generational technologies 17
generational theory 23, 25–26, 34
‘generationing’ 2, 3, 24, 25–26, 31, 34–35, 
218–219
Genie 201, 207
Germany 204
‘gerontechnologies’ 19
G.I. Generation 38
Gilleard, C. 1–8, 14, 40, 124, 217–221
globalisation 38, 41
Goffman, E. 204
grandparents 18, 103; health issues 
81–82; intergenerational solidarity 72, 
73, 75–77, 79–82, 83, 104; women’s 
mobile phone use 98; young people’s 
experience of older people’s ICT use 
105–114; see also older people
Gumpert, G. 23
habits 49
habitus 14–15, 17, 18, 40
Haddon, L. 5, 37–51, 106, 204, 210, 211, 
213–214
Harper, R. 208
health 81–82, 168
hedonism 177
Helsper, E. J. 87
Higgs, P. 14, 40, 124
Hirsch, E. 204, 213
Hirvonen, H. 6, 119–133
hobbies 58, 65
Hochschild, A. R. 204
home care 121, 127, 130
household structure 151, 153–154, 162
housing see domestic environments
Howe, N. 39
hurriedness 56, 58–59, 62
Hyde, M. 153
hyper-coordination 63–64
Hyppönen, H. 130
ICT Development Index 82–83
ICTs see information and communication 
technologies
ideal types 91
identity 1, 3; caste 137; cultural 37; 
early experiences of technologies 
48; evolution of generational 4; 
‘generationing’ 25, 31–32, 34–35, 
218–219; identity politics 217–218; 
India 138; intragenerational 116; late 
middle-agers 175; new divisions of 
16–17; older people 114; role of the 
media 46; social change 2; third age 14; 
women’s mobile phone use 91; young 
adults 168, 178; youth 150
illiteracy 138, 139
immaterial labour 103, 104, 116, 220
incomes: computer and internet use 152, 
183; extraversion linked to 188; middle-
aged and elderly people in Finland 153, 
155, 158–159, 160–161, 162
India 6, 134–146, 219
indirect generational relations 31
individualisation 3, 4, 12–13, 69; of the 
body 14; ‘second’ modernity 16; of 
society 218
individualism 13, 70
information and communication 
technologies (ICTs) 3, 5, 11, 
219–220; care of old people 119–133; 
consumption norms 151–153; cultural 
and social relations 17; electronic 
emotions 201–216; generational 
analysis 37, 40–48; generations and 
life course 150–151; intergenerational 
solidarity 69–86; middle-aged and 
elderly people in Finland 149–150, 
153–163; older people 18, 19, 102–118; 
public services 119; time issues for 
middle-aged employees 55–66; trust 6; 
see also computers; digital technology; 
internet; mobile phones
Instagram 74, 75, 76, 77
interfaces 108–109
intergenerational ambivalence 71
intergenerational relations 26, 34, 58, 
60, 72
intergenerational solidarity 69–86, 
103, 104
international generations 38, 41
internet: avoidance of time contamination 
61; care of old people 130–131; 
children 72, 206, 211; democratisation 
of the 220; digital global generation 41; 
Eurobarometer survey 109; Eurostat 
survey 183; intergenerational solidarity 
70, 72; late middle-agers 168; leisure 
activities 187; middle-aged and elderly 
people in Finland 150, 154–155, 
156–157, 158–159, 161–162; mobile 
phone use in India 139–140, 142–143; 
older people 4, 106, 107, 111, 122, 131; 
personality traits 185–186, 196; proxy 
internet use 140; ‘second’ modernity 16; 
women’s mobile phone use 92, 95, 96, 
98; work-related use 187–188; see also 
mobile internet; social media

226  Index
Internet of Things 220
iPad 114, 210
iPhone 95, 97
Italy 4–5, 41, 102, 103, 105–114
Jain, V. 142
Janković, B. 187
John, O. P. 184
Judge, T. A. 188
Jyväskylä Longitudinal Study of 
Personality and Social Development 
(JYLS) 189
Kekäläinen, T. 6, 183–200
Kemppainen, T. 6, 167–182
Kennedy, J. 103
Kennedy, T. L. M. 69
Kenny, D. A. 186
Kinnunen, M. 197
kinship system 134, 141–142, 144, 219
knowledge workers 55, 58, 66
Kokko, K. 6, 183–200
Kröger, T. 121
Kuhlmann, E. 129
Kundu, T. 138–139
Kunk, L. M. 126
Kuo, T. 187
Kuoppamäki, S-M. 6, 149–166, 
167–182
Kwan, C. and Y-H. 103
labour 3, 12, 220; see also work
Landers, R. N. 195
landscape metaphor 27, 34
language use 78
Laslett, P. 14
late middle age 167–168, 169, 170–172, 
174–177, 178–179; see also middle-
aged people
Le Cornu, A. 1
learning: change in the direction of 34; 
older people 71, 115; pre-figurative 33
Lefebvre, H. 28
Leinonen, A. 121
leisure 3, 56, 66; late middle age 168; 
mobile phone use in India 143; older 
people 151; personality traits and 
computer use 6, 186–187, 188, 190, 
191–194, 196; tablet use 162
Licoppe, C. 59
life course perspective 1–3, 69, 99, 151, 
167–168; electronic emotions 202, 
212–213, 214; household structure 162; 
women 88–89
life situation questionnaire (LSQ) 189, 190
life stages 89–91, 99, 167–168, 202, 
214, 220
lifestyle 151–152, 168, 217, 219; 
individualisation of the body 14; 
marketing of 218; new divisions of 
16–17; ‘second’ modernity 12, 13; 
third age 14
Lim, S. S. 141
LinkedIn 33, 61
Livingstone, S. 206
location, generation as 25, 29, 35
Lost Generation 38
Lounsbury, J. W. 195
Luhmann, N. 120, 122, 124
Lüscher, K. 71
Mannheim, K. 1, 38, 204–205, 213, 
218–219; generational entelechy 14, 
206; generational theory 23, 25–26; 
social change 2, 217; social generations 
2, 37, 134
marketing 39, 169, 179, 201
marriage 138–139, 141–142
Marx, K. 25, 218
Mascheroni, G. 211
mass consumerism 12, 14
Maxwell, J. A. 91
McCrae, R. R. 184
McLuhan, M. 25, 31
McMullin, J. A. 71
Mead, M. 26, 33, 34, 204
media: generational analysis 26–27, 
28–34, 46–48; ‘generationing’ 25, 
34–35, 218; India 142; mass 2; media 
generations 23; media landscape 1, 27, 
34; older people 102–103; ‘second’ 
modernity 12
mediatisation 5, 23–24, 27, 34
memories 37–38, 46
men: digitalisation of domestic 
environments 171, 173; India 135, 136, 
138, 139, 141; life course transitions 
151; middle-aged and elderly people in 
Finland 158–159, 162; mobile phone 
use 88; older 103, 110–111, 115; 
personality traits and computer use 185, 
189, 191; purpose of internet use 183; 
see also gender
messaging 61, 207; intergenerational 
solidarity 75, 78, 82; older people 106, 
115; time coordination 64, 65; see also 
text messages; WhatsApp
micro-coordination 63–64, 91

Index  227
middle-aged people 5, 149–150, 153–163; 
digitalisation of domestic environments 
6, 167, 170–172, 174–177, 178–179; 
life stages 167–168; personality 
traits and computer use 6, 184, 
189–197; shared experiences 219; social 
networking sites 183; time issues and 
ICT use 55–66; women’s mobile phone 
use 90, 91, 96, 97–98; see also late 
middle age
middle class 42, 43, 110, 139, 171, 177
Millennials 38, 39, 150, 169, 178, 213; 
see also Generation Y
mobile internet: Eurobarometer survey 
109; Genie service 201; India 142–143; 
middle-aged and elderly people in 
Finland 150, 153, 154–155, 159–161, 
162; older people 106; women’s mobile 
phone use 92, 95, 96, 98; see also 
internet
mobile phones 16, 149; care of old people 
120–121, 124–127, 130; children 72; 
communication norms 81; connectivity 
205, 207, 211; consumption norms 
152; emotions 6, 201, 202, 207–212; 
Eurobarometer survey 109; gender 
and 5, 87–101; generational analysis 
29, 32; generational identity 150; 
‘generational’ trajectories 220; Genie 
service 201; India 134–135, 139–144; 
intergenerational solidarity 69, 74, 76, 
82; late middle-agers 168; middle-aged 
and elderly people in Finland 150, 
154–155, 157, 158, 161–162; older 
people 4, 18, 44, 106, 107–108, 111, 
112, 115, 122, 131; online parenting 
60; time coordination 64; see also 
smartphones
mobile technologies 2; impact on 
scheduling 63, 64–65, 66; multitasking 
62–63; online parenting 60–61
modernity 11–13, 15–19, 25, 217, 218, 
219–220
Mortimer, J. T. 88
mothers: India 141; intergenerational 
solidarity 75–76, 83; mobile phone use 
90–91, 94–96, 99, 211; single 90, 91, 
95–96, 99
movies 3, 143
MTV generation 1
multimedia messaging services 
(MMS) 98
multitasking 56, 58, 60, 62–63, 65
music 3, 113, 143
naivety 113–114
Näsi, M. 187
NEO-FFI questionnaire 190
nesting women 90, 93–94
Net Children Go Mobile project 203–204
Net Generation 1, 41, 150
‘network society’ 11, 13, 217
networked individualism 13
neuroticism 184–188, 190–193, 195, 
196, 197
newspapers 108
Nintendo 108, 111, 114
Nintendo generation 1
normative solidarity 70, 79–81, 82, 83
norms: consumption 151–153, 162; 
intergenerational solidarity 80; women’s 
mobile phone use 91
nostalgia 46
occupational status 122, 190, 191, 193, 194
older people 3–4, 18–19, 102–118; care 
of 6, 119–133; changes in attitudes 
113–114; digital housekeeping 103, 
104, 111–113, 115, 116; digital 
television 109–110; diversity 16–17; 
domestication 41–49, 106–109, 
114–115; education and income 152; 
emotions 202; Finland 149–150, 
153–163; fourth age 17, 18, 124; gender 
issues 110–111, 115; generational 
belonging 32; generational identity 
25, 34–35; health issues 81–82; 
intergenerational solidarity 72, 76–77, 
78; learning strategies 71; leisure 
activities 151, 187; life stages 167–168; 
mobile phone use 144, 209, 210, 
211, 212; new ageing 13–14; shared 
experiences 219; social networking 
sites 183; third age 14, 16–17, 18, 124; 
‘we-sense’ 2; women’s mobile phone 
use 90, 91, 98–99; see also grandparents
online communities 17
online parenting 60–61
openness to new experiences 184–188, 
190–195, 196, 197
Oreglia, E. 140
Ortega y Gasset, J. 23
Oyama, P. S. 104
Pant, S. 142
parents: intergenerational solidarity 72–73, 
75–82, 103, 104; online parenting 
60–61; parent-child contract 103–104; 
working 13; see also mothers

228  Index
Path 75
PCs see computers
periodisation 15–16
personalisation 91, 94, 95, 96, 208
personality traits 6, 183–200
Petrovčič, A. 5, 69–86
photos 94, 95, 97, 98, 110, 113, 207
Pillemer, K. 71
policy 119, 121, 129
politics: cultural or identity politics 
217–218; generational analysis 39; 
India 139
popular culture 39
Portugal 4–5, 41, 87, 88, 89–99
post-modernisation 11, 13
poverty 136, 144n2
Prensky, M. 41
privacy 173, 178, 179
public services 119, 121
Pulkkinen, L. 189
Putnam, R. 40–41
quality of life 120, 127, 129, 131
race 134, 217
radio 2, 12, 16, 108, 218
recycling 18
‘rhythm of ages’ 23, 24
risk 175, 176, 178
risk management 128
Roberts, R. E. 70, 74
Robinson, J. P. 187
routines 93–94, 96
Rowe, R. 129
rural India 134–146
Sackmann, R. 15
safety: care of old people 127; emotions 
and mobile phone use 209; late middle-
agers 168, 175, 178, 179; women’s 
mobile phone use 91, 97, 99
Sayago, S. 71
Schrock, A. 205–206
‘second’ modernity 11–13, 15–16, 17, 217, 
218, 219–220
security 79–80, 178
self-awareness 35, 37–38
self-expression 14, 92, 93, 168
self-presentation 64, 202, 205
self-understanding 35
sexuality 13, 217
Shah, D. V. 184
Shanahan, M. J. 88
shared meanings 170, 171–177
Silent Generation 38, 39, 42
Silver Surfers 213
Silverman, D. 105
Silverstone, R. 106, 204, 213–214
Simmel, G. 19n1, 217, 218
simultaneity 60, 65
single mothers 90, 91, 95–96, 99
‘situated knowledges’ 99
skills: intergenerational solidarity 70, 74, 
77–78, 79; late middle-agers 174, 178; 
older people 113
Skype 17, 18, 71, 76, 77, 81, 108
Slovenia 4–5, 70, 72, 73–83
smart home solutions 167, 170, 178
smartphones: addiction to 176; 
children 206, 209; co-presence 205; 
consumption norms 152; digitalisation 
of domestic environments 167, 170; 
emotions 202, 208, 214; increase in 
use 149; India 135, 140, 142–143; 
intergenerational solidarity 69; middle-
aged and elderly people in Finland 
160; older people 18, 107, 113, 210; 
third age 17; ubiquity of 207; see also 
mobile phones
Snapchat 211
social capital 131, 168
social change 2, 104, 217; generational 
analysis 23, 24, 34, 35, 38; India 134, 
135–139
social contract 103
social generations 1–3, 37, 134, 142, 
220; definition of 6n1; India 143–144; 
mobile phone use in India 139
social imaginaries 17, 18, 19n2
social media: emotions 202, 213; hyper-
coordination 64; intergenerational 
solidarity 69, 75, 76, 82, 83; messaging 
207; mobile phone use in India 144; 
multitasking 62–63; older people 18, 
103; personality traits and computer 
use 185–186, 188, 191, 193, 194, 197; 
rise of 1; self-expression 168; staying 
outside 58, 61–62; see also Facebook; 
social networking sites
Social Media Generation 1
social networking 92, 94, 97, 169
social networking sites (SNS) 3, 33, 
35, 71, 106, 115, 183–184; see also 
Facebook; social media
social networks 72, 122, 151
social relationships 173, 175, 178, 179
social support 72, 82, 168
socialisation 87

Index  229
socioeconomic status 131, 155, 
158–159, 162
‘soft experts’ 144
softening schedules 64–65, 66
Soulet, M.-H. 91
Spain 210
Spotify 32–33
spouses 103
Srivastava, S. 184
Stanyer, S. 24
stereotypes 1, 78, 99, 111, 116, 178
Strauss, W. 39
stress 125
structural solidarity 70, 81–82, 83
support 4, 72, 77, 82, 168; see also 
technical assistance
surveillance 210
Sweden 4–5, 24, 26–27, 28–33, 
35n2, 35n3
Swing Generation 39
tablets: consumerism 3; digitalisation of 
domestic environments 170; emotions 
202, 208; increase in use 149; middle-
aged and elderly people in Finland 150, 
153, 159–161, 162; older people 106, 
115; ubiquity of 207
Taipale, S. 1–8, 69–86, 217–221
Tammelin, M. 5, 55–68
Tang, H. 187
technical assistance 79, 80, 82–83, 108, 
140; digital housekeeping 103, 104, 
111–113, 115, 116; digital 
television 110
technofeminism 87
technology: assistive 4, 121; changes in 
15–16, 23, 107; ‘generationing’ 218; 
impact on generational identities 220; 
living without 176–177; media 26, 
27; modernity 12, 217; public services 
119; technofeminism 87; technological 
determinism 41; technology generations 
15; time-space compression 56; 
see also digital technology; information 
and communication technologies; 
mobile technologies
telephones 16, 44, 65, 109, 152; see also 
mobile phones
television 2, 12, 175, 218; Baby Boomers 
184; digital 111, 114, 152; generational 
analysis 31, 33, 40–41, 43, 45–49; India 
143; intergenerational solidarity 72; 
older people 102–103, 109–110, 114; 
women’s mobile phone use 92
Tenhunen, S. 6, 134–146
text messages 78, 80, 98, 99, 207; 
see also messaging
third age 14, 16–17, 18, 124
time 28, 55–66, 178, 219; accelerating 
pace of life 55, 56–57, 58, 63; 
changing conceptions of 56, 63, 66; 
contamination of 56, 59–62, 63, 66; 
digitalisation of domestic environments 
173; fragmentation of 56, 57, 59–60; 
generational theory 25–26; time 
coordination 58, 63–65, 66; time-space 
compression 56; women’s mobile 
phone use 95
transfer of knowledge 115–116
trust 6, 119–120, 121–124, 126, 128, 129, 
130–131
Turkle, S. 89, 91
Turner, B. S. 41
Twitter 74, 211
UMTS Forum 203–204, 208
United Kingdom 4–5, 42, 201, 204, 208
United States 28
upgrading 18
Urry, J. 205
Uusitalo, O. 6, 167–182
values 77, 81, 167, 169–170; digitalisation 
of domestic environments 170, 
172, 174, 176, 179; Finland 177; 
generational analysis 40
vanity 177
VCRs 45–46, 153
Viber 81
Viinikainen, J. 188
Vincent, J. 6, 201–216
Virgin Media 206
Wajcman, J. 55, 59, 62, 87
War Generation 150, 155–156
‘warm experts’ 80, 111, 140
‘we-sense’ 2, 38
Weber, M. 91
Wellman, B. 69
WhatsApp 61, 65, 210; children 211; 
emotional sharing 64; groups 62, 63; 
intergenerational solidarity 74, 75–76, 
82; older people 110, 113, 115
White, D. S. 1
Wilska, T-A. 1–8, 149–166, 217–221
Winkler, O. 15
women: care of old people 123–127; China 
140; demands for equal recognition 217; 

230  Index
digitalisation of domestic environments 
171, 173, 174, 176; hurriedness 58; 
India 134–135, 136, 138–139, 141–142, 
144; life course transitions 88–89, 
151; middle-aged and elderly people 
in Finland 154, 158–159, 162; mobile 
phone use 5, 87–88, 89–99, 134–135, 
141–142, 144, 201; older 103, 110–111, 
115, 116; personality traits and 
computer use 186, 189, 191; purpose 
of internet use 183; time coordination 
66; time fragmentation 59–60; see also 
gender; mothers
work 3, 12, 13, 219; hurriedness 58; 
increases in intensity of 104; India 137, 
139, 144n4; middle-aged employees 
58; personality traits and computer use 
187–188, 190, 191, 192–194, 195; tablet 
use at 162; time issues for middle-aged 
employees 55, 57, 60–61, 66; women’s 
mobile phone use 92–93, 94
working class 42, 43
young adults: cohorts 38; digitalisation of 
domestic environments 6, 167, 170–173, 
176–177, 178–179; intergenerational 
solidarity 70; life stages 167–168; social 
networking sites 183; women’s mobile 
phone use 90, 92–93, 99
youth 1, 13; digital housekeeping 5, 103, 
104, 111–113, 115, 116; electronic 
emotions 213; experience of older 
people’s digital technology use 102, 
104–116; generational belonging 32; 
generational identity 150; ‘generationing’ 
25; household structure 151, 162; India 
142; intergenerational solidarity 72–73, 
77; Mannheim on 37; mobile phone use 
in India 134–135, 140, 144; personality 
traits 185; self-understanding 2; youth 
culture 40; see also children
zeitgeist 107, 115
Zhou, R. 187
Zukin, C. 28

