i

Discovering British 
Literature in Bits 
and Bytes 


Discovering British 
Literature in Bits 
and Bytes
An Internet Approach
Carolyn M. Johnson
ROWMAN & LITTLEFIELD
Lanham • Boulder • New York • London

Published by Rowman & Littlefield 
A wholly owned subsidiary of The Rowman & Littlefield Publishing Group, Inc.
4501 Forbes Boulevard, Suite 200, Lanham, Maryland 20706
www.rowman.com
Unit A, Whitacre Mews, 26-34 Stannary Street, London SE11 4AB
Copyright © 2017 by Carolyn M. Johnson
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any 
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, 
without written permission from the publisher, except by a reviewer who may quote 
passages in a review.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Information Available
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Available
ISBN 978-1-4758-3825-1 (pbk. : alk. paper)
ISBN 978-1-4758-3826-8 (electronic)
∞ ™ The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of American 
National Standard for Information Sciences—Permanence of Paper for Printed Library 
Materials, ANSI/NISO Z39.48-1992.
Printed in the United States of America

~To My Mother~
Who always encouraged me in my endeavors
And often offered insightful suggestions
~To My Sister~
For her comments and editorial suggestions


vii
Contents
Preface
ix
Acknowledgments
xiii
General Introduction
xv
SECTION 1: ANGLO-SAXON LITERATURE
1
 1 	 Metrical Charms and Runic Poems
3
 2 	 Old English and Early Middle English Verse
9
 3 	 Colloquy
15
 4 	 A Letter on the Advancement of Learning
19
 5 	 Riddles from “The Exeter Book” (970–1042) by Anonymous 
25
 6 	 Selections from “The Exeter Book”
31
SECTION 2: FOURTEENTH, FIFTEENTH, AND SIXTEENTH 
CENTURIES—POETRY
39
 7 	 Selections from The Canterbury Tales
41
 8 	 Selections from The Faerie Queene
47
SECTION 3: SIXTEENTH AND SEVENTEENTH CENTURIES—
DRAMA
55
 9 	 Selections from Shakespeare’s Plays: The Comedies
57
 10 	 Selections from Shakespeare’s Plays: The Histories
65
 11 	 Selections from Shakespeare’s Plays: The Trajedies
73

viii	
Contents
SECTION 4: SEVENTEENTH CENTURY—POETRY
81
 12 	 Excerpts from The Passionate Pilgrim, Sonnets to Sundry 
Notes of Music, “The Phoenix and The Turtle”
83
 13 	 Sonnets plus Dramatic Poetry by William Shakespeare
89
 14 	 Various Writings by John Donne
97
 15 	 Selected Poetry by John Donne
105
SECTION 5: SEVENTEENTH CENTURY—PROSE
111
 16	 “No Man is An Island,” “For Whom the Bell Tolls,” 
and Other Writings
113
 17	 Excerpts from Juvenilia, or Certaine Paradoxes and Problemes
119
SECTION 6: EIGHTEENTH CENTURY—MISCELLANEOUS
123
 18 	 Selection from Preface to A Dictionary of the English 
Language, The Rambler, The Idler, and The Adventurer
125
Conclusion
133
Appendix 1: More Websites to Note
137
Index
139
About the Author
165

ix
Preface
What a wonder it is when one types some letters and other characters into a 
machine and onto a screen, guides a finger or traveling arrow on that screen, 
and clicks a link or taps search, then suddenly comes upon links that go 
directly to documents with original texts of words written just so with a per­
sonal style and message by authors of long ago, and printed hundreds of years 
past, or written and published just yesterday or days before then!
It is as wondrous, in its own way, as the wonder that scholars have expe­
rienced when discovering a treasure of an actual age-old hand written or 
printed manuscript or book in an archive or library not readily accessible to 
a general population. Each is nothing less than a gem discovered in a quarry.
This book and others in the series have been written so that teachers and 
librarians (both hereafter referred to as educators) can guide the use of the 
Internet for secondary school students, as well as beginning college or uni­
versity students, and some middle school students, who are enrolled in basic 
American literature courses, or perhaps are taking unique courses in English 
literature. Such courses may include British and American literature from 
their beginnings through the early twenty-first century.
Volumes in this series include:
• Series 1 (four volumes sub divided into sections) features the beginnings 
of literature in English, such as early British literature up to and includ­
ing Chaucer and Spenser, plus British literature just before Shakespeare 
and after Shakespeare, plus Shakespeare; and the Victorian Era (primarily 
nineteenth-century British literature), and British literature in the twentieth 
and early twenty-first centuries)
• Series 2 (four volumes sub divided into sections) features American literature 
in the beginning, including colonial, seventeenth- and eighteenth-century 

x	
Preface
American literature; plus nineteenth-century American literature; and Ameri­
can literature (early modern) as well as middle and later twentieth century, 
the end of the twentieth century, and the beginning of the twenty-first century
• Series 3 (four volumes sub divided into sections) features a miscellany 
of English literature in special categories, including ethnic American and 
regional American literature; English literature in the science fiction/
fantasy/visionary category and the gothic category; English Literature 
in nations other than England and the United States, such as Australia, 
Canada, Ireland, Scotland, Wales, and New Zealand; plus English litera­
ture of an uncategorizable and unique but intriguing variety; and English 
literature considering the future aside from the SF-fantasy-visionary group 
cited above.
The volumes in this three-part twelve-volume series start at the beginnings 
of literature in English in places that would become collectively known as 
England, and in the first flowerings of literature in the United States, in its 
colonial years; then continue on through the centuries, while including repre­
sentative works from other English-speaking nations and providing excerpts 
of representative literary works at the twenty-first century’s start; sometimes 
with ties to earlier works. 
The volumes in this series, aim to assist educators in helping students to be 
introduced to English literature through a medium students like: the Internet. 
It also aims to introduce educators and students to how English and American 
literature is represented on the World Wide Web, always with the purpose 
of encouraging interest, a wanting to discover, enjoy, and learn, as well as 
be drawn to gaining a sense of critical thinking about English and American 
literature.
With chapters arranged chronologically, and by literary types, the volumes 
provide chapters with descriptive titles, introductions based on what is in 
each featured website on the subject, plus featured websites’ urls, as well 
as questions and activities based on what can be found at the chapters’ fea­
tured websites, and at additional websites provided in a blog by the author/
compiler. 
The featured websites are primary-document websites. These primary sites 
feature full e-texts of, or excerpts from literary works, or a selection of liter­
ary works by an author or by genre. 
Usually, full e-texts are available for works written before 1930, although 
there may be exceptions, while works after 1930 will primarily be excerpted 
texts. Often a first chapter or selected excerpts are featured.
I have created discussion questions and activities to follow the list of fea­
tured sites. These questions and activities refer to literary documents found 
at the featured websites. These questions aim to point to the basic aspects of 

	
Preface
xi
what each literary document features and to present them in ways that elicit 
critical thinking. 
At the end of each chapter, there is a link to an online list titled “Additional 
Sites.” In each chapter’s list, there are: (a) titles and urls with more details 
on some websites whose urls are listed in chapters’ discussion questions and 
activities; and (b) website titles and urls that link to more websites on the 
main topic of the primary websites so that additional authoritative sources 
may be located and research may be accomplished.


xiii
Acknowledgments
To some authors writing in english whose lives and works have inspired me,
ESPECIALLY Emily Dickinson, T. S. Eliot, Madeleine L’Engle, Marianne 
Moore, Louisa May Alcott, Carolyn Keene, Kathleen McClean, James Red­
field, Dan Brown, and more.
CLASSIC AUTHORS—BRITISH
Jane Austen; Anne, Charlotte, and Emily Bronte; Frances Hodgson Burnett; 
Charles L. Dodgson (aka Lewis Carroll); George Eliot (pen name for Mary 
Ann Evans Lewes Cross); T. S. Eliot
CLASSIC AUTHORS—AMERICAN
Louisa May Alcott, Rachel Carson, Emily Dickinson, Robert Frost, Marianne 
Moore, Sarah Orne Jewett
LIBRARIAN—AUTHORS
Beverly Cleary and Madeleine L’Engle, plus: Eleanor Cameron, Eleanor 
Estes, Mary Downing Hahn, Lilian Morrison, Andre Norton (pen name for 
Mary Alice Norton), Kit Pearson, Cynthia Rylant, Anne Tyler, Edward Irving 
Wortis (pen name for Avi).

xiv	
Acknowledgments
CLASSIC & WELL-KNOWN AUTHORS FOR 
CHILDREN / OLDER YOUNG PEOPLE
Kathryn Anderson (aka Kathryn Forbes and Kathleen Mclean), Sheila 
Burnford, Monica Dickens, Margaret Peterson Haddix, Carolyn Keene (pen 
name for many writers of Nancy Drew mystery series), Alexander Key, Eric 
Knight, E. L. Konigsberg, Lois Lenski, Anne Morrow Lindbergh (a daughter 
of Charles Lindbergh, aka Anne Spencer Lindbergh, Feydy, Sapieyevski, 
Perrin), Vonda K. Mcintyre, Lucy Maud Montgomery, Scott O’Dell, Phillipa 
Pearce, J. K. Rowling, Anna Sewell, Elizabeth George Speare, Johanna Spyri, 
Laura Ingalls Wilder.
PRESENT-DAY AUTHORS NOT NOTED ABOVE
Other authors writing in traditional genre, plus new genres: visionary fiction, 
time-slip stories.

xv
General Introduction
PART 1: SCOPE OF THE SERIES
English literature, for the purpose of this three-part series of four volumes 
each, is defined as literature from Britain (especially England, yet also rep­
resentations from other places in the United Kingdom), from the beginnings 
of the written language to the present time; as well as the areas now known 
as the United States featuring generations of European Americans, U.S.-born 
citizens, as well as some integral ethnic Americans (from first seeds planted 
in the colonies to the present time). These groups represent features of the 
authoritative literary canon as well as representative examples of authors or 
works from the U.S. educational system’s Standard Core. 
The volumes in the first series include British literature in the beginning 
with alliterative and accentual verse, metrical runes and riddles, and a let­
ter on the advancement of learning by Britain’s King Alfred the Great. The 
fifteenth, sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries are represented by 
chapters on Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales and Spenser’s The Faerie Queene, 
John Donne’s devotions and epigrams, Samuel Johnson’s essays from The 
Rambler, The Idler and The Adventurer, and Shakespeare’s comedies, trag­
edies, histories, and poetry. 
Next, Jane Austen and the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, 
plus the Victorian era of the middle and later nineteenth century, including 
works by George Eliot, the Bronté sisters, and Charles Dickens, plus the 
early twentieth century with T. S. Eliot, Henry James, Alice Meynell, Vir­
ginia Woolf, the mid-twentieth century with C. S. Lewis, J. R. R. Tolkien, 
Dorothy Sayers, Doris Lessing, George Orwell, and more; the later twentieth 
century and the beginning of the twenty-first century with J. K. Rowling, the 

xvi	
General Introduction
new poets laureate, while noting previous British poet laureates in life long 
positions.
Volumes in series 2 feature American literature—first flowerings (as in 
poems and essays of Anne Bradstreet and Hector de Crevecoeur) in the 
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, nineteenth-century American literature 
including essays and short stories by Washington Irving; and the first U.S. 
novelist James Fenimore Cooper, the Fireside poets and Brahmin poets (e.g., 
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow), and the New England Transcendentalists 
with the advent of the nature essay by Ralph Waldo Emerson, Henry David 
Thoreau, and Margaret Fuller; and the second generation represented by Lou­
isa May Alcott, Emily Dickinson, Walt Whitman, and Mark Twain, plus the 
era of early modern America (from the end of the nineteenth century to the 
mid-twentieth century and touching the beginning of the century’s last quar­
ter), then the mid and later twentieth century and early twenty-first century; 
all in a variety of literary styles and genres, such as short stories, long fiction, 
and drama, in addition to poetry and essays; along with specialties including 
nature essays; critical analysis essays; sonnet poetry; historical fiction; dra­
matizations of literary works; speculative, fantasy, gothic, and science fiction; 
and more unique literary works.
Additional volumes in the series provide primary websites plus questions 
and activities based on representative online examples of ethnic ­American 
­Literature (such as African American literature (with its main literary 
movement, the Harlem Renaissance), Asian American literature, Hispanic 
­American literature, Jewish American literature, Native American literature 
in its various facets, and Scandinavian American literature), plus representa­
tions of English literature in nations such as Canada, Australia, New Zealand, 
Ireland, Scotland, Wales, and South Africa. 
American and British literature, including literary gothic fiction (ranging 
from Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley to Edgar Allan Poe, Louisa May Alcott, 
Charles Dickens, Henry James, and more), fantasy and science fiction (rang­
ing from Ray Bradbury and Arthur C. Clarke, to Zenna Henderson, Andre 
Norton, C. L. Moore, Madeleine L’Engle, VernorVinge, plus many more), 
and visionary literature (with seeds emerging early in places in literature, but 
primarily in full bloom with the works of, so far, James Hilton, James Red­
field, and Michael Gurian), as well as miscellaneous unique subjects, round 
out the literary representations in this series. 
Among the unique subjects in the miscellaneous volume’s chapters are 
Shakespeare and Star Trek, “Dialogue Among Civilizations Through Poetry,” 
U.S. poet laureates, presidential inaugural poets, traditional poetic forms plus 
“From Politics to Poetics” (a U.S. president turned writer); and classic books 
brought to life in modern media (as in online video clips) that foster critical 

	
General Introduction
xvii
thinking on the similarities and differences in each medium. Classic works 
have played pivotal parts in the early twenty-first century television fantasy, 
Lost, and, by doing so, draw new generations into the multi faceted marvels 
of American and British literature.
Also looking uniquely at representatives featured, think of pioneering writ­
ers as well as some of their works, with the writers being considered the first 
literary generations, as matriarchs and patriarchs, while later writers may be 
thought of as their “literary descendants” (i.e., in particular genres such as 
poetry, the essay, the novel, and the short story). 
“Literary descendants” of previous authors are new authors who have 
“adopted” something from a classic author and made something of her or his 
own from it, building on it, or taking up the banner of matriarchs or patri­
archs, “grandmothers” or “grandfathers,” “fathers” or “mothers,” “aunts” or 
godfathers” of a genre or point of view, and bringing something of the cause 
into the new millennium—with their own marks on it—with major parts 
being through the Internet. 
Equally marvelous is that many well-known authors’ well-known and 
lesser-known works are readily available. What a surprise and thrill it is 
to discover that the author of “The Mysterious Key and What It Opened,” 
“A Whisper in the Dark,” and “Hospital Sketches,” was the writer of great 
classics for young people; none other than Louisa May Alcott, author of 
Little Women and Little Men—AND they can be read online! How intrigu­
ing it is to find out that “Gone with the Wind” author Margaret Mitchell also 
wrote an early novel titled Lost Laysen, and a collection of writings recently 
discovered and published as Beyond Scarlet: Girlhood Writings of Margaret 
Mitchell.
It’s also exciting to find out about primary literary descendants (actual 
relatives of well-known authors), how they are authors in their own right, 
and how they help to bring their famous ancestors into present times. Note 
for example, Martha Dickinson Bianchi, the niece of Emily Dickinson, who 
helped to introduce her aunt’s poetic gems to the world; also Reeve Lind­
bergh who has provided for her mother’s book, a foreword to Charles Dick­
ens’ great-granddaughter Monica Dickens-Stratton (and her Follyfoot series, 
plus her Working Chronicles); Thom Steinbeck—son of John—writing his 
own Down to a Soundless Sea and more (e.g., an interesting article “The Boy 
and His Dog” article at www.thomassteinbeck.com, being more than, yet 
including, what the title suggests); Madeleine L’Engle’s granddaughter Lena 
Foy writes introductions for reissues of her grandmother’s great books, and 
has published works herself, as is revealed at her website www.lenaroybooks
.com; Christopher Tolkien, J. R. R. Tolkien’s son, has edited and published 
his father’s writing, as well as publishing his own. J. R. R. Tolkien’s daughter 

xviii	
General Introduction
Priscilla has also published articles about her father. J. R. R. Tolkien’s grand­
son Adam Tolkien (son of Christopher) has helped to edit and translate his 
grandfather’s works. 
These are just a few of the many literary giants’ descendants helping to 
bring their ancestors’ works to new readers, oftentimes making a name for 
themselves in their own right.
In particular, featured in each volume’s chapters, are primary literature 
documents, how they manifest on the web, and how they may be used to 
develop critical thinking.
Primary literary documents in cyberspace:
• Actual e-texts, or online reproductions, of novels, short stories, poetry, and 
essays from the beginnings of oral and written English literature, including 
classics and little-known works.
• Some rarely seen documents accessible online but not readily accessible to 
secondary school students in print.
• Some snippets (e.g., quotations, first chapters, excerpts) that are selections 
from great and lesser known works of modern times—that give an intro­
duction to, a taste of, an enticement for, some work.
• true stories, with their first chapters or other chapters, as online examples.  
Features of Websites Useful for Discovering Literature Online and 
Helping Creative Thinking and Analysis
• Websites with samples of writings such as quotations (including sources 
noted), excerpts (first chapters, random chapters, selected passages or para­
graphs, or first lines or first verses of poetry), such as individual authors’ 
official or authorized websites.
• Websites that provide documents for one author in one place on several 
pages, such as Shakespeare on the Internet and Shakespeare: A Guide to 
Shakespeare to the Complete Works, with e-texts of the plays and poems, 
plus critical analyses, plus links to documents at other sites; all essential to 
facilitate critical thinking and analyses. 
• Websites with documents by and about several authors in one place on 
several pages are sources to help critical thinking. Note sites such as 
the Luminarium and its collections of works by, and critical analyses 
on, medieval, renaissance, seventeenth-century, and eighteenth-century 
(or Restoration-era) authors. Then there http://www.gutenberg.com and 
http://www.bartleby.com (an online library of documents that are in the 
public domain—having been written and published before the 1920s). 

	
General Introduction
xix
• Literary resources websites, including sites of specific literary genres or 
literary timelines or national literatures (e.g., www.poets.org, Representa­
tive Poetry Online, and The Poetry Foundation).
• Search sites known for providing samples (e.g., http://books.google.com), 
the ISBN Library (http://digmylibrary.com), www.amazon.com, www
.barnesandnoble.com, and more—offer prime material that is “food for 
thought” or the seeds for critical analyses.
• Other primary documents or authoritative information on the Internet scat­
tered, not yet provided as main websites, are sometimes brought together 
in the volumes of these series in particular chapters. This is another way 
for educators to introduce students to literature both well-known and lesser-
known, and to the critical analysis process. There may be isolated sites with 
primary documents that are full texts, or quotations, selected passages, first 
or random sample chapters, or other types of excerpts. There may also be 
sites with critical analysis articles or comments. 
When all of these are brought together and presented in a chapter, new intro­
ductions to works are provided in interesting ways following the purpose of 
each text in this series. These and other chapters of established main websites 
provide more opportunities for students’ critical thinking through American 
and British literature, both together referred to as English literature.
 SECONDARY AUTHORITATIVE DOCUMENTS 
WITH REPRESENTATIVES ONLINE
• Research or scholarly papers with critical analysis commentaries; reviews, 
or introductions, sometimes written by relatives (e.g., Emily Dickinson’s 
niece, Anne Morrow Lindbergh’s daughter, Madeleine L’Engle’s grand­
daughter), plus literary executors (e.g., J. R. R. Tolkien’s son, Christo­
pher), Thom Steinbeck, son of John, plus scholars, professors, or graduate 
students of British and American literature, may be taken as authoritative 
secondary sources. 
• Website urls ending in .edu or .org rather than, but not excluding, .com or 
.net, are usually good indications of websites with accurate facts or authori­
tative statements backed by quotations and scholars’ or other credentialed 
people’s claims or viewpoints.
Note, however, if websites that end in .edu are places where students 
do assignments online, their accuracy must be double-checked. Also, as 
with Wikipedia entries (although with good basic data that must also be 

xx	
General Introduction
double-checked), plus essays or term papers written by those just beginning 
their discoveries (e.g., high school or undergraduate college students doing 
assignments online for British and American Literature classes). Papers writ­
ten by writers for term paper companies may be acceptable as starting points 
also, but what they claim should be verified by other, authoritative sources. 
Sometimes what is listed in their sources list is a place to start, for example, 
but students should be guided away from just taking these papers at face 
value, or else be taught to understand and be capable of evaluating these 
companies’ papers’ points of view for themselves.
ONLINE TERTIARY RESOURCES/RESOURCES 
OF THE THIRD KIND OR LEVEL
Search engines and meta search engines (general and on special subjects), 
indexes, a webliographies of links that go to primary or secondary documents 
are the equivalent or modern cyber versions of encyclopedias and indexes.
The Deep Net is also essential to educate students about as they go in 
search of documents and data on particular subjects.
IN CONCLUSION
This introductory look aims to reveal and point to the aims of this book 
series—which, primarily, includes ways educators can introduce students to 
the wonders of literary works written in English, with words imagined years 
ago and that still have something to say to people living today, as found 
through the modern medium of the Internet, including well-known works as 
well as lesser-known works not readily available to students before this mod­
ern invention unless they could have access to special archives.
The texts aim to present American literature and British literature (both 
identified as English literature collectively) as found online in documents 
or e-texts in ways that spark the interest of young learners to experience the 
magnificent thoughts and imaginings portrayed in words and in their com­
binations in sentences and paragraphs and in their intricate designs that are 
poetry, short stories, novels, and nonfiction essays. 
Moreover, this series aims to foster critical thinking, which may be 
expressed in this way (as suggested at www.edutopia.org/groups/project-
learning/8404); besides just remembering information and concepts, people 
can analyze it, evaluate it, and apply it to the particular works as well as to 
various life situations. 

	
General Introduction
xxi
All this is conducted through this series’ chapters’ featured websites, these 
sites’ summaries that pinpoint their features, plus questions and activities 
meant not just for recognizing information, but to spark interest and activate 
imaginations, as well as develop in intriguing ways: evaluation and critical 
thinking processes that serve to acquaint students with historical and modern 
civilizations’ magnificent ideas and thoughts, and intellectual as well as inspi­
rational processes, and how it all can be beneficial in their lives.
Narrator/hosts of PBS-TV’s Masterpiece Theater and Masterpiece Clas­
sic—which re-creates classic literature for television production—have 
expressed viewpoints that may be appropriate expressions for the aim of this 
book, albeit not for the television medium, but that of the Internet. 
Laura Linney is known for her portrayal of Abigail Adams (the United 
States’ second first lady) on an HBO series. She has said of her role as a 
Masterpiece host: “Whether it’s Austen or Dickens, timeless stories by great 
authors are worth telling again and again. . . . The beauty of Masterpiece 
Classic is that each generation brings a new and interesting interpretation to 
these programs.”
Alistair Cooke equated his role as host on the Masterpiece series with 
that of a headwaiter. He said, “I’m there to explain for interested customers 
what’s on the menu and how the dishes were composed.”
And so it can be where English Literature and the Internet meet, as shown 
or revealed and guided by entertaining educational works such as Discover­
ing English Literature in Bits and Bytes.”


Section I
 ANGLO-SAXON LITERATURE


3
Chapter 1
Metrical Charms and Runic Poems
Some of the earliest writings, called charms and runes, were written by ances­
tors of the people in the land now known as England and were in early forms 
of the English language.
There are modern English translations from an early form of the English 
language called Old English, also known as Anglo-Saxon, with yet another 
later form called Middle English.
Some e-texts of these writings in modern English translations are provided 
at the Northern European Studies Texts website (Northvegr).
Some links to e-texts are of modern English translations of twelve metrical 
charms, including charms for “Unfruitful Land,” “A Swarm of Bees,” and a 
“Journey Charm.” Charms were meant to ward off bad luck while bringing 
good luck through a magical power it was believed words had. 
Runes, other early writings said to have secret or mysterious messages, 
include “The Rune Poem” and Cynewulf’s runic signature verses in his reli­
gious works. 
Click the Primary Sources link for Misc. Primary Sources, then the “Rune 
Poems” link to see modern English titles for poems including the “Anglo 
Saxon Rune Poem” with broken links not going to translations, but find mod­
ern English translations and contemporary examples as cited in urls above for 
Bruce Dickins, Marijane Osborne, J. R. R. Tolkien, and others.
Under Secondary Sources at the Northvegr site, scroll to and click the 
Runes link, then “Swedish Vikings in England” to read of runes in a modern 
English document.
On the Northvegr home page under Primary Sources, also note its Old Eng­
lish, Texts and Resources, click “Complete Corpus of Anglo Saxon Poetry in 
Anglo Saxon” link to see title links in modern English to works in the original 
Old English or Anglo-Saxon language. 

4	
Chapter 1
Note the additional sites (e.g., a Rutgers University site) with modern 
English translations.
FEATURED WEBSITES
• http://self.gutenberg.org/articles/Anglo-Saxon_Metrical_Charms (see 
descriptions); http://www.northvegr.org
{
{ Touch Misc. Primary Sources with mouse arrow.
{
{ Choose “Anglo-Saxon Charms” (see title links in modern English for 
twelve charms translated from Old English and Anglo-Saxon). 
{
{ Also under Primary Sources, scroll to Misc. Primary Sources, then click 
link to “Rune Poems” and see titles in modern English for runes written 
in Anglo-Saxon.
• For e-texts of listed “Rune Poems,” scroll to “The Runic Poem” at http://
www.arild-hauge.com/eanglor.htm in Anglo-Saxon and in a modern Eng­
lish translation by Bruce Dickins.
{
{ See a translation for women by Marijane Osborn at www.nordic-life.org/
nmh/poem.htm.
{
{ Under Secondary Sources on Northvegr’s main page, click link for 
“Runes” then “Swedish Vikings in England” to read of runes in a modern 
English document.
{
{ For more e-texts of Rune Poems translated into modern English, go to 
http://www.sunnyway.com/runes/rune_poems.html. 
{
{ Also under Primary Sources at Northvegr, touch “Icelandic, Old English, 
Texts” then click link to “Corpus of Anglo-Saxon Poetry” and title links 
in modern English to poems in Old English including Cynewulf’s “Fates 
of the Apostles,” riddles, charms, and other poems such as “The Riming 
Poem,” “The Seafarer,” The Wanderer,” and more. Find these and other 
Anglo-Saxon poems in translation at http://anglosaxonpoetry.camden.
rutgers.edu.
• Note Old English literature defined at http://www.cs.mcgill.ca/~rwest/wiki­
speedia/wpcd/wp/a/Anglo-Saxon_literature.htm.
• See examples from the recent past at http://alliteration.net/web.htm.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1.	 Find and read e-texts of modern English translations of three examples of 
early English writings called charms.
a.	 Find these e-texts online at the “Anglo Saxon Metrical Charms” page 
at a featured website as stated above. 

	
Metrical Charms and Runic Poems
5
b.	 Choose a charm meant to help someone going on a “Journey,” a charm 
meant to help an “Unfruitful Land,” a charm meant to help someone 
caught up in a bee swarm. 
c.	 Quoting from each charm, identify what the narrator in each charm 
aimed to say, and how he or she expressed it.
2.	 Choose two charms in e-texts of modern English whose translations you 
find online.
a.	 Choose one charm found in a featured website as cited in summary and 
url above. 
b.	 Choose another charm at any site cited in the related Internet sites area 
below. 
c.	 Write an essay. 
d.	 Identify what the narrator aimed to say, and how he or she expressed it. 
e.	 Quote from each charm to support what you claim.
3.	 Find and read two modern English e-text translations of the Old English 
“Rune Poem.”
a.	 Follow links as directed in the featured sites summary above to find 
e-text of a traditional rune, translated with men in mind, as with Bruce 
Dickins’s translation. 
b.	 Find another rune’s e-text translation online with women in mind; as 
with one translated by Marijane Osborn at a featured site cited above. 
c.	 From each translation above, choose and identify three words: one 
about nature, one about a thing, and one on a person or people. 
d.	 Quote some phrases (in translation) that the poet used to express some­
thing of what each word represents. 
e.	 Identify one passage each from the poems, then compare both transla­
tions of it, as you consider each narrator as s/he presented the subject 
for women or men.
4.	 Find and read some definitions of runes on the Internet.
a.	 Look for definitions found online as cited under “Runes Defined” in 
the related sites area below. Note what is on the “Runic Alphabet” web 
page and pages found via its links and the “Viking Runes Through 
Time” web page.
b.	 Choose some definitions of runes. 
c.	 Quote from the chosen definitions as you briefly identify what runes 
are.
5.	 Keep in mind the “Rune Poem” and definitions of runes referred to in 
questions/activities nos. 3 and 4 above.
a.	 Suggest how runes may have other meanings (maybe hidden “under 
the surface”). 
b.	 Quote phrases from some of the rune poems to support what you claim. 
c.	 Keep in mind as an example the “Rune Poem” and its traits as sample 
traits of runes. 

6	
Chapter 1
6.	 Find and read an e-text of a Modern English translation of Cynewulf’s 
runic signature verses and his “Fates of the Apostles.”
a.	 Find a modern English translation online (e.g., at the Poetry Foundation 
website as cited in Additional Websites below), and note some critical 
analyses.
b.	 Note the whole work but pay attention to lines 20 through 23. 
c.	 Identify words that are main runic symbols or alphabet letters. 
d.	 Tell which runic words identify Cynewulf and how. 
e.	 Identify the runes’ subjects. 
7.	 Study again online definitions of rune, and the runic alphabet, found as 
cited in question/activity 4 above.
a.	 Being guided by the way Cynewulf wrote his runic signature verse, 
select some runic letters. 
b.	 Write a poem that you can call your own “runic signature” verse. 
c.	 Tip: Use one letter (the first in your name), or some or all letters of 
your name. 
8.	 Find an e-text document titled On “Mimicking Old English Verse Forms 
in Modern English,” plus “The Very Nature of Alliterative Verse,” “J. R. 
R. Tolkien’s Alliterative Poems,” and Modern Alliterative Poetry.
a.	 Find and read the first e-text and the last cited e-texts at, or through 
links at, the Forgotten Ground Regained website. Find other sites as 
cited in the related sites area below. 
b.	 Write a brief essay in which you identify how someone may create an 
approximation of Old English verse according to this document. 
c.	 Consider, for example, a key that captures what, while keeping what 
else? 
d.	 Identify four suggestions on what to look out for, or aim to do and not 
do. 
e.	 Read e-texts excerpts from J. R. R. Tolkien’s works, then write an essay 
suggesting how Tolkien used the key and the four suggestions in these 
e-text excerpts of his works. 
f.	 Read other alliterative poetry from the recent past. Tell how they show 
alliterative traits. 
9.	 Literary charms are still around in a way in modern times, as shown in 
Harry Potter stories.
a.	 Write an essay in which you suggest how some charms in the Harry 
Potter stories are similar in their purpose to actual charms in early 
English.
b.	 To gather information for your essay, find some what may be called 
realistic charms and spells and their types defined, then where and how 
they are presented in the Harry Potter books, as cited at websites on 
Harry Potter in the additional sites below. 

	
Metrical Charms and Runic Poems
7
c.	 Define charms and spells according to the Harry Potter worldview, and 
tell why they are done and how to do them. Use quotes from the books 
when possible.
d.	 Describe, for example, from the Harry Potter books, the counter-charm 
for hiccups, a spell to reenergize a person, or another spell or charm. 
e.	 Choose a charm or spell in book one or two, then in another book. 
f.	 Tell what the chosen charm is, why it is done, who does it, and what 
the outcome is.
Additional websites for chapter 1, with more data to note
• https://clynjohnson.wordpress.com
{
{ Click link to “Discovering English Literature . . . Additional Websites,” 
then link to a wordpress.com blog at netedbooks, or go directly to http://
www.netedbooks.wordpress.com/blog.


9
Chapter 2
Old English and Early 
Middle English Verse
To find online translations of Old English and early Middle English language 
writings of British literature into early Modern English (e.g., by Ezra Pound, 
and others), visit the first featured website Forgotten Ground Regained and 
click links. 
Each translation offers a sample of ancient Britain’s literary world and 
actual world. Sometimes more than one translation of the same work chal­
lenges students to see similarities or differences among various translators’ 
interpretations. 
Find links on the Other Translations page to selected writings in the origi­
nal early English and in modern English translations, such as Beowulf (1000 
AD) by an unknown anonymous author or Scribes A and B in a monastery, 
the Pearl Poet’s Sir Gawain and the Green Knight (1400 AD) (with refer­
ences to King Arthur), and more. 
Click the Medieval Poetry link in left column to go to a page of links to, 
William Langland’s The Vision of Piers Plowman (1337–39? AD) in early 
English. 
Note the Site References link on the left that brings up links on the right to 
other areas (e.g., Electronic Texts Archives) and their links to other websites 
(e.g., Luminarium, with its modern English translation of Piers Plowman). 
Click also on the Poetic Techniques link in the left column to go to links 
on the right under From the Editor, to, Linking Letters: A Poet’s Guide to 
Alliterative Verse (especially parts 3 and 4) for an introduction to the poetic 
technique dominant in early English (i.e., Old English and Early Middle 
English) writings. 
More links on the right of Poetic Techniques page under Elsewhere On 
Web go to more data in Overviews, Old English Alliterative Verse, other 
subjects (e.g., J. R. R. Tolkien & Alliteration).

10	
Chapter 2
Note also in Poetic Techniques and Essays areas, links to Richard Moore’s 
“Poetic Meter in English: Roots and Possibilities,” Paul Deane’s “Alliterative 
Poetry and J. R. R. Tolkien,” and Dana Goia’s essays “Accentual or Allitera­
tive Verse” and “Poetry As Enchantment.”
FEATURED WEBSITES
• http://alliteration.net
{
{ Click Other Translations link under Resources in left column and click 
links under the headings titled Old English and Middle English. For 
interesting definitions of poetry in general, click Poetic Techniques and 
Essays.
• http://alliteration.net/Pearl.htm
{
{ See excerpts from Sir Gawain and the Green Knight.
{
{ Note link to Corpus of Middle English Works at http://alliteration.net/
original.htm with some modern English translations at http://alliteration.
net/translate.htm.
• Excerpts from Beowulf at http://alliteration.net/beoIndex.htm and https://
web.archive.org/web/20150816194203/http://beowulftranslations.net/
index.html.
• Note data on J. R. R. Tolkien and alliteration at http://alliteration.net/
ALLITERT.HTM, http://alliteration.net/Beleriand.htm, and at http://allit
eration.net/technica.htm see Dana Goia’s “Accentual Verse,” and “Poetry 
As Enchantment.”
• The Great Vowel Shift at http://facweb.furman.edu/~mmenzer/gvs/lit.htm
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1.	 Find and read online explanations of alliteration, the poetic form in which 
early English poetry was primarily written, in the early versions of the lan­
guage called Old English (also called Anglo-Saxon) and Middle English.
a.	 Find online explanations at the http://alliteration.net featured website 
after clicking Poetic Techniques under Resources, then clicking the 
Anglo-Saxon Alliterative Verse link and Alliteration link. See explana­
tions at http://alliteration.net/fieldgd.htm in Linking Letters: A Poet’s 
Guide to Alliterative Verse (especially parts 2 and 4), found also 
through A Field Guide to Alliterative Verse link at the http://alliteration
.net via the Editor’s Notes page and see a definition attributed to J. R. 
R. Tolkien on the Tolkien and Alliterative Verse page found through the 
http://alliteration.net Editor’s Notes page. 

	
Old English and Early Middle English Verse
11
b.	 Write a definition of alliterative verse from the data you find online. 
c.	 Choose a poetic e-text example of alliteration from a modern English 
translation of early English verse (i.e., from Old English or Early 
Middle English verse). You may choose to explain a translated excerpt 
from the Historical Prologue of Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, 
part 2 (especially lines four through sixteen), or a translated excerpt 
from Beowulf, both found through links under Classic Works at 
http://alliteration.net and Beowulf translated by Francis Gummere 
at https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/b/beowulf/b48g and more at http://
www.beowulftranslations.net/alliteration.html.
d.	 Tell how alliteration is expressed in the poetic passage you chose. 
e.	 Also find more data at websites through the link cited below for Addi­
tional Websites.
2.	 Find and read online definitions and examples of a kenning (a literary 
device used in Old English or Anglo Saxon literature).
a.	 Formerly found through the Poetry Magic link at http://alliteration.net/
outside.htm, see http://www.poeticbyway.com/gl-k.html and its defini­
tion of kenning. 
b.	 Visit also the websites Kennings and BEOWULF, Kennings and Anglo 
Saxon Literature, and Eddic and Skadic Kennings, cited in Additional 
Websites below. 
c.	 List three definitions of a kenning. 
d.	 Provide two examples each of modern translators’ translations of ken­
nings, such as those by Seamus Heaney, Bertha Rogers, and others.
3.	 Find and read excerpts that are online Modern English translations of parts 
of William Langland’s Piers Plowman, such as the B-Text Excerpts.
a.	 Find excerpts online at the Luminarium website through the http://
alliteration.net featured website’s Site References link, found as cited 
above. 
b.	 Note the translation of the Prologue, especially lines 1 through 19. 
c.	 What did the narrator decide to do, and when, but what happened 
instead? 
d.	 Identify some of the “fair field of folk” the narrator sees, including 
especially but not exclusively the folk in the lines following line 19.
e.	 Suggest how alliterative verse helps the poet’s message (even in trans­
lation) to be told. 
f.	 Scroll to bottom of the page (near page 6) and tell of a warning the 
narrator gave.
4.	 Find and read e-text excerpts in a modern English translation of 
Beowulf.
a.	 Find these e-texts online as cited in http://alliteration.net/beoIndex.htm 
and https://web.archive.org/web/20150816194203/http://beowulftrans

12	
Chapter 2
lations.net/index.html featured websites cited above, then by clicking 
chapter links. 
b.	 Click the link for The Haunted Mere, then scroll to the third verse and 
read excerpt. 
c.	 Write a paragraph including quotations from the alliterative lines. 
d.	 Identify features of the place and two trekkers. 
e.	 What does the narrator ask someone to do? What will he give him if 
he does it but only if something happens (which you should identify).
5.	 Find and read e-text excerpts from a modern English translation of the 
Pearl Poet’s Sir Gawain and the Green Knight.
a.	 Find these e-texts online at http://alliteration.net/Pearl.htm featured 
website page. 
b.	 Click link in the left column for The Green Knight Arrives. Read verses 
7 through 13. 
c.	 Quoting alliterative phrases that you can find in this translation, tell 
what is going on when the Green Knight comes in. Describe three of 
his many features. 
d.	 How do people in the room react? What is the reaction of an important 
person? Who is it? What is the challenge (but not a fight) that the Green 
Knight suggests to this person?
6.	 Keep in mind question/activity 5 above and the story referred to in it.
a.	 Click the link at http://alliteration.net/index.htm for Gawain Takes Up 
the Challenge. 
b.	 Scroll to and read verses 14 through 21.
c.	 Quoting alliterative phrases, tell how Gawain described his connection 
to the important person the Green Knight spoke to. 
d.	 Tell what Gawain asks to do and why. 
e.	 How did the important person respond?
7.	 Find and read online definitions of epic poetry.
a.	 Find these definitions at Aristotle—Poetics—Epic Poetry and Defini­
tion of Epic Poetry pages at www.sacred-texts.com/cla/ari/poe/index
.htm (xxiii, xxiv, and xxvi). 
b.	 Write a definition of epic poetry. Draw from what you find at sites cited 
above. 
c.	 Write an essay in which you suggest how Beowulf, Piers Plowman, or 
Sir Gawain and the Green Knight may be thought of as an epic.
8.	 Find and read online definitions of Dream Vision Poetry.
a.	 Find these definitions online at http://faculty.goucher.edu/eng240/
dream_vision.htm and other websites found via link for Additional 
Websites cited below. 

	
Old English and Early Middle English Verse
13
b.	 Write a brief description of dream vision poetry. 
c.	 Read excerpts from online translations of Old English and early Middle 
English works identified as dream vision poetry, such as parts of Piers 
the Plowman and The Pearl, Dream of the Rood, and Geoffrey Chau­
cer’s House of Fame and Parliament of Fowles.
d.	 Tips: Find works at or through the featured alliteration.net site via the 
Medieval Poetry link in the left column, or via the Site References link, 
then Electronic Texts Archives and Reference Sites link, then Lumina­
rium link and its links to Medieval Resource including bartleby.com’s 
Prosody of Old and Middle English Verse, and its Alliterative Revival, 
plus links going to amazon.com’s dream vision poetry work titled The 
High Medieval Dream Vision: Poetry, Philosophy and Literary Form 
(1988) by Kathryn L. Lynch with a definition and explanation in the 
introduction. 
e.	 Suggest how these poems show features of dream vision poetry as iden­
tified in the descriptions at the websites referred to just above.
9.	 Find and read websites with data about the Old English era and Middle 
English era.
a.	 Find these sites, such as for the Norton Anthology of English Literature, 
pages at the http://www.ucalgary.ca/uofc/eduweb/engl401/faq.htm, 
www.anglo-saxons.net/hwaet, http://www.thehistoryofenglish.com/
timeline.html (note 1385 and 1450 etc.), http://historialenguainglesa
.blogspot.com/2012/12/timeline-of-middle-english-period-1100.html, 
plus http://facweb.furman.edu/~mmenzer/gvs/lit.htm, http://vos.ucsb.
edu/browse.asp?id=2740, and other sites on these eras, their society, 
literature and authors, in some Additional Web Sites for chapter 2 
via the link at https://wordpress.com/posts/carolynlibrarianwriterword
presscom.wordpress.com.
b.	 Write an essay in which you tell something of the time period from 
500–1500 AD or CE—the times when Old English and Middle English 
literature were being created. 
c.	 Cite literary and related cultural features. 
d.	 Suggest how, you think, the Old English era and the early Middle 
English era are different, similar, separate, or overlapping.
e.	 Write an essay giving an overview of features, reasons, and seven 
events (in 1066, 1362, 1385, 1399, 1450, 1476, and 1500), that marked 
a period of time; before, during, and just after the great vowel shift. 
What did it signal the end of, and the beginning of? Which literary 
works were important then? How? Why?

14	
Chapter 2
Additional websites for chapter 2 with more data to note
• https://clynjohnson.wordpress.com
{
{ Click link to “Discovering English Literature. . . . Additional Websites,” 
then link to a wordpress.com blog at netedbooks), or go directly to http://
www.netedbooks.wordpress.home.

15
Chapter 3 
Colloquy 
On a page featuring Anglo-Saxon links at the website for The Heroic Age: A 
Journal of Early Medieval Northwestern Europe, see links to pages of some 
of the earliest literary works in the English language, written as the English 
language emerged, at the time when the first ancestors of people in today’s 
England lived. 
These works were written in early versions of the English language known 
as Anglo-Saxon, also called Old English, or were translated from Latin into 
Old English. 
Old English texts or modern English translations are provided through 
links at this site.
These early writings, both poetry and prose, expressed people’s basic con­
cerns of those times, such as hard living and death, war, and religious subjects.
Note links in the Anglo Saxon Literature area to Anglo-Saxon Literature 
(1884) by John Earle and Anglo-Saxon Narrative Poetry Project. See also 
works’ links under authors’ names, plus links under particular Anglo-Saxon 
works such as the Vercelli Book.
FEATURED WEBSITES 
• http://www.heroicage.org/as.php
{
{ Scroll to links under Literature and its sections.
{
{ Note working links in English to documents in Anglo-Saxon, Old Eng­
lish, or modern English translations.
{
{ Note links under Aelfric, such as Of Seasons of the Year; link to Bede.net 
and its link to isasweb.net and its link to web searches.
• See Ann Watkins’s translation of a colloquy at www.kentarchaeology.ac/
authors/016.pdf.

16	
Chapter 3
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES 
1.	 Find and read an e-text of a modern English translation of a colloquy by 
Aelfric, written during the late tenth century or early eleventh century.
a.	 Find modern English translation online at Ann Watkins’ www.kent
archaeology.ac/authors/016.pdf (a featured website cited above):
b.	 What did a student say to a teacher? 
c.	 What did the teacher ask? What did the student answer?
d.	 Write your own colloquy between yourself or someone else of your age 
and a teacher, parent, or other adult.
2.	 Find and read e-texts of modern English translations of Caedmon’s Hymn, 
written about 670.
a.	 Find these e-texts online by clicking links at the Heroic Age featured 
website http://www.heroicage.org/as.php.
b.	 Scroll to find link to Caedmon’s Hymn, an Old English Version by 
Heorot. Click Heorot link to view introduction, then click link to text 
and modern English translation. 
c.	 Back on the main featured website http://www.heroicage.org/
as.phpcited above, click link to Bede’s Account of Caedmon and 
CAEDMON’S HYMN as translated into modern English in 1990 with 
Old English examples by Kevin Kiernan. 
d.	 Identify what, according to Bede, happened to Caedmon in a dream. 
e.	 Compare phrases in two or more modern English translations of the 
Hymn at the http://www.heroicage.org/as.php website, such as one 
translated from an early version of English called Northumbrian and 
one from Bede’s Latin version. 
f.	 Compare, the different words used for the first and second parts of each 
line. 
g.	 Next, identify, how God is identified, how works, wonders, roof, mid­
dle earth, and people, or words similar to them, are referred to.
3.	 Find and read an e-text of a modern English translation of Bede’s poem 
whose first line starts with the phrase “Before the inevitable journey,” also 
known as “Death Song,” written in 735.
a.	 Find translation via http://www.heroicage.org/as.php featured website 
that goes to Bede.net and its web search links, then search for first line 
at Google Books.
b.	 Identify who the poem’s narrator believes will be the wisest human 
being if that person thinks about what and when. 
c.	 Provide suggestions you think of that you see as examples of what 
Bede wrote about.

	
Colloquy
17
4.	 Find and read an e-text of a modern English translation of Aelfric’s On the 
Seasons of the Year, written during the late tenth century or early eleventh 
century.
a.	 Find a translation online by clicking the title link under Aelfric under 
Literature at the Heroic Age featured website http://www.heroicage
.org/as.phpcited above. 
b.	 List the subjects he wrote about. 
c.	 From various paragraphs on different seasonal subjects, identify differ­
ent types of winds he mentioned, the metaphor he used to describe the 
Earth, and his views of stars. 
d.	 Choose another subject he wrote about, and then tell, while quoting, 
something important or interesting from paragraphs he commented in 
about this subject.
5.	 Keep in mind Aelfric’s On Seasons of the Year referred to in question 
4 above.
a.	 Look at this textbook’s chapter 1 on Selected Anglo Saxon [Old Eng­
lish] Literature such as metrical charms and Runes, plus something by 
Gildas. 
b.	 Identify how Aelfric’s writings, although on subjects similar to subjects 
in the Anglo-Saxon metrical charms, are written in a different way.
6.	 It is stated at http://www.medievalchurch.org.uk/p_aelfric.php (via chap­
ter 3, Additional Sites at https://netedbooks.wordpress.com/home, click 
link to chapter 3 list), that “As Alfred was the founder, so Aelfric was the 
model, of the Saxon prose.”
a.	 Suggest why you think this statement may be true.
b.	 Quote from Aelfric’s writings that you find online to support your 
viewpoint. 
c.	 Tip: Scroll to find links to more of Aelfric’s works at http://www.hero
icage.org/as.php. 
d.	 Find, modern English translations of Aelfric’s preface to his Grammar 
and his preface to First Series of Catholic Homilies.
e.	 Identify what John Earle wrote about Aelfric in 1884 in his Anglo-
Saxon Literature, found online via the link at the Heroic Age featured 
website above under Literature.
f.	 Quote from e-texts of excerpts from Aelfric’s works, and from com­
ments about Aelfric by Earle, to support and provide examples for your 
answer to b) above.

18	
Chapter 3
Additional websites for chapter 3 with more data to note 
• https://clynjohnson.wordpress.com
{
{ Click link to “Discovering English Literature. . . . Additional Websites,” 
then link to a wordpress.com blog at netedbooks), or go directly to http://
www.netedbooks.wordpress.com/home.

19
Chapter 4
A Letter on the Advancement 
of Learning
At the Bucknell University featured site, after scrolling to and clicking the 
translation title link, see the web page that features an e-text of a modern 
English translation by an unnamed author of King Alfred’s Letter on the 
Advancement of Learning as sent to a Bishop of Werfrith.
It was sent then in the form in which it appears here as the 894 Prose 
Preface to Pope Gregory’s book (first published in Latin in the year 591). 
The book was considered to be a guide by Gregory, who was both a spiritual 
leader and teacher. 
It was translated into early English by King Alfred, who is identified by 
scholars as “the father of english prose.” Alfred translated the work into the 
form of early English known as Anglo-Saxon English or Old English. 
The document features the thoughts of Alfred, also known as Aelfred, 
identified as the first English monarch, although he reigned in just a part, but 
an important part, of what is now present-day England, a place called Wes­
sex, in the southwest part of the nation. 
The document shows, in essay and letter form, the concern (the first by an 
English monarch) about learning and knowledge for his nation’s people in 
the beginning years of the nation now known as England, the main nation of 
Great Britain. 
Serving as examples of this monarch’s literary aims and cultural goals for 
his people, e-text samples of King Alfred’s prose and poetry can be found at 
the Bucknell University website, plus the websites with King Alfred’s Poems 
Now Turned into English Metres, his Preface to St. Augustine’s Soliloquies, 
and King Alfred the Great and His England.

20	
Chapter 4
FEATURED WEBSITES 
• www.departments.bucknell.edu/english/courses/engl440/pastoral.shtml
{
{ Click link to Modern Translation to Alfred’s Prose Preface of Pasto­
ral Care (note also links to Alfred’s Old English prose version of this 
document).
{
{ See Preface to St. Augustine’s Soliloquies fccs.ok.ubc.ca/__shared/
assets/Modern_English_Translation3522.doc.
{
{ Click search icon for close-up view at https://archive.org/details/kingal
fredspoem00tuppgoog of King Alfred’s Poems and flip pages with mouse 
arrow or click at bottom right of each book page.
• An epitaph in his own words at http://www.england-history.org/2012/09/
king-alfred-the-great-and-his-england.
• Scroll to paragraph 14 to the phrases “The earliest work Alfred commanded 
to be translated . . .”; “He, himself, assisted by his scholars, translated . . .”
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES 
1.	 Find and read an e-text of a modern English translation of King Alfred’s 
Prose Preface to his early English translation of Pope Gregory’s Pastoral 
Care.
a.	 Find this e-text online at the featured Bucknell University web 
page, www.departments.bucknell.edu/english/courses/engl440/pastoral
.shtml cited above. 
b.	 Study the first paragraph. 
c.	 Identify which kinds of men Alfred said once lived in England before 
his time. 
d.	 What were the sacred orders some men were eager about? 
e.	 Why did men come from abroad (other nations) to England at that early 
time? 
f.	 What was so interesting about men from abroad at the time Alfred 
wrote his document? Why? 
g.	 What was Alfred thankful for as he wrote? 
h.	 What did he ask be done by the bishop he wrote to?
2.	 Study e-text of paragraph 2 of a modern English translation of Alfred’s 
Prose Preface to his early English translation of Pope Gregory’s Pastoral 
Care.
a.	 Find this e-text online at the featured Bucknell University web page, 
www.departments.bucknell.edu/english/courses/engl440/pastoral.sht
mlcited above. 

	
A Letter on the Advancement of Learning
21
b.	 Tell what Alfred also remembered, especially with reference to Eng­
land’s churches and yet why this was of little benefit. 
c.	 How did Alfred use footprints as a metaphor? 
d.	 What did Alfred say had been lost and why?
3.	 Study paragraph 3 of a modern English e-text translation of Alfred’s 
Prose Preface to his early English translation of Pope Gregory’s Pastoral 
Care.
a.	 Find this e-text online as the featured Bucknell University web 
page, www.departments.bucknell.edu/english/courses/engl440/pastoral
.shtml cited above. 
b.	 What did Alfred wonder about with reference to some men in England 
and what they would not do, and why they would not do it (in part 
because they could not conceive of something that happened, which 
you should identify).
4.	 Study paragraph 4 of a modern English e-text translation of Alfred’s 
Prose Preface to his early English translation of Pope Gregory’s Pastoral 
Care.
a.	 Find this e-text online at the featured Bucknell University web 
page, www.departments.bucknell.edu/english/courses/engl440/pastoral
.shtml cited above. 
b.	 What did Alfred say some other people of other nations did? 
c.	 Identify what it seemed better to him that he and other Englishmen 
should do? Why? 
d.	 What did he see “if there was peace,” that would be good for England’s 
youth to do, until they could accomplish what?
5.	 Study paragraph 5 of a modern English e-text translation of Alfred’s Prose 
Preface to his early English translation of Pope Gregory’s Pastoral Care.
a.	 Find this e-text online at the featured Bucknell University web 
page, www.departments.bucknell.edu/english/courses/engl440/pastoral
.shtml cited above. 
b.	 Why did Alfred start to translate something into English (actually the 
early form of English known in his time)? 
c.	 What did Alfred translate? 
d.	 Which two goals did he sometimes aim for; really one or the other; as 
he translated?
e.	 What else did Alfred do “when I had,” “just as I had,” and “as I could 
do most?”
6.	 Find and read an e-text of the Bishop of Sherbourne’s Biography of King 
Alfred, written in 888, in a modern English translation.
a.	 Find an e-text of this translation online at http://omacl.org/KingAlfred 
and click links to Introduction, Parts One and Two. See description via 
Additional Websites cited below. 

22	
Chapter 4
b.	 Study the first paragraphs suggested. 
c.	 Identify a challenge young Alfred’s mother gave to him and his broth­
ers when Alfred was growing up. 
d.	 What was the prize his mother planned to offer to the winner of the 
challenge? 
e.	 How did young Alfred react to what his mother suggested? 
f.	 What was a wish Alfred had starting at an early age?
7.	 Find and read an e-text of what an early twentieth-century scholar, John 
Richard Green, wrote of Alfred.
a.	 At http://www.ensignmessage.com/kingalfredthegreat.html, after scroll­
ing 3/4 down the page, find e-text of these statements. See pages 99–105 
at https://archive.org/details/historyenglishpeo01gree. More data at Sites 
cited below. 
b.	 What did Professor Green write on Alfred’s interests for himself and 
his people? These interests were other than his interests in religious and 
political matters. 
c.	 In which literary genre was he most interested? 
d.	 What did Alfred aim to do? 
e.	 Find and read e-text excerpt of a translation of Alfred’s translation on 
Boethius’ Consolations of Philosophy, found at http://www.royal.gov
.uk/pdf/alfred.pdf and described in Additional Websites as cited below. 
f.	 Comment more on Alfred’s aims with quotes in Alfred’s translation of 
Boethius’ work.
8.	 Find and read the e-text of the first page of an article on Alfred’s talking 
poetry and other e-texts of works about and with examples of Alfred’s 
poetry.
a.	 Find this e-text at King Alfred’s Talking Poems by James W. Earl (1989) at 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/1316601?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents.
b.	 Do you agree, or not, with Earl’s statement of Sisam’s evaluation of 
Alfred’s verse? Why? or why not?
c.	 Quote from translations of Alfred’s poetry to support your answer. 
d.	 Read some of Alfred’s poetry as translated by and commented on by 
Martin F. Tupper in King Alfred’s Poems (1850) at https://archive.org/
details/kingalfredspoem00tuppgoog (click search icon, flip pages with 
arrow). See notes in additional websites cited at https://netedbooks
.wordpress.com/home. 
e.	 Quote from one or more of these poems, and Tupper’s comments, as 
you suggest the importance of Alfred’s poetry and particular poems. 
f.	 Find, study, Winston Churchill’s 1956 comment on Alfred in a docu­
ment’s e-text at http://charltonteaching.blogspot.co.uk/2010/10/greatest-
englishman-ever-king-alfred.html.
g.	 Quote Churchill and suggest how his comment supports positive view 
of Alfred’s poetry.

	
A Letter on the Advancement of Learning
23
9.	 Find and read e-text excerpts of a modern English translation to King 
Alfred’s Old English Translation of St Augustine’s Soliloquies (with A 
Rendering into Modern English). 
a.	 Find this e-text at fccs.ok.ubc.ca/__shared/assets/Modern_English
_Translation3522.doc. 
b.	 Scroll to and read parts (2v), (3r), and (3v). 
c.	 What are the two books called “soliloquiorum” about? 
d.	 What account did the narrator give of them? 
e.	 What or who did the narrator think answered him? 
f.	 What did “she” say to him? 
g.	 In a dialogue, what did he and “she” talk about? 
h.	 Which two points noted in the conversation make the word “entrust” 
important?
10.	 Find and read more excerpts from an e-text of a modern English transla­
tion of the last words of St. Augustine’s Soliloquies that was translated 
into Old English by Alfred; noting especially at the end of the work the 
first phrase of the line that starts “Therefore me thinks. . . . .”; then find 
and read the e-text of a quote from Alfred’s last writing titled Blotsman.
a.	 Find an e-text translation in modern English of Alfred’s Old English 
translation of the Soliliquies and Alfred’s Preface at www.gutenberg
.org/files/40341/40341-h/40341-.htm. 
b.	 See also a quote from Alfred’s last writing Blotsman (an anthology) 
at the websites http://www.england-history.org/2012/09/king-alfred
-the-great-and-his-england and http://www.leslettreseuropeennes.eu/
wp-content/uploads/2013/04/GHILLEBAERT_English-literature_part
-I.pdf.
c.	 Suggest what the sentence from Blotsman, aka Blooms, means?
d.	 Why do scholars identify this sentence, referred to in c) above, as a 
fitting tribute to King Alfred? 
e.	 What do you think the last sentence of Alfred’s translation of Book III 
of St. Augustine’s Soliloquies may mean? 
f.	 Why may the document referred to in e) above also be thought of as 
a tribute?
Additional websites for chapter 4 with more data to note 
• https://clynjohnson.wordpress.com
{
{ Click link to “Discovering English Literature… Additional Websites,” 
then link to a wordpress.com blog at netedbooks, or go directly to http://
www.netedbooks.wordpress.com/home.


25
Chapter 5 
Riddles from “The Exeter Book” 
(970–1042) by Anonymous  
Some early English writings, called riddles, were written in early versions 
of the English language. This early version of the English language is called 
Old English (aka Anglo Saxon, with West Saxon and Northumbrian dialects), 
plus Early Middle English verse. 
See examples of these riddles, called Exeter Riddles, the beginnings of 
English literature, at featured websites with translations in modern English 
plus some original Old English texts. 
Note translations of nearly one hundred riddles that were collected with 
other writings in a manuscript called “The Exeter Book,” and preserved by a 
Bishop Leofric, who donated it to the Exeter Cathedral in 1042. 
See translated riddles, try to identify what each refers to, then look at the 
answers. 
The riddles may be numbered differently with, for example, number 42 
(at first featured site) is identified as number 45 (at second featured site), and 
number 47 (at third featured site).
Featured websites cited below feature Exeter riddles translated by schol­
ars. Note translations by Megan Cavall and Matthias Ammon; Paul F. Baum 
(c) 1963, with explanations offered by Alfred John Wyatt (1835–1935); five 
riddles with commentaries to introduce students to analyzing riddles; and 
Joseph Barone with links to hidden riddle answers, now broken.
A sign of the enduring nature of the literary format of the riddle is that rid­
dles are present in English literature even today, as studies of, and examples 
from, Tolkien’s The Hobbit and Rowling’s Harry Potter books reveal, as in 
Riddles in The Hobbit and Riddles of Harry Potter.
Scholars through time have translated, studied, and written commentaries 
on the riddles. 

26	
Chapter 5
See some of their writings online at www.oenewsletter.org/OEN/index
.php, at various university sites such as the California State University and 
the University of Toronto websites and at additional sites, for which a link is 
cited at the end of this chapter.
FEATURED WEBSITES 
• https://theriddleages.wordpress.com/riddles-by-number
{
{ See links to fifty Exeter riddles by numbers going to OE versions, mod­
ern English translations, answers and commentaries.http://www.swarth
more.edu/Humanities/english/oldenglish
{
{ See number links for the selected riddles 45, 76, 25, 23, 27, click transla­
tion links, then commentary links.
• http://www.technozen.com/exeter
{
{ Click links to number groups of riddles, then individual numbers (ques­
tion mark cluster links to answers are broken). 
{
{ Click a subject link at https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Anglo-Saxon_Rid
dles_of_the_Exeter_Book, then links for number groups, then individual 
numbers, then a riddle, its answer, and an explanation.
• http://www.csun.edu/~sk36711/WWW/355/nelson.pdf
{
{ See functions of the Exeter riddles), http://homes.chass.utoronto.
ca/~cpercy/courses/1001Brewer.htm; http://www.thing.net/~grist/ld/
young/ky-bkrid.htm, http://www.csun.edu/~sk36711/WWW/355/nelson
.pdf.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES 
1.	 Find and read translated e-text excerpts of, and data online about, the 
Exeter Book riddles.
a.	 Find data at the http://www.swarthmore.edu/Humanities/english/old
english featured site. 
b.	 In other featured websites and in the additional websites online and 
cited below at https://netedbooks.wordpress.com/home (click chapter 
five link). 
c.	 At http://www.thing.net/~grist/ ld/young/ky-bkrid.htm, see defini­
tions by Karl Young; see Hazel Brewer’s comments at University of 
Toronto’s http://homes.chass.utoronto.ca/~cpercy/courses/1001Brewer
.htm; 
Gerard 
Benson 
at 
http://wonderingminstrels.blogspot
.com/2001/12/bookworm-anonymous.html; University of Glasgow’s 
http://theses.gla.ac.uk/2943/1/2011diganmphil.pdf with Laura Digan’s 

	
Riddles from “The Exeter Book” (970–1042) by Anonymous
27
introduction; Marie Nelson at the University of Florida’s http://
www.csun.edu/~sk36711/WWW/355/nelson.pdf; Michael Alexander’s 
Old English Riddles from the Exeter Book at http://books.google.com; 
plus Kevin Crossley-Holland’s Nature of the Riddle at amazon.com, 
Craig Williamson’s Introductions to, and Translations of, the Riddles 
in “BEOWULF and Other Old English Poems” at amazon.com; S. A. 
J. Bradley’s Introduction to Anglo-Saxon Poetry at amazon.com; and 
others cited in the additional websites below. 
d.	 Write a short essay in which you identify main features of riddles. 
e.	 Note, for example, Ms. Nelson’s four functions of the riddles and two 
types of riddles’ challenging endings; plus Mr. Young’s quote “Most 
riddles open with. . . .”
2.	 Find and read an e-text of a Modern English translation of “riddle 47” 
from the Old English book titled “The Exeter Book.”
a.	 Find this e-text at the https://theriddleages.wordpress.com/riddles-by-
number and http://www.technozen.com/exeter featured websites.
b.	 Study the riddle. 
c.	 Write a paragraph in which you aim to identify what the riddle means. 
d.	 Note: Be sure to quote some of the riddle’s phrases to provide examples 
of the riddle’s meaning and to show how you understand it. 
e.	 For help with the riddle’s meaning, look for its key word at another 
featured site, or find an alternate translation and answer at another site 
cited in additional websites on the Internet as cited below at https://
netedbooks.wordpress.com/home (click chapter 5). 
f.	 If you guess a solution/answer to the riddle, or if you find a suggested 
answer or solution and choose to accept it, write your paragraph 
explaining why you support the interpretation.
3.	 Find and read an e-text of a modern English translation of “riddle 
26” from the Old English, The Exeter Book, found at https://theriddle
ages.wordpress.com/riddles-by-number and http://www.technozen.com/
exeter.
a.	 Study lines 13 through 28 (including a part that starts with a phrase 
about being clothed and a part that starts with the words “If the children 
of men will use me”). 
b.	 Study the riddle, then write a paragraph suggesting what you think the 
riddle means. 
c.	 Include some of the riddle’s phrases to provide examples of the riddle’s 
meaning and to show that you understand it. 
d.	 For help with the riddle’s meaning, see other e-texts of a modern 
English translation of this riddle (also identified as XXVI) at another 
featured site or in additional websites at https://netedbooks.wordpress
.com/home as cited below. 

28	
Chapter 5
e.	 If you guess an answer or solution to the riddle, or find a suggested 
answer or solution, and choose to accept it, write your paragraph 
explaining why you support this interpretation.
4.	 Find, read, e-text of a modern English translation of “riddle forty nine” 
from the Old English, “The Exeter Book,” found at the https://theriddle
ages.wordpress.com/riddles-by-number and http://www.technozen.com/
exeter featured websites.
a.	 Study the riddle and think about its meaning. 
b.	 Write a paragraph identifying what you think the riddle means. 
c.	 Quote some of the riddle’s phrases to provide examples of the meaning 
and to show your understanding of it. 
d.	 For help with the riddle’s meaning, see the Riddle Ages featured web­
site at https://theriddleages.wordpress.com/riddles-by-number/, and 
other e-texts of modern English translations of this riddle as found at 
another featured website or in “additional websites” at https://neted
books.wordpress.com/home as cited below. 
e.	 If you guess an answer or solution to the riddle, or you find a suggested 
answer or solution and choose to accept it, write a paragraph explaining 
why you support the interpretation.
5.	 Find and read e-texts of modern English translations of the Exeter Book 
riddles 91 and 44, found at the http://www.technozen.com/exeter or 
https://theriddleages.wordpress.com/riddles-by-number featured websites.
a.	 Quote from the riddles and identify the narrators’ features. 
b.	 Write a paragraph identifying what you think the riddles mean. 
c.	 Quote some of the riddles’ phrases to give examples of the meaning, 
especially in ways that show you are aiming to understand it. 
d.	 For help with meaning, see other e-texts of these riddles’ modern 
English translations as found at the other featured sites or at additional 
websites at https://netedbooks.wordpress.com/home as cited below. 
e.	 If you guess an answer or solution to the riddles, or if you find a sug­
gested answer or solution and choose to accept it, write your paragraph 
explaining and showing, while including quotations, why you support 
this interpretation.
6.	 Keep in mind what you discovered when doing questions/activities 1, 2,3, 
4, and 5 above.
a.	 Write a short essay. 
b.	 In this essay, suggest how these riddles are connected.
7.	 Keep in mind what you did in questions 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 above.
a.	 Choose another riddle from “The Exeter Book” that you find by 
number at the https://theriddleages.wordpress.com/riddles-by-num­
ber and http://www.technozen.com/exeter featured websites, by 

	
Riddles from “The Exeter Book” (970–1042) by Anonymous
29
subject then number at the https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Anglo-Saxon
_Riddles_of_the_Exeter_Book featured website, by subject/title at 
the additional website, http://elfinspell.com/RiddlesandGnomicVerse.
html, or in various ways at other additional websites such as http://
www.dmoz.org/Arts/Literature/World_Literature/British/Old_English/
Individual_Poems/Exeter_Book_Riddles. 
b.	 Identify what the chosen riddle means or to what it refers. 
c.	 Be sure to quote some of the riddle’s phrases as examples pointing to 
what you think this riddle means. 
d.	 If you guess an answer or solution to riddle, or find a suggested answer 
or solution, and choose to accept it, write your paragraph explaining 
why you support this interpretation. 
e.	 Alternately, choose from among these riddles: 8, 24, 33 (especially 
lines 1–8), 34, 39 (especially lines 1–4, 21–27, 56, 69, and 85, or 
another number); or from the Baum book: Natural Phenomena 7, Birds 
22, Miscellaneous 57, Domestic Subjects, Other Animals, Writing, 
Music 44, Chiefly Christian 12, and others.
8.	 Riddles or the synonym-like runes can also be found in the modern writ­
ings of J. R. R. Tolkien, such as The Hobbit.
a.	 Find three riddles from this work, found online at http://hubpages.com/
literature/The-Riddles-In-The-Hobbit-Riddles-In-The-Dark-Answers; 
www.tolkientrail.com/riddles.shtml; http://www.carlanayland.org/
essays/riddles_word_games.htm; and more in additional websites at 
https://netedbooks.wordpress.com/home as cited below. 
b.	 You may use at least one or all of the riddles that start “a box without 
hinges,” “this thing all things devours,” “it cannot be seen,” or choose 
other ones.
c.	 As you did with the ancient riddles, study these riddles, then write para­
graphs in which you aim to identify what the riddles mean. 
d.	 Be sure to quote some of the riddle’s phrases to provide examples of 
the riddle’s meaning, especially ones that show how you understand it. 
e.	 Tip: If you guess an answer or solution to the riddle, or find a sug­
gested answer or solution, and choose to accept it, write your paragraph 
explaining why you support this interpretation.
9.	 Riddles or their synonym-like runes can be found not only in writings 
from English literature’s beginnings, you can also find them in the Harry 
Potter books popular today.
a.	 Find and read the first page of chapter 1, and pages 9 and 10 of Shira 
Wolosky’s The Riddles of Harry Potter: Secret Passages and Interpretive 
Quests found online after a title search at www.amazon.com and click­
ing the “look inside this book” link and/or doing a search for riddles.

30	
Chapter 5
b.	 Identify the importance of riddles in general and in connection with 
Harry Potter.
c.	 Read the riddle by the third door found online at the ‘JK Rowling 
Lexicon’ website, http://www.hp-lexicon.org/about/sources/jkr.com/
jkr-com-door-instructions.html. 
d.	 As you did with the ancient riddles, study this riddle, then write a 
paragraph in which you aim to identify what the riddle means. 
e.	 Be sure to quote some of the riddle’s phrases to provide examples of 
the riddle’s meaning, especially ones and in ways that show how you 
understand it. 
f.	 If you guess an answer or solution to the riddle, or if you find the sug­
gested answer or solution and choose to accept it, write a paragraph 
explaining why you support this interpretation.
g.	 Be sure (as guided by additional websites below) that riddles found 
online are really Rowling’s riddles from the Harry Potter books, such 
as the sample referred to just above. 
h.	 Who was the character Percival Pratt and what did he have to do with 
riddles?
10.	 U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt had a favorite riddle.
a.	 Find an e-text of this riddle at http://www.innovateus.net/innopedia/
history-riddles or http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Riddle#Charades. 
b.	 Choose a phrase from this riddle. 
c.	 Suggest why it is a good example of what the riddle refers to.
11.	 Think about or look again at what you discovered when doing question 
1 above.
a.	 Be guided by what you read or thought was written about riddles in 
general. 
b.	 Be guided by numbered riddles cited in other questions in this text­
book’s chapter. 
c.	 Think of, then write, a riddle of your own in poem or paragraph form.
Additional websites for chapter 5 with more data to note 
• https://clynjohnson.wordpress.com
{
{ Click link to “Discovering English Literature. . . . Additional Websites,” 
then link to a wordpress.com blog at netedbooks, or go directly to http://
www.netedbooks.wordpress.com/home.

31
Chapter 6
Selections from “The Exeter Book”
At the website called Forgotten Ground Regained: Translations of Allit­
erative and Accentual Poetry, see introductions to the beginnings of English 
literature featuring poetry. 
See links to various translations into modern English of early English 
writings that were written in early versions of the English language, such as 
Old English (also called Anglo-Saxon, with West Saxon and Northumbrian 
dialects) and Early Middle English verse. 
Click left column’s Other Translations link. Find links in right column to 
translations into modern English of Old English poems collected in one of 
English literature’s first books, called “The Exeter Book,” featuring more 
than 150 items including poems, riddles, and religious writings and so titled 
because it was given to Exeter Cathedral Library in 1042 by preserver Bishop 
of Leofric. 
At the Forgotten Ground Regained website, see links to long poems 
including “The Wanderer,” “The Seafarer (975 AD),” “The Ruined City,” 
“The Wife’s Lament,” “The Husband’s Message,” “Rhyming Poem,” and 
more, with translations in modern English by J. R. R. Tolkien, Ezra Pound, 
Eric F. J. Martin, Sean Miller, and others. 
Click Site References link for links to more translations. See literal or 
commonsense translations by Bella Millett, Chauncey B. Tinker, Ann 
Stafford, Michael R. Burke, Ellen Amatangelo, and Charmae Cottom.
See other translations cited in other featured sites above, and additional 
websites below.
See new examples in OE style in modern English by recent poets. See 
W. H. Auden, C. S. Lewis, G. M. Hopkins, Seamus Heaney, and others at 
Modern Revival, alliteration.net site, plus an OE version of Alice in Wonder­
land written by a nineteenth-century scholar.

32	
Chapter 6
FEATURED WEBSITES
• http://alliteration.net/translate.htm
{
{ Click title links for selected Exeter Book poems.
• http://www.northvegr.org/index.html 
• At https://unr440.wordpress.com/2015/09/03/the-exeter-book-introduction-
and-contents
• https://web.archive.org/web/20040607073404/http://www.georgetown
.edu:80/labyrinth/library/oe/exeter.html 
{
{ see modern English title links to OE versions of Exeter Book entries; for 
the Rhyming Poem in a 1922 translation go to https://archive.org/details/
jstor-27702657, click other formats link then html or PDF link; 
• for more selected Exeter Book poems, see 
{
{ http://www.southampton.ac.uk/~enm/widsith.htm; 
{
{ http://www.elfinspell.com/EarlyEnglishHusband.html; 
{
{ http://research.uvu.edu/mcdonald/Anglo-Saxon/wife'slament/wifeother
trans.html
{
{ http://anglosaxonpoetry.blogspot.com/2012/04/order-of-world.html 
{
{ https://unr440.wordpress.com/2015/09/15/the-exeter-book-the-order-of
-the-world
{
{ See also Modern Poetry link at http://alliteration.net 
{
{ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alliterative_verse#Modern_revival
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1.	 Find and read Eric F. J. Martin’s modern English translation, in an e-text 
format, of the Old English poem titled “The Ruined City.”
a.	 Find this e-text online by clicking the title link in the featured website 
at http://alliteration.net/translate.htm. 
b.	 Study the last eleven lines of part 3, then lines 1 through 6. 
c.	 Identify who is referred to, what mood they were in, how they were 
dressed, and which seven things they gazed at, then identify what else 
the narrator imagined that once was in this place. Study the first part, 
line 4 and identify what is referred to.
2.	 Keep in mind the e-text of a modern English translation of The Ruined 
City, found as cited in question/activity 1 above.
a.	 Study part 2, lines 1 through 13. 
b.	 Identify what still endures and shines, yet what has changed and how. 
c.	 Study part 1, lines 2, 11, and 15, plus part 2, lines 4, 9, and 19, then part 
3, lines 7, 10, 16, and 17. 

	
Selections from “The Exeter Book”
33
d.	 Tell what the narrator identified as reasons why the city became a 
“waste place” of ruins (including three types of reasons and examples 
of each).
3.	 Find and read an e-text translation in modern English of excerpts from an 
early English-language work titled Concerning the Ruin of Britain (writ­
ten about 540) by Gildas.
a.	 Find it online directly at http://www.northvegr.org/index.html and 
by following links at http://alliteration.net for site references, Anglo-
Saxon and Norse Literature, Personal Home Pages, Sean Miller’s 
Anglo-Saxon site and its What’s Elsewhere links area and its link to 
Voice of the Shuttle. Then scroll to and click VOS link to NetSerf, then 
click link to NetSerf Resources, then search at NetSerf for Old English 
or Anglo-Saxon, then do Google web search for Works of Gildas, click 
Northvegr link, then Histories and Chronicles link, then works of Gil­
das for his works in translation. 
b.	 Study the excerpts from chapter 23. 
c.	 Identify to which particular happenings or people the writer compared, 
in a metaphoric way: wolves in a sheep fold, a lioness’s lair, darkness 
and the mind, talons, brood, offspring, germ, room, plants, dogs, leaves, 
and branches. 
d.	 Study the excerpts from chapter 25.
e.	 Identify to which happenings and people the writer compared bees and 
their hives. 
f.	 Study the first part, then the second part of excerpts from chapter 26. 
g.	 Identify who and what the writer suggested as patterns for people. 
h.	 Tip: Provide quoted phrases to illustrate what the writer was referring to.
4.	 Find and read an e-text of a modern English translation (e.g., Sean Miller’s) 
of the Old English poem “The Wanderer.”
a.	 Find this e-text by clicking title link at http://alliteration.net/translate
.htm. 
b.	 Find and read online definitions and examples of a kenning (a liter­
ary device used in Old English or Anglo Saxon literature), at http://
www.poeticbyway.com/gl-k.html, http://www.cyberartsweb.org/cpace/
ht/knots/Kennings.html, http://www.davidgsimpson.com/ref/kennings
.pdf, http://literarydevices.net/kenning, https://vikingsbooksetc.word
press.com/2013/03/21/skaldic-poetry-and-eddic-poetry (scroll to “Skal­
dic poetry also involves especially prominent use of kennings”); then list 
three definitions of a kenning and provide two examples each of modern 
translators’ translations of kennings, such as those by Seamus Heaney, 
Ezra Pound, and Robert Frost. 
c.	 Study “The Wanderer,” especially lines between about 8a and 16a. 

34	
Chapter 6
d.	 Identify what the narrator refers to in the line that begins “I know it 
truly,” while referring to two examples of a kenning. 
e.	 Study lines around 46a through 72a. 
f.	 What happens when the narrator refers to the mind surveying 
something? 
g.	 What do the spirits of seafarers never bring back? 
h.	 What does the narrator think about his spirit when he ponders on the 
life of people throughout the world?
5.	 Study further the e-text of the modern English translation beside the 
OE version of “The Wanderer,” found online by clicking title link at http://
alliteration.net/translate.htm.
a.	 Study especially lines 46a through 72a, found as cited in question 3 
above. 
b.	 Keep in mind that J. R. R. Tolkien quoted part of this poem in his Lord 
of the Rings stories, as stated at the bottom of the featured website cited 
just above. 
c.	 What is so about Middle Earth? Why can’t a man call himself wise? 
What must a wise man be, not be, and before what? 
d.	 Study lines 88a through 96a. 
e.	 What does the narrator say of “he who thought wisely” and “pondered 
deeply”? 
f.	 Study lines 100a through 112a. 
g.	 What does the narrator say about “the famous fate” and how nature is 
involved?
6.	 Keep an e-text of a modern English translation of “The Wanderer” in 
mind, online by clicking the title link at the featured website, http://
alliteration.net/translate.htm.
a.	 Choose a passage from this translation. 
b.	 Find another modern English translation or two not used in questions 
3 and 4 above and found online as cited in the additional websites 
section below. 
c.	 Quote some phrases from the chosen passage as you tell how the pas­
sage’s meaning may be different and similar because of translators’ 
individual interpretations.
7.	 Find and read an e-text of a modern English translation of the Old English 
poem “The Seafarer” (e.g., Sean Miller’s), found by clicking title link at 
http://alliteration.net/translate.htm.
a.	 Study the beginning of the poem through about line 16a, then study 
lines around 16a through about 24a, and around line 52a. 
b.	 What does the narrator say about himself? Identify some examples he 
gave. 

	
Selections from “The Exeter Book”
35
c.	 Tell which seven birds he mentioned and what he liked about them, 
instead of what else. 
d.	 Study lines around 28a through about 40a and 44a through about 52a. 
e.	 How does the narrator compare sea life and life on the land? 
f.	 What does a land dweller “credit little” about a seafarer’s life? 
g.	 What does the seafarer say about the life he lived? 
h.	 Study around lines 72a through 80a. 
i.	 What did the narrator see as “the best epitaph”? 
j.	 Study lines just past line 108a, plus lines around line 116a and some 
following lines.
k.	 Identify four things that man must keep and be, then what is greater 
and who is mightier than any man’s thoughts, and what should be 
pondered.
8.	 Still keep in mind an e-text of a modern English translation of “The 
Seafarer”, found by clicking the title link at http://alliteration.net/trans
late.htm.
a.	 Choose a passage from it. 
b.	 Find another modern English translation or two not used in question/
activity 6 above. Search sites cited in the additional websites below. 
c.	 Quote some phrases as you tell how the chosen passage’s meaning 
may be different and yet similar because of the translators’ individual 
interpretations. 
d.	 Compare a phrase translated by Miller with one translated by Ezra 
Pound, found by following a link, then searching via http://alliteration
.net/translate.htm, or go directly to http://rpo.library.utoronto.ca/poems/
seafarer.
9.	 Find and read an e-text of a modern English translation of the poem 
“Widsith.”
a.	 Find this e-text, for this other work in The Exeter Book, as provided 
in 2003 by Bella Millett at http://www.southampton.ac.uk/~enm/
widsith.htm. 
b.	 Study lines 1 through 7, 50 through 56, 94 through 108, 130 through 
134, then 135 through 139. 
c.	 As you quote phrases from this poem, identify what the main charac­
ter did when he spoke, where he went, what he did on his travels and 
when he came back, then what he said about his occupation.
10.	 Find and read an e-text of a modern English translation of “The Wife’s 
Lament.”
a.	 http://research.uvu.edu/mcdonald/Anglo-Saxon/wife’slament/wifeo
thertrans.html find a modern English e-text translation by Robert E. 
Diamond. 

36	
Chapter 6
b.	 Study verse 1 (except the last line). 
c.	 Why is the wife as narrator writing this poem? 
d.	 Study verses 2 and 3.
e.	 Why is the wife’s husband absent? What does the wife try to do? What 
obstacles must she cope with? Why? 
f.	 Study the last line of verse 1, and line 20 and the last three lines of 
verse 3, and the last two lines of the last verse (verse 5). 
g.	 Quote from the poem as you tell about what bothers the wife. 
h.	 Study lines 1 through 7 of the poem’s last verse. 
i.	 Quoting some phrases, identify two situations, one of which the wife 
thinks may be the reason for her husband’s continued absence. How 
does she believe he is reacting to it?
11.	 Keep question/activity 10 above in mind as you find and read an e-text of 
a modern English translation of “The Husband’s Message.”
a.	 Find this e-text online at http://www.elfinspell.com/EarlyEnglishHus
band.html.
b.	 Suggest how, as scholars have commented, this poem answers “The 
Wife’s Lament.”
c.	 Suggest why the message, or the object on which it is delivered, as 
narration or narrator, is effective.
12.	 Find and read an e-text of a modern English translation of “The ­Rhyming 
Poem.”
a.	 Find this e-text at the https://archive.org/details/jstor-27702657 fea­
tured web page. 
b.	 Study lines 1–35, 40–42; 36–39, 43–69, and 70 with the following 
lines, especially 73–74.
c.	 Write an essay. What is the narrator saying in each group of lines? 
Suggest how one part of a line works with another line part to define 
and show examples of what he wants to say.
13.	 Find and read excerpts from e-text of a modern English translation of 
“Order of the World.”
a.	 Find the translation at http://anglosaxonpoetry.blogspot.com/2012/04/
order-of-world.html. 
b.	 It is claimed that this poem, in part, “provides the reader with a com­
plex depiction . . . a self-portrait . . . of the Anglo-Saxon poet . . . 
influenced by themes of . . . self-assurance, exploration and the power 
of poetry as a craft,” plus something of the religious.
c.	 Read the third stanza and scan other lines in this thirteen-stanza poem. 
d.	 Write an essay. Quote from the third stanza and from other parts of 
the poem’s translation, as well as from the quotation in b) just above. 

	
Selections from “The Exeter Book”
37
Describe how a portrait of an Anglo-Saxon poet is depicted, what “the 
power of poetry” is, and how that power affects that poet. 
e.	 Tell how this poem helps you understand the first English poets and 
their writings. 
14.	 Read modern creations of poems written in the style of Old English 
poetry.
a.	 Click the Modern Poetry or Fantasy Poetry link at http://alliteration
.net/index.htm featured site. Look for poems by J. R. R. Tolkien, 
G. M. Hopkins, Ezra Pound, P. K. Page, and others. 
b.	 Choose one poem by one of these modern poets.
c.	 Write an essay. Suggest the features from Old English poetry that you 
find in this modern poem. Suggest why the modern poem written in 
the format of Old English poetry helps to convey what the poet wanted 
to say.
Additional websites for chapter 6 with more data to note
• https://clynjohnson.wordpress.com
{
{ Click link to “Discovering English Literature . . . Additional Websites,” 
then link to a wordpress.com blog at netedbooks, or go directly to http://
www.netedbooks.wordpress.com/home.


Section II
 FOURTEENTH, FIFTEENTH, AND 
SIXTEENTH CENTURIES—POETRY


41
Chapter 7
Selections from 
The Canterbury Tales
It is thought that the fourteenth-century English writer Geoffrey Chaucer, 
who lived from 1343 until 1400, was the first author to write literary works 
in the English language, especially his The Canterbury Tales. By doing this, 
he transformed this language from a language only for illiterate or lower-class 
people into a literary language equal to that time’s other literary languages 
such as Latin and Italian. 
Manuscript of the parts Tales were distributed and read in the 1380s but 
first published in 1476. 
E-texts of two original versions plus authoritative user-friendly versions 
now exist and are provided online. Original Caxton versions are at a featured 
British Library web page. A Harvard University featured website has e-texts 
of the Tales in an original Middle English version with lines in modern 
English interwoven in an “interlinear version,” with each line’s translation 
placed below the line it translates. Sections’ side-by-side original and modern 
English versions are at libirius.com. 
A reader-friendly version has modernized spelling, explains unusual words 
at right of the text and in a glossary, and is in an e-document by Michael 
Murphy of Brooklyn College, part of the City University of New York. The 
Prologue in the original English plus links to explanations of unusual words 
can be found at the Librarius featured website and the Brooklyn College site 
with modern explanatory English words in the right margin.
More featured sites to assist studies of Chaucer and his works in e-text 
format include The Electronic Canterbury Tales companion, Essays and 
Articles on Chaucer at the Luminarium website; at the Chaucer MetaPage; 
plus a Chaucer Glossary to medieval English words and modern English 
equivalents.

42	
Chapter 7
FEATURED WEBSITES 
• www.bl.uk/treasures/caxton/homepage.html
{
{ Two original Caxton versions in old type with explanation of Caxton’s 
English, www.libarius.com/cantales.htm.
{
{ See original Caxton version with original words but in modern type 
and see side-by-side section translations of Middle English and modern 
English at www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~chaucer/teachslf/tr-index.htm.
{
{ See interlinear translations with one line then a translation, then another 
line and a translation; see e-text of modernized spelling version with 
unusual words explained at right of text at http://academic.brooklyn
.cuny.edu/webcore/murphy/canterbury/2genpro.pdf.
{
{ See modern English at left and Early English at right, section by section, 
of the Tales at http://pages.towson.edu/duncan/chaucer/duallang1.htm.
• “General prologue” to the Tales with links to explanations of unusual 
words at www.librarius.com/cantales/genpro.htm and through link at 
Chaucer Online/Electronic Canterbury Tales Companion at http://www
.kankedort.net;
• Chaucer as “Father of English Poetry,” commentaries on tales, at www
.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~chaucer/special/authors/dryden/dry-intr.html and 
at www.bartleby.com/190/8.html (scroll to last third of fifth paragraph at 
page’s bottom);
• www.luminarium.org/medlit/chaucessays.htm see links to essays/articles 
on Chaucer;
• Chaucer Glossary at www.literature-dictionary.org/Chaucers-Middle-
English-Glossary;
• MetaPage with links to more sites http://englishcomplit.unc.edu/chaucer/
index.html.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES 
1.	 Find and read an e-text in a modern English translation of the “General 
Prologue” to The Canterbury Tales by Geoffrey Chaucer.
a.	 Find a literal translation at the featured Harvard University website 
cited above or look for a poetic translation at another featured website. 
Note versions at the Brooklyn College, Towson College, and Librarius 
featured websites.
b.	 Identify, including quotations, what, according to the narrator, inspired 
people to go on pilgrimages, and when, as he stated in the first section 
of the prologue.

	
Selections from The Canterbury Tales
43
2.	 Keep in mind Chaucer’s prologue to his Canterbury Tales, as referred 
to in the Harvard University, Brooklyn College, Towson College, and 
Librarius featured websites.
a.	 Identify what the narrator said in the first part of the last part of the 
prologue about the way he will tell the tales of the people who are 
going on a pilgrimage. 
b.	 Do you agree or disagree, in whole or in part, with what he said? Com­
ment on why you think this way. 
c.	 Identify what the narrator says was said by the ancient philosopher and 
writer Plato. Comment on why Plato’s comment is important.
3.	 Keep in mind Chaucer’s prologue to his Canterbury Tales and the nar­
rator’s descriptions of the people going on a pilgrimage, as referred to in 
the featured websites at Harvard University, Brooklyn College, Towson 
College, and Librarius.
a.	 Identify the people who will go on the trip. 
b.	 Choose three of the travelers, then quote a few phrases that the narrator 
used to describe each traveler you chose. 
c.	 Why do you think these quoted words give very vivid descriptions of 
each traveler? 
d.	 Tip: Identify a knight, a squire, a prioress, a wife of Bath, or a clerk, 
and some others, and then choose any of them as the three travelers of 
your choice.
4.	 Still keep in mind Chaucer’s prologue as referred to in the Harvard 
University, Brooklyn College, Towson College, and Librarius featured 
websites.
a.	 How did the narrator/host choose the first traveler to tell a tale? 
b.	 How did the chosen traveler react to his being the first in the group to 
tell a story? 
c.	 Imagine you, or some person of note, being chosen as the first tale teller 
during a trip. 
d.	 How would you react, or how do you think the person you chose would 
react? 
e.	 Would the tale you tell, or the tale the person you chose would tell, be 
influenced by being the first tale teller? Why or why not?
5.	 Scholars say Chaucer’s The Canterbury Tales may be called a representa­
tion of the people and society of his time.
a.	 Keep in mind basic features and characters of Chaucer’s The Canter­
bury Tales. 
b.	 Imagine a trip today taken by a group of people. Suggest where today’s 
travelers may go, why, and how. 
c.	 Identify three to six people in this group. How may they represent 
today’s society?

44	
Chapter 7
d.	 Suggest a story each person in the group could tell the others during 
the trip.
e.	 Tips: For one person, write a poem that introduces or starts a story that 
she or he might tell; for another person, write, in poem or story form, a 
tale that he or she might tell.
6.	 Think of the women described in the prologue to The Canterbury Tales as 
referred to in question/activity 3 above.
a.	 Compare the women travelers. Tell what you think of them (i.e., how 
they may be representative of the women, or some women, in the soci­
ety of Chaucer’s time). 
b.	 Is there a type of woman of that time who may not be represented 
among the travelers?
c.	 Compare some of the women travelers with some of the women in the 
tales (e.g., Cecilia, Ypolita and Emily, Prudence, Griselda, Dorigan, 
Guinevere and an old woman, and Custance, in the tales told by the 
Second Nun, the Knight, Melibee, the Clerk, Franklin, Wife of Bath, 
and Man of Law). 
d.	 Suggest a type of woman you think may not be represented in the tales.
7.	 Find 	and read an e-text in a modern English translation of “The Canon’s 
Yeoman’s Tale,” one of The Canterbury Tales by Geoffrey Chaucer.
a.	 Find an e-text online at the Brooklyn College featured website, http://
academic.brooklyn.cuny.edu/webcore/murphy/canterbury/2genpro.
pdf.
b.	 Note especially in the first part the references to the search for the phi­
losopher’s stone in lines 309 through 325, with special attention to the 
last eleven lines in this passage. 
c.	 What does the thing cause seekers of the stone to do? What comes, 
however? Where? How? 
d.	 What is hard? What should one be warned about? What is usually the 
result or outcome?
8.	 Keep in mind Chaucer’s “Canon’s Yeoman’s” Tale, found as cited in 
question 7 above.
a.	 Note, in the tale’s second part, references to the philosopher’s stone’s 
secret recipe (i.e., in lines 889 through 918). 
b.	 Identify what people should not busy themselves with, unless philoso­
phers do what? 
c.	 Why did he say it or quote someone who said it? 
d.	 Identify what should be kept secret. Why? 
e.	 What, did the storyteller say, are philosophers sworn to do? 
f.	 Who is the one who should know and why? 
g.	 Why do you think, what the storyteller said or quoted, makes sense or 
has good points?

	
Selections from The Canterbury Tales
45
9.	 Find and read an e-text, in a modern English translation, of Chaucer’s 
prologue to “The Nun’s Priest’s Tale,” and then “The Nun’s Priest Tale” 
(another of the Canterbury Tales), found online at the Brooklyn College 
featured website http://academic.brooklyn.cuny.edu/webcore/murphy/
canterbury/2genpro.pdf.
a.	 Including quotations, identify what, in response to the previous tale 
teller’s story, the knight said is a bad tale and a good tale, then identify 
the host’s phrase that refers negatively to the previous tale teller’s tale. 
b.	 Next, tell about the story that the nun’s priest told. 
c.	 Tips: Identify the tale’s main character, what predicament he found 
himself in, and how he was able to get out of that bad situation. What 
comments did he make that are called morals (i.e., something impor­
tant that one can learn from the tale)?
10.	 Find and read an e-text, in a modern English translation of “The 
Manciple’s Tale,” another Canterbury Tales by Geoffrey Chaucer.
a.	 Find this e-text online at the Brooklyn College featured website http://
academic.brooklyn.cuny.edu/webcore/murphy/canterbury/2genpro.pdf.
b.	 Who is a manciple? 
c.	 What did he say about a caged bird?
11.	 Find and read, in a modern English translation, an e-text of “The Parson’s 
Tale,” another one of Geoffrey Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales.
a.	 Find this e-text online at the Brooklyn College featured website, http://
academic.brooklyn.cuny.edu/webcore/murphy/canterbury/2genpro
.pdf.
b.	 Of what did this traveler want to remind the other travelers? 
c.	 Suggest what you believe he meant and then what his statement means 
to you. 
d.	 Support your comments with examples you think of from your life, 
the lives of people you know, or other people in today’s society.
12.	 Literary critics, including John Donne of the seventeenth century and Sir 
Arthur Quiller-Couch of the twentieth century, claimed Chaucer was the 
father of English poetry.
a.	 Find claim at www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~chaucer/special/authors/
dryden/dry-intr.html featured web page with comments by John 
Dryden and comments in the fifth paragraph from the bottom of the 
page at the www.bartleby.com/190/8.html featured web page of On 
Lineage of English Language by Quiller-Couch. 
b.	 Identify comments Donne and Quiller-Couch stated to support their 
view. 
c.	 Quote from The Canterbury Tales to illustrate and support what both 
critics claimed.

46	
Chapter 7
Additional websites for chapter 7 with more data to note 
• https://clynjohnson.wordpress.com
{
{ Click link to “Discovering English Literature . . . Additional Websites,” 
then link to a wordpress.com blog at netedbooks, or go directly to http://
www.netedbooks.wordpress.com/home.

47
Chapter 8 
Selections from The Faerie Queene
At the Edmund Spenser Online website offered by England’s Cambridge 
University, click links under Scholarly Resources to online texts, a critical 
bibliography, a biography, and a discussion list, for this noted sixteenth-
century renaissance-era English writer living 1522–1599. 
See also links to critical analysis periodicals including Spenser Review 
with links to issues online, plus Spenser Studies with abstracts/synopses of 
its issues’ articles; and more. 
On the online text pages, note a link to a website such as Renascence 
Editions (now at http://www.luminarium.org/renascence-editions/fqintro
.html and at Scholars Bank at the University of Oregon website, https://
scholarsbank.uoregon.edu/xmlui/handle/1794/784). Also note the Spenser 
Page at the University of Toronto Library’s Representative Poetry Online 
now at http://rpo.library.utoronto.ca/poets/spenser-edmund. 
Note also the University of Vermont’s Spenserians website’s translation 
with original English and detailed descriptions of the various parts of The 
Faerie Queene. 
At http://search.lib.virginia.edu/catalog see the University of Virginia’s 
Modern English Collection with link to Spenser’s Works, such as his poems, 
sonnets, and The Faerie Queene, all featuring e-texts in an early English 
language. 
See also e-texts for The Shepheardes Calendar, Complaints Containing 
Sundrie Small Poems of the Worlds Vanitie, including Cantos of Mutabilitie, 
Fowre Hymnes, and more. 
See critics’ views at Luminarium’s Renaissance Essays: Edumund Spenser 
and other sites, and note C. S. Lewis’s commentaries cited and quoted in 
featured web sites just below.

48	
Chapter 8
FEATURED WEBSITES 
• www.english.cam.ac.uk/spenseronline/welcome
{
{ See links for Spenser Review, Spenser Studies, and Scholarly Resources 
Online Texts, or go directly to Renaissance Edition’s Faerie Queene at 
http://www.luminarium.org/renascence-editions/fqintro.html. 
{
{ Or Scholar Bank’s Faerie Queene at https://scholarsbank.uoregon.edu/
xmlui/handle/1794/784.
• See Spenser’s stories retold for young readers by Jeanie Lang (n.d.) 
at www.gutenberg.org/files/41350/41350-h/41350-h.htm and by Mary 
McCleod (1916) at www.sacred-texts.com/neu/eng/sfq. 
• See e-texts of the prologue for Spenser’s Faerie Queene at http://www.sca
.org.au/bardic/vocal/poems/a_gentile_knight.html and http://www.sacred-
texts.com/neu/eng/fq/fq03.html.
• See versions of Faerie Queene meant to make the meanings and language 
of the tales more accessible at http://spenserians.cath.vt.edu/TextRecord
.php?textsid=35115.
{
{ Click author, click titles, and note http://spenserians.cath.vt.edu/Text
Record.php?textsid=34525, with notes from The Faerie Queene: A 
New Edition with a Glossary, and Notes Explanatory and Critical 1758 
by John Upton, and note revisions cited at www.amazon.com; http://
anthony.sogang.ac.kr/books/Ren3.htm (see some modern English words 
in margin). See reading guides for Faerie Queene at https://www.guten­
berg.org/files/6930/6930.txt, http://socrates.acadiau.ca/courses/engl/
rcunningham/2273/FQ-ReadingAid.html, and https://en.wikisource.org/
wiki/The_Faerie_Queene/Book_I/Glossary. 
• See critics’ views at http://www.luminarium.org/renlit/spenseressay.htm 
via links and at http://web.archive.org/web/20030220153900/, http://www
.dbu.edu/mitchell/spensers.htm.
• See C. S. Lewis on Spenser in Studies in Medieval and Renaissance Litera­
ture (1966) after book title search, search inside book for Spenser, at www
.amazon.com (e.g., page 146) and in phrases (e.g., Lewis’s statement on 
critical interpretations “only use” quoted in highlighted box, then Lewis’s 
tracing “Spenser’s understanding of natural growth” at center of medievalm­
vb’s dissertation) at https://medievalmvb.wordpress.com/2014/06/18/read
ing-c-s-lewis-on-spensers-use-of-allegory-in-the-faery-queene. Spenser 
and Literary Devices at https://prezi.com/9jhbrcyfzak2/literary-devices-
of-the-faerie-queene, https://orangemanor.wordpress.com/2010/08/12/
spenser%E2%80%94the-faerie-queene, and www.theartsjournal.org/index
.php/site/article/download/126/123.

	
Selections from The Faerie Queene
49
• Spenserian sonnet defined at http://www.literarydevices.com/sonnet, http://
www.sonnets.org/basicforms.htm and http://www.sonnets.org/glossary
.htm#195. 
• Spenserian Stanza defined at www.english.emory.edu/classes/Handbook/
Spenserian.html, 
http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/Terms/spense
rian.html, and http://www.gutenberg.org/files/15272/15272-h/15272-h
.htm#Intro_III.4. 
• Title links to Spenser’s poems at www.sanjeev.net/poetry/spenser-edmund/
index.html and at Representative Poets Online, http://rpo.library.uto
ronto.ca/poets/spenser-edmund and http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/
edmund-spenser (click poems link, then title links).
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES 
1.	 Find and read an e-text of book I of Edmund Spenser’s The Faerie 
Queene.
a.	 Find this e-text online at http://www.luminarium.org/renascence-
editions/fqintro.html or https://scholarsbank.uoregon.edu/xmlui/han­
dle/1794/784, both accessible formerly through links for online pages 
at the Spenser Online featured website cited above. 
b.	 Identify seven main characters, their names and characteristics, what 
they represent or personify, and what is each one’s purpose. 
c.	 Provide quotations to support your claims. 
d.	 Hint: Read of the traits of one main character as told by other main 
characters, in book I, canto ix, verses 13 through 16, and in book II, 
canto ix, verses 3 through 6, as told by another main character.
2.	 Keep in mind Spenser’s portrayal of the character of the Faerie Queene, as 
referred to in question/activity l above:
a.	 Identify a noteworthy person of the present or recent past. 
b.	 Write a poem suggesting how this person may influence or have an 
effect on someone, maybe you or someone like you, and cause that 
someone to do something, either directly involving that person or 
something that person represents.
3.	 Find and read an e-text of the introduction to book III of Spenser’s The 
Faerie Queene.
a.	 Find this e-text online at http://www.luminarium.org/renascence-
editions/fqintro.html or https://scholarsbank.uoregon.edu/xmlui/
handle/1794/784, both accessible formerly through links for online 
pages at the Spenser Online featured website cited above.

50	
Chapter 8
b.	 Identify what the young Britomart saw one day in the mirror in her 
father’s room. 
c.	 Why is this mirror unusual? Why did her father have it? Where did he 
get it? 
d.	 Why did Britomart go to a cave? What did she discover there? 
e.	 What reason did Britomart give for a journey she went on after these 
happenings? 
f.	 Note: Include quotes in your answers. 
g.	 Hint: See book III, part 2, verses 3, 7, 8, and 17 through 26.
4.	 Find and read the introductory verses of the e-texts of book II, book IV 
(also sometimes identified as Book IIII), book V, and book VI of Spens­
er’s The Faerie Queene.
a.	 Find this e-text online at http://www.luminarium.org/renascence-
editions/fqintro.html or https://scholarsbank.uoregon.edu/xmlui/
handle/1794/784, both accessible formerly through links for online 
pages at the Spenser Online featured website cited above. 
b.	 Identify each book and its character that portrays Justice, Friendship, 
Courtesy, and Temperance, citing each one’s early English spelling. 
c.	 Quoting from the verses, identify a feature of each of these virtues and 
the character who is its personification.
5.	 Find and read an e-text of the Faerie Queene, book II, canto ix, on a castle 
called The House of Temperance.
a.	 Find this e-text online at http://www.luminarium.org/renascence
-editions/fqintro.html or https://scholarsbank.uoregon.edu/xmlui/
handle/1794/784, both accessible formerly through links for online 
pages at the Spenser Online featured website cited above. 
b.	 Identify what the castle represents. What are some features of the 
castle’s structure? 
c.	 What are two types of things the crowd of people at the castle’s 
entrance represent? 
d.	 What do the three rooms in the castle’s tower represent? 
e.	 Who are the people in those castle rooms? What do they do? 
f.	 Hint: Note verses 1 and 10, last part of verse 44 and so on to end of 
canto ix.
6.	 Spenser’s Faerie Queene has been called an allegory with sub-allegories.
a.	 Find e-text definitions of allegory; some connected to the ­Faerie 
Queene, at the websites http://www.bartleby.com/213/1112.html, 
http://www.shmoop.com/faerie-queene/allegory-symbol.html, https://
prezi.com/9jhbrcyfzak2/literary-devices-of-the-faerie-queene, http://
www.jstor.org/stable/27702688?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents, plus 
critical analysis pages at www.bartleby.com found via resources page 
link at http://www.luminarium.org/renlit/spenlink.htm. 

	
Selections from The Faerie Queene
51
b.	 What are an allegory’s features? 
c.	 How is the Faerie Queene, book I an allegory; does it have sub-
allegories? Quote examples. 
d.	 Find other literary devices (e.g., other than allegory, Spenser stanza, 
Spenserian sonnet) in The Faerie Queene. See definitions at www.poetry
foundation.org/learning/glossary-terms?category=techniques-and-fig
ures-of-speech and devices Spenser used described at www.theartsjournal
.org/index.php/site/article/download/126/123 and https://orangemanor
.wordpress.com/2010/08/12/spenser%E2%80%94the-faerie-queene.
e.	 Write an essay in which you define three other literary devices (e.g., 
irony, ambiguity, epic, imitation, eclogue, pastoral) and how they 
appear in Spenser works. Give Spenser quotes.
7.	 Find and read e-texts of comments on Spenser by scholars through time.
a.	 Note for example: Spenser As a Word Painter and Metrical Musi­
cian and Poetry of Spenser, Its Design by Courthope at www.bartleby
.com/213; George Saintsbury’s Spenser’s Mission at http://www
.bartleby.com/213/1311.html; Spenser’s Narrative Imagery: Visual 
Structure of The Faerie Queene by Josephine McMurtry via www
.luminarium.org/renlit/spenseressay.htm. “In his charming introduction 
to Spenser . . . C. S. Lewis describes three ways to begin one’s acquain­
tance with Faerie Queene” at www.catholiceducation.org/en/culture/
art/reading-the-classics-with-c-s-lewis.html; C. S. Lewis on Spenser’s 
Faerie Queene at http://badgermum.blogspot.com/2014/05/c-s-lewis
-on-spensers-faerie-queene.html; C.S. Lewis on Spenser in Studies in 
Medieval and Renaissance Literature (1966) after a book title search, 
then search inside the book for Spenser, at www.amazon.com including 
page 146, then see https://medievalmvb.wordpress.com/2014/06/18/
reading-c-s-lewis-on-spensers-use-of-allegory-in-the-faery-queene; 
Woolway’s Spenser and the Culture of Place at https://extra.shu.ac.uk/
emls/iemls/conf/texts/woolway.html and at http://web.archive.org/
web/20010522163346/, http://www.dbu.edu/mitchell/spenserl.htm see 
Spenser's Didactic Purpose in Book One of THE FAERIE QUEENE, 
plus more critical essays on The Faerie Queene at www.lumina
rium.org/renlit/spenseressay.htm, Critics on Spenser’s Style at http://
web.archive.org/web/20030220153900/http://www.dbu.edu/mitch
ell/spensers.htm, and http://www.enotes.com/topics/faerie-queene/
critical-essays. 
b.	 Choose and identify three scholars’ viewpoints. 
c.	 Write an essay in which you suggest how these scholars’ viewpoints 
help you understand Spenser’s works. Quote from Spenser’s and these 
scholars’ works.

52	
Chapter 8
8.	 Find and read an e-text of the first verse, then the introductory verse, of 
the e-text of canto VI of Spenser’s Cantos of Mutabilitie.
a.	 Find links to e-texts of these Cantos of Mutabilitie below the 
Faerie Queene Cantos at http://www.luminarium.org/renascence-
editions/fqintro.html or https://scholarsbank.uoregon.edu/xmlui/han
dle/1794/784, both accessible formerly through links for online pages 
at the Spenser Online featured website cited above.
b.	 Quote from these e-text excerpts as you identify what Spenser meant 
by Mutabilitie. 
c.	 Provide one of Spenser’s examples (from any of the other verses in 
Canto VI) of what he was writing about. 
d.	 Suggest your own example. 
e.	 Why do you think your example fits what Spenser wrote about?
9.	 Find and read e-texts of two of Edmund Spenser’s Complaints, such as 
those titled Visions of the Worlds Vanities and The Ruines of Time.
a.	 Find these e-texts at http://www.luminarium.org/renascence-editions/
complaints.html and https://scholarsbank.uoregon.edu/xmlui/han
dle/1794/813, available formerly through the link for online pages at 
the Spenser Online featured website cited above. 
b.	 Identify, as you quote from each Complaint, how Spenser defined 
what each poem’s title suggests. 
c.	 Include one example for each one that he provided.
d.	 Suggest your own examples, one for each Complaint, that you think of 
from today’s world and that you believe aptly exemplifies the defini­
tions he provided. 
e.	 Keep d) just above in mind. Why do you think so?
10.	 Find and read an e-text of the introduction, plus the e-texts for April, Octo­
ber, and December, of Edmund Spenser’s The Shepheardes Calendar.
a.	 Find these e-texts at http://www.luminarium.org/renascence-editions/
shepheard.html and https://scholarsbank.uoregon.edu/xmlui/han
dle/1794/833, both available formerly through the online pages link at 
the Spenser Online featured website. 
b.	 Identify, while including quotations, what Spenser referred to in the 
Introduction. 
c.	 Who and what are important in Spenser’s April passages from the 
Shepheardes Calendar? 
d.	 What did Spenser define, and how, in the October passages from the 
Calendar? 
e.	 What did Spenser refer to in the December passages of the Calendar? 

	
Selections from The Faerie Queene
53
11.	 Edmund Spenser created a sonnet format now known as the Spenserian 
Sonnet.
a.	 Find descriptions of the Spenserian Sonnet online at the Sonnet Cen­
tral featured website at http://www.sonnets.org/basicforms.htm and 
http://www.sonnets.org/glossary.htm#195 then at http://www.liter
arydevices.com/sonnet. 
b.	 What are the Spenserian sonnet’s features? 
c.	 See e-text samples online of this sonnet format in Spenser’s son­
nets, such as “Most Happy Letters (Amoretti LXXIV),” “One Day 
I Wrote Her Name (Amoretti LXXV),” found online at the featured 
websites http://www.literarydevices.com/sonnet, http://www.sanjeev.
net/poetry/spenser-edmund/index.html, http://rpo.library.utoronto.ca/
poets/spenser-edmund, http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/edmund
-spenser, www.sonnets.org/spenser.htm, and http://www.webexhibits
.org/poetry/explore_famous_sonnet_examples.html. 
d.	 Suggest how the Spenserian sonnet format’s features help to bring out 
the theme in one of these Spenserian sonnets. 
e.	 Hints: As you work with these poems, note in the first poem what 
he wrote about the written word and how he described (together and 
individually) three women who had the same name and how they were 
important to him in different ways; in the second poem, identify what 
he tried to do, what thwarted him, what a woman said to him about 
what he was doing, and how he strongly defended his action.
12.	 Keep in mind what you did for question/activity 11 above.
a.	 Study first two lines of e-texts of “Most Happy Letters” and line 10 
from that poem, then, from “One Day I Wrote Her Name,” second part 
of line 10 and all of line 11. 
b.	 Applying ideas that Spenser suggested in these lines, write two sonnets 
either on yourself and your life, or to someone else and that person’s 
life. 
c.	 Note: You may replace “name” with any appropriate word when fol­
lowing what was written in the first poem.
13.	 Spenser wrote another form of poetry now named for him: the Spenserian 
Stanza.
a.	 Find definitions and examples from Spenser’s works online at the 
featured websites, http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/Terms/spense
rian.html for Jack Lynch’s Guide to Literary Terms, and Emory 
University’s A  Handbook of Terms for Discussing Poetry at http://
www.english.emory.edu/classes/Handbook/Spenserian.html, and an 
introduction at http://www.gutenberg.org/files/15272/15272-h/15272-
h.htm#Intro_III.4.

54	
Chapter 8
b.	 Identify the Spenserian Stanza’s features. 
c.	 To show your understanding of this poetic form, quote from the exam­
ples provided at the websites, or from other examples among e-texts of 
his works you can find online.
d.	 Write a poem on any subject in the style of the Spenserian Stanza.
14.	 Think of the language of Spenser’s works. It is an early, but readable, 
form of English that is similar to, yet different from, modern English. 
Reading an original early English version of a Spenser story can be con­
fusing, unless one has a glossary of early English words, reading guides, 
line-by-line translations, and/or parts in translation side by side, with 
early and modern English versions, or retellings in modern English.
a.	 Look at the http://spenserians.cath.vt.edu/TextRecord.php?textsid=
34525 website with an authoritative e-text of a late sixteenth-century 
version of The Faerie Queene with modernized spelling of early 
English words plus explanatory notes beside original English text. See 
https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/The_Faerie_Queene/Book_I/Glossary 
and use it with the www.luminarium.org/renascence-editions/fqintro
.html or https://scholarsbank.uoregon.edu/xmlui/handle/1794/784 
featured e-texts. Scroll to modern English words in right margin at 
http://anthony.sogang.ac.kr/books/Ren3.htm; see some retellings 
at www.gutenberg.org/files/41350/41350-h/41350-h.htm and at www.
sacred-texts.com/neu/eng/sfq; and read the e-text article on How to 
Read The Faerie Queene at www.english.cam.ac.uk/spenseronline/
review/item/44.3.56. 
b.	 Read book I, canto 1, verse i, of Faerie Queene, starting “A gentle 
knight. . . .” 
c.	 Write an essay. Suggest how unfamiliar words you’ve found modern 
English words for, in glossaries or retellings or translations, enrich 
your reading of Spenser.
Additional websites for chapter 8 with more data to note 
• https://clynjohnson.wordpress.com
{
{ click link to “Discovering English Literature . . . Additional Web Sites,” 
then link to a wordpress.com blog at netedbooks, or go directly to http://
www.netedbooks.wordpress.com/home.

Section III
SIXTEENTH AND SEVENTEENTH 
CENTURIES—DRAMA


57
Chapter 9 
Selections from Shakespeare’s Plays
The Comedies
On the pages of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology website, the first 
featured site, see the first e-texts of The Complete Works of Shakespeare, 
including his plays in categories that identify the types of plays (i.e., Comedy, 
History, and Tragedy) as first done in 1623. 
Under Comedy, see links to e-texts of the plays alphabetically (e.g., All’s 
Well That Ends Well, Cymbeline, Measure for Measure, A Midsummer 
Night’s Dream, Much Ado About Nothing, The Tempest, Twelfth Night, and 
The Winter’s Tale). 
Click a title link to go to links to acts and scenes of each comedy.
At the Shakesper.net featured website, note Scholarly Resources, links 
under Launching Points, BlogRoll, Life, Globe, Pedagogical, Research Sites, 
Concordances, Journals, and more. 
At the BardWebNet Shakespeare Resource Center featured website, note 
links to Shakespearean Study, SRC Features, Reading List, Other Links, plus 
Reading Guide.
Note also quotes from Shakespeare’s works at the Great Books Online 
Bartleby web pages.
Shakespearean critical analyses by well-known and lesser-known histori­
cal and modern critics and writers shed light on Shakespeare and his works, 
especially the comedies, ranging from critics Samuel Johnson and Samuel 
Taylor Coleridge to T. S. Eliot, and more.
FEATURED WEBSITES 
• http://shakespeare.mit.edu/works.html
{
{ See links to e-texts in first column.
• http://www.rsc.org.uk/shakespeare/shakespeares-plays

58	
Chapter 9
{
{ Click the play title photos to guides.
{
{ See links to criticism at http://www.touchstone.bham.ac.uk/links/Criti
cism.html such as Shakespeare and His Critics (1959).
{
{ Or go directly to https://ia902707.us.archive.org/17/items/shakespear
eandhi030042mbp/shakespeareandhi030042mbp.pdf and note a list of 
critics and where they are quoted in the book’s text.
{
{ Note also https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of_Shakespeare_criti
cism, at http://internetshakespeare.uvic.ca click Library, then Shake­
speare and the Classical Tradition, then Facsimile Viewer, then title page 
image, then right arrow to go to page 3 where introduction starts.
• Note Samuel Johnson’s 1765 Preface to Shakespeare at https://ebooks
.adelaide.edu.au/j/johnson/samuel/preface/complete.html#preface.
• www.bardweb.net (click SRC Features, Other Links, and more). 
{
{ See Shakespeare Source Materials at http://www.bardweb.net/content
/ac/sources.html and http://www.bardweb.net/content/ac/shakesreader
.html.
• At http://shaksper.net under Scholarly Resources, click Shakespeare on the 
Internet 
• See Shakespeare works’ quotes at http://www.bardwords.org, www.bar
tleby.com/100/pages/page42.html, and www.infoplease.com/spot/shake
spearequotes2.html.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES 
1.	 Shakespeare wrote of disguised characters and characters whose fates 
were not known to other characters although there were connections 
between these characters. 
a.	 Study e-texts of his comedies found online as cited in the featured web­
site, http://shakespeare.mit.edu/works.html (click links). 
b.	 Identify one disguised character and one character with a fate unknown 
to others and the comedy or comedies in which they appear. 
c.	 Tell why a disguised character disguised oneself, how situations work 
out, and how Shakespeare used the technique well to tell the tale. 
d.	 Tell how a character got into a situation with her or his fate being 
unknown, how the character’s fate becomes known, and how connected 
characters’ stories work out well by this technique.
2.	 Read an e-text of Shakespeare’s comedy As You Like It, noting act 2, 
scene 7, found online through featured website pagehttp://shakespeare.
mit.edu/asyoulikeit/index.html. 
a.	 Scroll to the last quarter of the page to see the character Jacques’s 
speech that begins “All the world’s a stage.” 

	
Selections from Shakespeare’s Plays: The Comedies
59
b.	 Write a paragraph identifying, while using quotations, what Shake­
speare or his character said are the seven ages of man. 
c.	 Write another paragraph. Suggest other ages of humankind that Shake­
speare’s character did not mention, or other types of people he could 
have mentioned in the ages of life that he did mention. 
d.	 Write a poem with stanzas featuring different ages of, or times in, 
human beings’ lives.
3.	 Study Shakespeare’s plays that are comedies whose e-text versions are 
found online at the featured website, http://shakespeare.mit.edu/works
.html (click links).
a.	 Think about the comedy plays’ women characters.
b.	 Write an essay. Compare two or three women in the same Shakespear­
ean comedy. Note their traits and, if applicable, how they interact with 
one another or other characters. 
c.	 Write another essay. Compare two or three women characters from 
different comedies. 
d.	 Note, compare, their traits. How do they interact with other characters?
4.	 Study Shakespeare’s plays that are comedies whose e-texts are found 
online at the featured website http://shakespeare.mit.edu/works.html 
(click links).
a.	 Note interactions between sisters, brothers, sisters and brothers, and 
cousins. 
b.	 Choose examples from the comedies for each of the four groups. 
c.	 Identify each character in each group and the plays in which they 
appear. 
d.	 Comment on these characters’ relationships with one another. 
e.	 Hint for d) just above: include how each helps or hinders the other, or, 
if trouble exists between them, how they work it out.
5.	 Study Shakespeare’s comedies whose e-text versions are found online at 
the featured website, http://shakespeare.mit.edu/works.html (click links). 
a.	 Note happenings between daughters or sons and their fathers or 
mothers. 
b.	 Choose examples of, and describe, three such situations from three dif­
ferent comedies. 
c.	 How are problems solved between a parent and a child or children? 
d.	 Note relationships in The Tempest, The Winter’s Tale, As You Like It, 
Cymbeline, or other comedies.
6.	 Read online quotations or excerpts on birds, other animals, flowers, other 
plants, or nature during the seasons, from Shakespeare’s comedies.
a.	 Find these quotations online at https://archive.org/details/birdsof
shakespea00geikuoft, http://cwf-fcf.org/en/discover-wildlife/resources/
online-articles/the-bards-birds.html?referrer=https://www.google.com, 

60	
Chapter 9
http://www.shakespeare-online.com/quotes/shakespeareonflowers
.html, https://www.questia.com/library/journal/1G1-162353983/theory
-from-the-fringes-animals-ecocriticism-shakespeare websites, and 
1871 James Edmund Harting’s The Birds of Shakespeare Critically 
Examined, Explained, and Illustrated, http://books.google.com. 
b.	 Write an essay. Quote four phrases from each category from different 
Shakespearean comedies as you suggest what each phrase refers to in 
a play. 
c.	 Tell what the phrases mean to you. 
d.	 Tip: Select a quote from As You Like It.
7.	 Find e-texts of famous quotations or passages from Shakespeare’s plays 
that are comedies, especially e-texts whose first lines or beginning phrases 
are listed just below. 
a.	 Find these quotations online at the www.bartleby.com/100/pages/
page42.html featured website and by titles and themes at www.shake
speare-online.com/quotes, plus at www.enotes.com/shakespeare-quotes. 
b.	 Find, read, and comment on quotes beginning with “We are such stuff,” 
“Be not afraid of,” “Our remedies,” “The quality of mercy,” and another 
one of your choice. 
c.	 Hints: Identify the comedy in which a quote appears. How is a quote 
meaningful as part of that play, and apart from the play (e.g., to anyone 
at any time in the past or present, to today’s world or someone in it, or 
to you)? Suggest each quote’s meaning for Shakespeare and to his time.
d.	 Tip: For help with part of c) above, see http://www.shakespear
estudyguide.com (note links under Shakespeare’s Life and Times), and 
see real and fictional Shakespearean places at http://www.shakespeare-
online.com/plays/playsettings.html, http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-eng
land-coventry-warwickshire-27041828, and http://www.britainexpress
.com/attraction-tags.htm?tag=William+Shakespeare.
8.	 Keep in mind what you did for question 7 above. 
a.	 Choose six other e-texts of quotes from six of Shakespeare’s plays that 
are comedies. 
b.	 Find quotes of Bartlett’s Familiar Shakespeare Quotations at www
.bartleby.com/100/pages/page42.html and http://www.bardwords.org 
featured websites, plus at http://www.shakespeare-online.com/quotes, 
www.enotes.com/shakespeare-quotes, and www.infoplease.com/spot/
shakespearequotes2.html. 
c.	 Explain why you chose each quote, then follow hints and tip in ques­
tion 7 above.
9.	 Read e-texts of monologues by women and men in Shakespeare’s plays 
that are comedies.
a.	 Find these e-texts by browsing the www.shakespeare-monologues
.org/home website. 

	
Selections from Shakespeare’s Plays: The Comedies
61
b.	 Choose a monologue for a woman, then follow hints and tip in ques­
tion 7 above to your chosen monologue quote. 
c.	 Choose a monologue for a man, then follow hints and tip in question 
7 above to your chosen monologue quote. 
d.	 Read e-text of “Men vs. Women: Examining the Relationship between 
Genre and Gender in Shakespeare?” (2002?) by Kristen Kurzaw­
ski, found online at http://teachers.yale.edu/curriculum/viewer/
initiative_08.01.01_u. 
e.	 Why does Ms Kurzawski claim that gender and genre determine por­
trayals in the plays? 
f.	 Give examples from one or two of Shakespearean comedies that 
you find online and that have portrayals of women and men as 
Ms. Kurzawski suggests.
10.	 Find and read an e-text of the article Critical Approaches to Shakespeare: 
Some Initial Observations (2001) by Ian Johnston.
a.	 Find this e-text online at http://records.viu.ca/~johnstoi/eng366/
approaches.htm. 
b.	 Identify four approaches and “other interpretative approaches” to 
Shakespeare’s works, then quote from or refer to the article as you 
explain each approach briefly. 
c.	 Choose examples from Shakespeare’s comedies for each approach 
you discovered above. Explain how each example fits with one or the 
other of Johnston’s approaches. 
d.	 Tip: Include quotations from the plays and the article.
11.	 Find and read e-texts of three classic essays on Shakespeare from literary 
history and written by British or American critics (e.g., Samuel Johnson, 
Samuel Taylor Coleridge, T. S. Eliot, Edward Dowden, William Hazlitt, 
Aldous Huxley, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Mark Twain). 
a.	 Find e-texts of essays (some as featured sites above and some as 
additional sites below). See overviews at https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Timeline_of_Shakespeare_criticism and Shakespearean critics 
quoted in http://www.touchstone.bham.ac.uk/links/Criticism.html. 
Note in particular T. S. Eliot’s early and later views of Shakespeare 
commented on at http://www.jstor.org/stable/23094254?seq=1#page
_scan_tab_contents in T. S. Eliot and Shakespeare (1967) by Philip 
L. Marcus, with excerpts from Eliot on Shakespeare quoted by David 
Galison www.huffingtonpost.com/david-galenson/recognizing-that
-poets-do_b_3479117.html in 2013 and in “Comedy as . . .” (1976) 
and Twelfth Night on page 132, number 1161 in De Shakespeare A 
T. S. Eliot by Henri Fluchere with title search at http://books.google
.com for Comedy, An Annotated Bibliography by James E. Evans, and 
Eliot in his The Use of Poetry and the Use of Criticism found after 
book title search at http://books.google.com plus a subject search 

62	
Chapter 9
in book for Shakespeare, criticism, imagination and Midsummer 
Night’s Dream, plus objective correlative. Note also Preface to Shake­
speare (1765) by Samuel Johnson with Measure for Measure notes 
at https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/j/johnson/samuel/preface/complete
.html#preface, and Coleridge’s Essays on Shakespeare (1907) at https://
ia802303.us.archive.org/0/items/coleridgesessays00cole/coleridgeses
says00cole_bw.pdf. See Shakespeare, or The Poet by Emerson (1904) 
at www.bartleby.com/90/0405.html, Twain’s Is Shakespeare Dead? 
(1909) at http://web.archive.org/web/20090711002917/http://etext.lib
.virginia.edu/toc/modeng/public/TwaDead.html (click links, e.g., for 
chapter 7); Hazlett’s Characters of Shakespeare (1916) at http://
www.saylor.org/site/wp- content/uploads/2011/01/CHARACTERS
-OF-SHAKESPEARE.pdf; Dowden’s 1875 “But Shakespeare pos­
sessed . . .” on page six and following pages of Shakespeare: 
His Mind and Art at http://assets.cambridge.org/97811080/00765/
excerpt/9781108000765_excerpt.pdf; 
“Consider 
Shakespeare’s 
achievement as a dramatist” (1965) by Huxley at www.sirbacon.org/
links/huxley2.htm (for this comment, scroll to phrases in paragraph 
three’s second part) (scroll down for more data, excerpts from the his­
tory plays, e.g., “Henry V”); note also Dowden’s 1893 Introduction to 
Shakespeare after title search at http://books.google.com and search 
inside for comedies; and Twelfth Night in Patricia W. Greene’s “Shake­
speare’s Clowns” at http://www.uh.edu/honors/Programs-Minors/
honors-and-the-schools/houston-teachers-institute/curriculum-units/
pdfs/2009/shakespeare/green-09-shakespeare.pdf.
b.	 Identify a main point in each chosen essay; one that is an essay writ­
er’s view, and one that is another essay writer’s view, of Shakespeare 
and his comedies. 
c.	 Quote quotations from one comedy or a few comedies as examples to 
show that you understand main points of what the critics wrote.
12.	 Read online definitions of the present and from the past to discover the pre­
cise meanings of comedy, dramatic comedy, tragic comedy, and tragedy.
a.	 Find definitions at http://www.siue.edu/~ejoy/eng208NotesOnCom
edyAndTragedy.htm with Ian Johnston’s Dramatic Structure: Comedy 
and Tragedy, and Shakespeare (n.d.). 
b.	 Write an essay identifying exactly each definition and what it means, 
how meanings have changed through literary history, or how some 
basic features have stayed the same. 
c.	 Choose one type of comedy, dramatic comedy, or tragic comedy. 
d.	 Select a Shakespeare comedy that you think fits the type of comedy 
you chose in c). 

	
Selections from Shakespeare’s Plays: The Comedies
63
e.	 Find this comedy online as cited in a featured website’s url and sites 
summary above. 
f.	 Write an essay. Explain, with examples and quotes from the play, and 
a definition, why this play is the particular type of comedy chosen 
above.
13.	 Phrases from Shakespeare’s works, including some from his comedies, 
have often been quoted in television episodes, movies, and books of Star 
Trek (the popular science fiction media franchise of modern times).
a.	 Visit and study websites with data and quotes on Shakespeare and 
Star Trek such as http://englishscholar.com/shakespeare_startrek.htm 
(see quotes from television episodes, movies, and novels connected to 
Star Trek), see links to To Bardly Go, The Hollywood Bard, and more 
at http://shakespeareonline.freeservers.com/toc.html. See e-texts of 
comedies you find online through other sites cited in this chapter and 
see http://memory-alpha.org/wiki/William_Shakespeare Star Trek’s 
MemoryAlpha Library.
b.	 Choose a phrase from one of Shakespeare’s comedies (e.g., The 
Tempest and As You Like It) that is quoted in something of Star Trek. 
Identify the Shakespeare comedy and a Star Trek episode, movie, or 
book where the quote appears, and the character or characters who 
spoke the quote. 
c.	 Suggest why these particular Shakespearean words fit well with this 
Star Trek story. 
d.	 Explain why you think Shakespeare’s comedies, a particular Shake­
spearean comedy, and certain words, plus Star Trek work well 
together.
14.	 Find and study web pages at sites that feature something about literature 
derived from Shakespeare’s works, including his comedies.
a.	 Find and study web pages such as http://www.barbarapaul.com/
shake.html (note titles), http://www.shakespeare-online.com/biogra
phy/shakespearewriter.html (note influence on writers), and note data 
on, e.g., titles taken from Shakespeare’s comedies. 
b.	 Choose three literary works at these websites, then identify some­
thing in each that is based on something in one of the Shakespearean 
comedies. 
c.	 Hint: Think of Shakespeare titles and familiar quotations. 
d.	 Write a story title, and a play scene, neither related, but based 
on phrases you choose from one of Shakespeare’s comedy titles, 
excerpts, or quotes, found online at http://shakespeare.mit.edu/works
.html, http://www.bardwords.org, www.bartleby.com/100/pages/page
42.html, and www.infoplease.com/spot/shakespearequotes2.html fea­
tured websites, or a) sites above.

64	
Chapter 9
15.	 Think of the interesting idea that many codes or ciphers may be hidden 
in Shakespeare’s works as some scholars and respected authors believe, 
then look at the comedies that have a code or cipher.
a.	 To find out about types of codes or ciphers and their features that may 
be found in Shakespeare’s works in general, and then in the comedies 
in particular, see websites such as http://www.wondersandmarvels
.com/2012/12/shakespeares-secrets-a-hidden-cipher-in-literatures
-greatest-works.html, http://www.rictin.com/codes-in-shakespeare, 
www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/aug/28/arts.books, and http://shake
spearethehiddentruth.com (click “film trailer”). 
b.	 Identify some codes or cyphers that scholars have discovered in 
Shakespeare works. Note especially those that suggest hidden mes­
sages in the plays in general, and the comedies in particular. See 
something at the end of All’s Well That Ends Well, and some things 
in Much Ado About Nothing, The Merry Wives of Windsor, and The 
Tempest.
c.	 Write an essay. With quotations or specific facts, suggest how one or 
another of these codes may enrich your study of the plays in general, 
and the comedies in particular. 
d.	 Identify what some scholars suggest are in the codes or ciphers 
which anticipate something well-known in today’s world. Suggest its 
significance. 
e.	 Hints: a code or cipher may refer to the actual author of Shakespeare’s 
works, something about a hidden prince, something about Sir Francis 
Bacon, something about a hidden treasure, or various messages (some 
political or religious or something else).
Additional websites for chapter 9 with more data to note
• https://clynjohnson.wordpress.com
{
{ click link to “Discovering English Literature . . . Additional Web Sites,” 
then link to a wordpress.com blog at netedbooks), or go directly to http://
www.netedbooks.wordpress.com/home.

65
Chapter 10 
Selections from Shakespeare’s Plays
The Histories 
An area of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology website features the 
first e-texts of “The Complete Works of Shakespeare,” including the plays. 
Title links of the plays are listed alphabetically under categories identifying 
types of plays, including history, tragedy, and comedy. 
Under History, note the plays Henry IV (parts 1 and 2), Henry V, Henry VI 
(parts 1, 2, and 3), Henry VIII, King John, Richard II, and Richard III. After 
clicking a title link, note links to acts and scenes and the titles of each. 
Note the Royal Shakespeare Company featured website’s guide to Shake­
speare’s plays with introductions, quotations, educational tips, and more. 
At the Internet Shakespeare Editions website’s Resources area, click Criti­
cal Materials (check boxes for introductions, critical surveys, essays; choose 
items on plays from a list). 
At Shakespeare Navigators site, find links to annotated texts, and quotes 
by or about. 
Note also features of BardWeb, sites with Shakespearean Monologues, 
influence of Shakespeare on other writers, Star Trek, plus characters in the 
plays and codes in the plays.
FEATURED WEBSITES 
• http://shakespeare.mit.edu/works.html
• Note links to e-texts in second column.http://www.backstage.com/mono
logues/shakespeare,http://www.acting-school-stop.com/shakespeare-
monologues.html 

66	
Chapter 10
• www.rsc.org.uk/shakespeare/shakespeares-plays
{
{ Click play title photos for guides.
• http://internetshakespeare.uvic.ca/Foyer
{
{ Click resources at top right, critical materials.
{
{ http://records.viu.ca/~johnstoi/eng366/approaches.htm, http://records.
viu.ca/~johnstoi/eng366/interpretation.htm, of Shakespeare’s histories 
at https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/c/coleridge/samuel_taylor/shakespeare-
ben-jonson-beaumont-and-fletcher/chapter27.html; http://www.shake
speare-online.com/scholars. 
• http://www.shakespeare-navigators.com
{
{ Click title links to find quotes from plays.
{
{ http://www.william-shakespeare.info/william-shakespeare-quotes.htm; 
see quotes about Shakespeare from Elizabeth Barrett Browning to T. S. 
Eliot at http://www.shakespeare-online.com/quotes/themanquotes.html.
{
{ www.bardweb.net (click resources link to go to page of links to sites with 
more data) 
{
{ http://shaksper.net/scholarly-resources/shakespeare-on-the-internet 
(click site name links to sites with additional information) 
{
{ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_titles_of_works_taken_from
_Shakespeare,
{
{ Shakespeare’s Influence on Other Artists at http://www.shakespeare-
online.com/biography/shakespearewriter.html,
• Titles Inspired by Shakespeare Phrases at http://mentalfloss.com/
article/61142/13-titles-inspired-shakespeare-phrases, www.barbarapaul.com/
shake.html.
• Click play titles to Titles from Shakespeare or go to http://webcache.
googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:http://www.barbarapaul.com/
shake.html&num=1&strip=0&vwsrc=0).
• www.opensourceshakespeare.org/views/plays/characters/chardisplay.php 
{
{ Click links to sources for characters’ speeches, www.shakespeare-online
.com/plays. 
{
{ Click titles, follow links to plays, and articles on characters, at www.nos
weatshakespeare.com/characters 
{
{ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Shakespearean_characters_(A-K) 
{
{ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Shakespearean_characters_(L-Z),
{
{ http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/CHARAC­
TERS-OF-SHAKESPEARE.pdf; http://www.shakespeare-online.com/
plays/characters 
• www.summituniversitypress.com/chapters/Shakespeare-Code-sample
.pdf

	
Selections from Shakespeare’s Plays: The Histories
67
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES 
1.	 Read an e-text of Shakespeare’s history play King Henry IV at a featured 
website.
a.	 Find the e-text online at http://shakespeare.mit.edu/works.html via 
column two. 
b.	 Describe young Prince Hal’s character. Feature how, and why, he 
changes as the play progresses. With your explanation, include quotes 
by Hal and other characters. 
c.	 Hint: As part of your description and explanation, feature quotations of 
what he says in part I, act 1, scene 2, and part II, act 5.
2.	 Read an e-text of a scene in the Duke of York’s Garden in Shakespeare’s 
history play Richard II (i.e., act 3, scene 4).
a.	 Find e-text online at http://shakespeare.mit.edu/works.html featured 
site via column two.
b.	 How does the gardener, his assistant, compare natural things in the 
garden to political situations? 
c.	 Tell what the gardener does after the queen overhears the gardener and 
the gardener’s assistant and he tells her of the happenings on which his 
comparisons are based.
3.	 Study some young people and children represented in e-texts of Shake­
speare’s history plays.
a.	 Find these e-texts online at the http://shakespeare.mit.edu/works.html 
featured website in column 2; and in articles’ e-texts, such as Portray­
als of Children in Shakespeare’s Plays at www.lotsofessays.com/view
paper/1711985.html, in Shakespeare and Childhood at http://ebooks
.cambridge.org/chapter.jsf?bid=CBO9780511483493&cid=CBO978
0511483493A015 see excerpt of A. J. Piesse’s Character Build­
ing: Shakespeare’s Children in Context, page 64; https://www.aca
demia.edu/2403589/Radmila_Nasti%C4%87_The_Child_as_Other_in
_Shakespeares_Plays (see some types of children in Shakespeare’s 
works); see Child Characters in Shakespeare . . . at http://gradworks
.umi.com/34/16/3416909.html.
b.	 Write an essay. Identify how Shakespeare wrote of young people, chil­
dren in his plays. 
c.	 Write an essay in which you compare and contrast two young charac­
ters in the history plays. They may appear on stage and speak or not, 
or be referred to with suggestions of what’s happening with them off 
stage. 

68	
Chapter 10
d.	 Study, for example, young Prince Hal in King Henry IV, young Arthur 
in King John, the two young Princes in Richard III, or others you 
discover.
e.	 Compare some young people in other Shakespearean plays, one a 
comedy and one a tragedy, but not those considered in d) just above. 
Study,  Miranda in The Tempest, Cordelia in King Lear, young Macduff 
in Macbeth, act IV, scene 2.
4.	 Study e-texts of Shakespeare’s plays that are histories and e-texts of 
articles for those plays, then investigate women characters in the plays.
a.	 Find e-texts of the plays that are histories in second column at the 
featured website http://shakespeare.mit.edu/works.html and find data 
on the Women in Shakespeare as cited in the plays, through the 
websites www.nosweatshakespeare.com/characters, http://www.shake
speareswords.com/Special-Features-Female-Characters, http://www
.beta-iatefl.org/861/blog-publications/women-in-shakespeare, http://
shakespeare.about.com/od/criticalapproaches/a/intro_women.htm, 
http://shakespeare.about.com/od/criticalapproaches/a/types_women
.htm. 
b.	 Write an essay. Compare traits and experiences of two or more women 
in the same play. 
c.	 For b) just above, write about Katherine of Aragon/Anne Bullen in 
King Henry VIII, or Elinor/Constance in King John and Calpurnia/
Portia in Julius Caesar. 
d.	 Write another essay. Identify how scholars see Shakespeare’s portray­
als of women and their traits in Shakespeare’s history plays.
5.	 Read an e-text of the 2001 article “Studies in Shakespeare: Critical 
Approaches to Shakespeare: Some Initial Observations” by Ian Johnston.
a.	 Find this article’s e-text online at http://records.viu.ca/~johnstoi/
eng366/approaches.htm. 
b.	 Identify four approaches and “other interpretative approaches” to 
Shakespeare’s works. 
c.	 Explain each approach briefly as you refer to Johnston’s article. 
d.	 For each, choose examples from history plays (e.g., Richard II & III 
and Henry IV). 
e.	 Explain how each Shakespearean example fits one or the other of John­
ston’s approaches. 
f.	 Also check Johnston’s article “Studies in Shakespeare: On Scholarship 
and Literary Interpretation” (2005) at http://records.viu.ca/~johnstoi/
eng366/interpretation.htm.
6.	 Read e-texts of two classic critical analysis essays on Shakespeare from 
literary history and written by British or American critics.
a.	 Find e-texts of critical analyses by classic author/scholar/critics such as 
Samuel Johnson, John Dryden, T. S. Eliot, plus Ralph Waldo Emerson; 

	
Selections from Shakespeare’s Plays: The Histories
69
along with Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Edward Dowden, William Hazlitt, 
Aldous Huxley, Mark Twain, and others. 
b.	 Find these e-texts online separately or collected. See featured and 
additional websites, including an overview of noted and lesser-
known Shakespearean scholar-critics and their works at http://www
.shakespeare-online.com/scholars plus excerpts from some of their 
works via http://books.google.com or www.amazon.com or elsewhere 
on the web after Google search or via http://www.shakespeare-online
.com or at http://www.bardweb.net/content/index.html. Note too Sam­
uel Johnson on Shakespeare’s histories at https://ebooks.adelaide
.edu.au/c/coleridge/samuel_taylor/shakespeare-ben-jonson-beaumont-
and-fletcher/chapter27.html; comments on early and later views of 
Shakespeare by T. S. Eliot in Eliot’s “Search for the Transcendent 
in Late Shakespeare” on page 111 of John Freeh’s Shakespeare’s 
Last Plays (2002) at http://books.google.com, and www.jstor.org/
stable/23094254?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents, and comment on 
Shakespearean style at https://www.academia.edu/22844804/What
_is_the_Objective_Correlative; comments by Emerson at http://www
.bartleby.com/90/0405.html, Coleridge at https://archive.org/details/
coleridgesessays00cole, and more.
c.	 Read and identify some main points in Johnson’s and Eliot’s com­
ments, using quotes. 
d.	 Select another two essays with comments by a British and an American 
author/critic, read these essays and identify their main points, including 
quotations. 
e.	 As you research, write, note essay writers’ views of Shakespeare, his 
history plays. 
f.	 Write an essay in which you quote examples from the history plays’ 
e-texts and the critics’ essays as you aim to illustrate how you under­
stand some of the critics’ writings.
7.	 Find and read some monologues by women and monologues by men in 
Shakespeare’s plays, especially the history plays.
a.	 Find monologues online at http://www.stagemilk.com/male-shake
speare-monologues, http://www.shakespeare-monologues.org/women, 
http://www.bottletreeinc.com/teen_monologues_shakespeare.html, 
http://www.acting-school-stop.com/shakespeare-monologues.html, 
http://www.backstage.com/monologues/shakespeare.
b.	 Choose a monologue for a woman. Adapt and apply the hints in ques­
tion 8 below to this chosen quoted monologue. 
c.	 Choose a monologue for a man. Adapt and apply the hints in question 
8 below to this chosen quoted monologue.

70	
Chapter 10
8.	 Find e-texts of famous passages in Shakespeare’s history plays.
a.	 Choose, from Richard III; Henry IV, part 2, act 3, scene 1 and two 
passages from Henry IV, part 2, act 4, scene 5. 
b.	 See first lines in Shakespearean sentences at c) below; then see phrases 
from the plays at www.bartleby.com/100/pages/page42.html; also see 
http://www.bbc.co.uk/schools/teachers/offbyheart/speeches, http://
theshakespeareblog.com/2011/05/greatest-shakespeare-speeches, 
http://www.nosweatshakespeare.com/quotes/famous-shakespeare-
quotes, and http://gwydir.demon.co.uk/jo/quotes/speech.htm.
c.	 Find, read, and comment on, passages beginning “Now is the winter 
of our discontent,” “So wise, so young,” “Uneasy lies the head that 
wears a crown,” “O coward conscience,” “A horse! A horse!” “O dear 
father . . . my due from thee . . .,” “my most inward true and duteous 
nature Teacheth . . .”; and another passage you choose. 
d.	 Write an essay in which you suggest how a quote is meaningful as 
part of a play where it is found, as via links at http://www.bartleby
.com/100/138.html. 
e.	 Suggest also how a quote is meaningful apart from the play (e.g., to 
anyone at anytime in the past or present, to today’s world or someone 
in it, or to your life). 
f.	 Suggest how each quote fits Shakespeare and his time. 
g.	 For some help with last parts, see Shakespeare’s Life, Time, and 
Places at www.stratford-upon-avon.co.uk/wslife.htm, see www.bri
tannia.com/hiddenlondon/shakespeare.html (click links), www.bard
web.net/england.html (see overview, then click links). 
h.	 For help understanding phrases, see modern translations, at http://
nfs.sparknotes.com, http://nfs.sparknotes.com/henry4pt2/page_481.
html (click title; select act, scene, phrase; see original and modern 
translations); see www.nosweatshakespeare.com/shakespeares-plays/
modern-english-translations; see scholars’ modern translations such 
as act 2, scene 2 spoken by Flavius in the Kenneth Cavander transla­
tion of Shakespeare’s Timon of Athens. 
9.	 Keep in mind question/activity 8 above.
a.	 Choose six other e-text quotations from Shakespeare’s history plays.
b.	 Find online through www.william-shakespeare.info/william-shake
speare-quotes.htm or www.shakespeare-navigators.com or other 
Shakespeare quotation sites on nature. 
c.	 Explain why you chose each quote. Tell what’s important to you about 
each one. 
d.	 Follow activities d) through f) in question 8 above. 
10.	 Find and browse the “Shakespeare and Classic Star Trek” web document.
a.	 Find it at http://englishscholar.com/shakespeare_startrek.htm, see also 
http://memory-alpha.org/wiki/William_Shakespeare, and find other 

	
Selections from Shakespeare’s Plays: The Histories
71
Shakespeare and Star Trek sites cited in the additional websites whose 
link is cited below. Note also Star Trek episode guides at http://www.
tv.com/shows/star-trek/episodes. 
b.	 Check the e-texts of Shakespeare’s histories found online in this chap­
ter and find something from a Shakespeare history that is quoted in 
something of Star Trek.
c.	 Identify a history play and a Star Trek title from a television episode, 
movie, or book, and characters (from Star Trek and from Shake­
speare’s history) who spoke the quote. 
d.	 Suggest why these Shakespearean words fit well with this Star Trek 
story, and why Shakespeare’s histories and Star Trek work well 
together. 
11.	 Study web pages about literature inspired by Shakespeare’s works.
a.	 Find these pages online at the featured sites http://www.barbara­
paul.com/shake.html, 
http://mentalfloss.com/article/61142/13-
titles-inspired-shakespeare-phrases, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
List_of_titles_of_works_taken_from_Shakespeare; and at addi­
tional sites such as Aldous Huxley’s A Sentence From Shakespeare 
(1944) at http://www.sirbacon.org/links/huxley1.htm), Shakespeare’s 
Influence on Other Artists at http://www.shakespeare-online.com/
biography/shakespearewriter.html, 
and 
www.bbc.co.uk/drama/
shakespeare/60secondshakespeare/teachers_themes_list.shtml. 
b.	 Choose six literary works’ titles, three from different sites. 
c.	 Identify something in each work that is based on one of Shakespeare’s 
history plays. 
d.	 Hint for c) just above: Think of his titles and quotations. 
e.	 Write your own story title and a play scene based on two phrases you 
choose from any of Shakespeare’s history plays’ titles, quotations or 
excerpts at a featured website or at websites referred to in the first part 
of this question/activity. 
f.	 Tip for e) just above: Your story title and play scene do not have to 
be connected.
12.	 Read an e-text of Shakespeare’s history play Henry V; noting especially 
act 4, scene 1.
a.	 Note that this part of the play is where young King Henry (the former 
Prince Hal) disguises himself and walks among his soldiers in their 
camp one night before a battle. 
b.	 Find this e-text at http://shakespeare.mit.edu/henryv/henryv.4.1.html 
featured site page. 
c.	 Write an essay in which you suggest why he disguised himself, what 
he discovered, and why it was important that he did it. 

72	
Chapter 10
d.	 Hints: What happened during talks with the characters Pistol and 
Michael Williams? What are some things Henry says near the end of 
the scene when alone, after soldiers exited, then after the character 
Erpingham exited?
13.	 Find and read some web documents whose author/scholars claim that 
since Shakespeare’s time there is a hidden code or codes hiding in Shake­
speare’s works.
a.	 Find e-texts of documents at the www.summituniversitypress.com/
chapters/Shakespeare-Code-sample.pdf featured site, http://www
.wondersandmarvels.com/2012/12/shakespeares-secrets-a-hidden-
cipher-in-literatures-greatest-works.html (the first and last para­
graphs), http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/aug/28/arts.books and 
other additional sites. 
b.	 Write an essay. Quote from these documents and from Shakespeare’s 
works, especially the histories, to reveal what codes may be hidden 
among Shakespeare’s words. 
c.	 Hints: Consider references to a forgotten prince, Shakespeare’s time’s 
politics and religious aspects hidden in the plays; plus how a code in 
the sonnets may be in the plays.
Additional websites for chapter 10 with more data to note
• https://clynjohnson.wordpress.com
{
{ Click link to “Discovering English Literature . . . Additional Web Sites,” 
then link to a wordpress.com blog at netedbooks), or go directly to http://
www.netedbooks.wordpress.com/home.

73
Chapter 11
Selections from Shakespeare’s Plays
The Tragedies
On the first featured site, an area of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
website, note the first e-texts of The Complete Works of Shakespeare, includ­
ing his dramatic works, written by this foremost British writer who lived from 
1564 until 1616. 
Title links of the plays are listed under tragedy, history, and comedy. 
Under “Tragedy,” see tragedies listed alphabetically, including Hamlet, 
King Lear, Macbeth, Romeo and Juliet, as well as historical tragedies such as 
Julius Caesar, Antony and Cleopatra, and more, with dates based on times 
of performance or publication. 
Click a title link, note links to acts and scenes and the titles of each tragedy, 
plus links in e-texts to definitions of unfamiliar words.
At the Royal Shakespeare Company site, click title photo links to find data 
on each play, with quotes, key words and facts, and tips for educators. 
At BardNet, note links to plays, SRC features, Shakespeare Study, and 
Other Links. 
At Shakespeare on the Internet, see links to Research Sites and Schol­
arly Resources (e.g., “Library of Essays,” Pedagogy—Teaching Resources, 
Cook’s Tour of Internet Resources for Students and Scholars, and more) on 
the author, his works, his life and times. 
Note Shakespeare and His Critics, Earlier Critics’ Extracts, Jonson, Eliot, 
Oates, and Ian Johnston at http://people.brandeis.edu/~teuber/earlycrit.html, 
www.celestialtimepiece.com, https://shine.unibas.ch/linkscriticismrec.htm, a 
Shakespeare Blog, and more.

74	
Chapter 11
FEATURED WEBSITES
• http://shakespeare.mit.edu/works.html 
{
{ Click title links in the third column.
• http://www.rsc.org.uk/shakespeare/shakespeares-plays
{
{ Click the play title photo to see links to synopsis, and information for 
teachers.
{
{ www.bardweb.net; http://shaksper.net under Scholarly Resources click 
Shakespeare on the Internet link. 
{
{ See Shakespeare’s critics at https://archive.org/details/shakespeare
andhi030042mbp.
{
{ See more critics at https://web.archive.org/web/20131006112331/http://
shakespeare.palomar.edu/playcriticism.htm, http://theshakespeareblog
.com/2014/01/t-s-eliot-and-shakespeare, https://shine.unibas.ch/links
criticismrec.htm.
{
{ See Ben Jonson on Shakespeare at https://www.nytimes.com/
books/00/02/13/bookend/bookend.html, http://www.luminarium.org/
sevenlit/jonson/benshake.htm, http://www.shmoop.com/to-the-memory-
of-my-beloved, http://www.sourcetext.com/greenwood/jands/02.htm, 
and poem at https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/
detail/44466, plus https://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/Texts/pope-
shakespeare.html, https://www.oneeyedman.net/school-archive/classes/
fulltext/www.mala.bc.ca/~johnstoi/eng366/approaches.htm.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1.	 Read web definitions of tragedy and Shakespeare’s dramas. 
a.	 Find these definitions by searching featured sites such as http://shak
sper.net/scholarly-resources/shakespeare-on-the-internet and www
.bardweb.net, plus sites found through the additional websites link cited 
below. 
b.	 Keep in mind a definition you found as you select an e-text of one of 
the tragic plays found online at the featured MIT website, http://shake
speare.mit.edu/works.html. 
c.	 Including quotes from the chosen play, and a definition, write an essay. 
Suggest how that play and its main character(s) are expressions and 
examples of that definition.
2.	 Study excerpts on particular subjects or symbols in Shakespeare’s tragic 
plays’ e-texts.
a.	 Find these e-texts online at featured website http://shakespeare.mit
.edu/works.html and at additional websites via link below, then online 

	
Selections from Shakespeare’s Plays: The Tragedies
75
under subjects such as birds and plants and note Shake Sphere—A 
Comprehensive Shakespeare Study Guide online at http://www.shake
spearestudyguide.com and in the additional websites cited below.
b.	 Identify references to, flowers, birds, the sun, and stars, and then sug­
gest their significance in the story and about the characters. 
c.	 Note, Romeo and Juliet, act two, scenes 2 and 3; act 3, scene 5, and 
act 4, scene 5; Hamlet, the Ophelia and flowers scenes in act 4, scene 
5, and act 4, scene 7; Macbeth, act 4, scene 1; Othello, act 1, scene 3.
3.	 Study an e-text of Shakespeare’s tragic play King Lear. 
a.	 Find it online at the featured website’s page, http://shakespeare.mit
.edu/lear/index.html.
b.	 What is significant about the storm in act 3? 
c.	 Identify some plant metaphors and how or why are they important in, 
act 2, scene 3, and act 4, scenes 4 and 6? 
d.	 Identify some animal metaphors and how or why they are important in, 
act 1, scene 4, act 3, scene 4, and act 5, scene 2. 
e.	 Identify the fool and his importance, especially in act 1, scene 4. 
f.	 Identify similarities and differences between the characters King Lear/
Gloucester, Cordelia/Edgar, the fool/Edgar, Albany/Edgar, Edmund/
Regan/Goneril. 
g.	 See also question 8 below, noting characters Cleopatra, Antony, and 
Enobarbus.
4.	 Study the e-text of Shakespeare’s tragic play Romeo and Juliet.
a.	 Find it online at featured website page, http://shakespeare.mit.edu/
romeo_juliet/index.html. 
b.	 See Friar Lawrence’s comments in act 2, scene 3. What does the friar 
think of Romeo; yet why does he agree to perform the marriage cer­
emony for Romeo and Juliet? 
c.	 See act 5, scene 3. How is Friar Lawrence’s goal (one he had in mind 
when he agreed to marry Romeo and Juliet) achieved, but not in the 
way he had hoped it would be?
5.	 Study an e-text of Shakespeare’s tragic play Hamlet.
a.	 Find it online at featured website’s page, http://shakespeare.mit.edu/
hamlet/index.html.
b.	 Identify why Hamlet returns home from a university, and what he finds 
out from his friend Horatio. Who does he see and what is he told? 
c.	 How does Hamlet begin his plan to prove what he was told? How does 
he expose the guilty person and make him pay for what he has done? 
d.	 Who are Gertrude, Ophelia, Polonius, Laertes, and Fortinbras? 
e.	 What connection and importance does each character in c) above have 
to Hamlet? 

76	
Chapter 11
f.	 What unexpectedly happens to each character cited above as a conse­
quence of Hamlet’s actions, by accident, or because of the guilty person?
6.	 Study an e-text of Shakespeare’s tragic play Macbeth.
a.	 Find it online at featured the website’s page, http://shakespeare.mit
.edu/macbeth/index.html.
b.	 Identify what three witches tell Macbeth and Banquo. 
c.	 When does Macbeth start to believe them? 
d.	 What do Macbeth and his wife decide to do, and why, because of what 
the witches said?
e.	 How do Lady Macbeth and Macbeth psychologically act in different 
ways before and after they do what they decide to do? 
f.	 What other things does Macbeth feel compelled to do after he and his 
wife carry out their first plan? 
g.	 Which two statements do the witches make when Macbeth sees them 
again? Why do these statements make him think he is safe from conse­
quences for his actions, yet why are his assumptions not true?
7.	 Study an e-text of Shakespeare’s tragic play Julius Caesar.
a.	 Find online at featured website page, http://shakespeare.mit.edu/
julius_caesar/index.html.
b.	 What is a soothsayer’s warning to Julius Caesar during a procession 
praising Caesar for winning a war? 
c.	 What does Calpurnia (Caesar’s wife) see in a dream? How is it con­
nected to what the soothsayer said? 
d.	 Who are the men who decide that Caesar must be assassinated? Why 
do they think he should be assassinated? 
e.	 Why does Caesar’s friend Brutus decide to be one of the assassins? 
f.	 How does Antony react to the assassins at first? What does he say to 
the crowd of citizens?
g.	 How do the citizens react to the assassins because of what Antony says 
to them? 
h.	 What do the citizens cause the assassins to do? 
i.	 What strange things are experienced by the two main assassins, Cas­
sius and Brutus? What do they argue about as they prepare for war with 
Antony, Octavian and Lepidus, who have taken over ruling Rome? 
j.	 What happens to the two main assassins? How do Antony and Octavian 
react to what happened to Brutus?
8.	 Study an e-text of Shakespeare’s tragic play Antony and Cleopatra.
a.	 Find it online at the featured website page, http://shakespeare.mit.edu/
cleopatra/index.html.
b.	 How well is Antony ruling Rome with Octavian and Lepidus as the 
play opens? 

	
Selections from Shakespeare’s Plays: The Tragedies
77
c.	 How is Cleopatra described by Philo and Demetrius in act 1, scene 
one, and by Enobarbus in act 2, scene 2, each with reference to 
Antony? 
d.	 Why did Antony first go to Egypt? Why did he stay there, and then 
why did he go back to Rome? What causes him to return to Egypt? 
e.	 How does Cleopatra with her fleet of ships cause trouble for Antony? 
f.	 Tell about Enobarbus (a main soldier of Antony’s forces). Suggest 
why he may be thought of as an important although minor character. 
g.	 In addition to Enobarbus in the play, see commentaries about him 
online through the additional websites link cited below. 
h.	 Why and how do Antony and Cleopatra die? How does Octavian treat 
them before and after their deaths?
9.	 Study an e-text of Shakespeare’s tragic play Othello.
a.	 Find it online at the featured website’s page, http://shakespeare.mit
.edu/othello/index.html.
b.	 Why does Desdemona choose to marry Othello? 
c.	 What did Desdemona’s father believe was the reason that made her 
marry Othello? 
d.	 Who are Iago, Rodrigo, and Cassio? What does each do to cause 
Othello to mistrust, then murder, his wife? How is a handkerchief 
important to what happens? What happened to Othello, Cassio, Iago, 
and Rodrigo, after the murder?
10.	 Keep in mind Shakespeare’s women characters as you read e-texts of 
some of his tragic plays, or excerpts, found online at the featured site, 
http://shakespeare.mit.edu/works.html.
a.	 Write an essay comparing and contrasting traits of two or more 
women in the same tragedy (e.g., the three sisters in King Lear). 
Include quotes on why two sisters are thought of as better daughters 
during the play, and which sister is later found to be the better daugh­
ter? Explain why. 
b.	 Write another essay comparing and contrasting traits of two or more 
women not in the same play (e.g., Ophelia or Gertrude from “Hamlet,” 
Juliet from Romeo and Juliet, Lady Macbeth or witches from Mac­
beth, Desdemona from Othello, Cleopatra from Antony and Cleopa­
tra), or others you have read about.
11.	 Read e-texts of Monologues by Women and Men in Shakespeare’s tragic 
plays.
a.	 Find these e-texts by searching a Shakespeare’s Monologues website, 
found at www.shakespeare-monologues.org. 
b.	 Choose a monologue for a woman with phrases starting “Oh what a 
noble mind” by Ophelia in Hamlet or “O Romeo” by Juliet in Romeo 
and Juliet, or another one from another tragic Shakespearean play. 

78	
Chapter 11
c.	 Adapt and apply question 12’s hints below to chosen woman’s mono­
logue quote. 
d.	 Choose a monologue for a man, such as Hamlet’s “To be or not to 
be,” or Romeo’s “But soft, what light,” or Antony’s “Friends, Romans, 
Countrymen” in Julius Caesar or another one from another tragic 
Shakespearean play. 
e.	 Adapt and apply question 12’s hints below to the chosen man’s mono­
logue quote.
12.	 Find and read e-texts of famous passages in Shakespeare’s tragic plays 
(e.g., e-texts with first lines or beginning phrases listed in a) below and 
found at the Shakespeare Quotes at www.enotes.com/shakespeare-quotes 
or http://www.enotes.com/shakespeare-quotes/index, or other quotation 
sites found through the William Shakespeare on the Internet and BardWeb 
featured websites, or at Additional Websites whose link is cited below.
a.	 Select, read, and comment on six passages, choosing from among 
passages that begin “The play’s the thing,” “The fault, dear Brutus,” 
“Tomorrow, and tomorrow,” “What a piece of work is a man,” “There 
are more things in heaven and earth,” “To Sleep, Perchance to Dream,” 
“What’s in a Name?” 
b.	 Hints: How is a quote meaningful for the play it is in? 
c.	 How is a quote meaningful apart from a play (e.g., to anyone, any 
time, past or present, to your life, or to today’s world)? 
d.	 How does each quote fit Shakespeare and his time? 
e.	 Tip: For help, see http://www.rsc.org.uk/shakespeares-life-and-times; 
http://shakespeare-gesellschaft.de/en/info/faqs/shakespeare/shake
speares-times.html; Shakespeare’s Life and Times at “Annie’s Page” 
at www.reocities.com/Athens/Oracle/3221/shakespeare.html; sites 
found through William Shakespeare on the Internet, or through addi­
tional websites found through a link below.
13.	 Keep in mind question/activity 12 above.
a.	 Choose six other e-text quotes from Shakespeare’s plays, especially 
the tragedies, one each as found at the websites cited in b) just below. 
b.	 Visit websites on Shakespeare’s works (e.g., Shakespeare Online 
sites; Resources at the Shakespeare Society Online; Quotes from the 
Works of Shakespeare; Shakespeare in Bartlett’s Familiar Quotations, 
Quotations About Flowers or Plants, Birds or Other Animals, Nature 
During the Seasons; Selected Quotes from Shakespeare’s Tragedies), 
or others, found online at Additional Websites cited below, at William 
Shakespeare on the Internet, or BardWeb, or in other chapters in ser. 1 
vol. 1. 
c.	 Explain why you chose each quote. 
d.	 Tip: Follow hints and tip in question/activity 12 above.

	
Selections from Shakespeare’s Plays: The Tragedies
79
14.	 Choose and read e-texts of two classic essays from literary history on 
Shakespeare, written by past and recent British and American critics or 
other critics in English. 
a.	 Choose from among the critics Ben Jonson, Samuel Johnson, S. T. 
Coleridge, Edward Dowden, William Hazlitt, Aldous Huxley, Ralph 
Waldo Emerson, Mark Twain, T. S. Eliot, Joyce Carol Oates, Anna 
Jameson, and Bianca-Oana Petrut.
b.	 Of works of authors cited in a) above, find e-texts online individu­
ally, or at Extracts from Earlier Critics (1710–1945) at http://people
.brandeis.edu/~teuber/earlycrit.html, or at Shakespeare on the Internet 
or BardWeb featured sites cited above, or at Shakespeare Online or 
Shakespeare Resources websites, found online via additional websites 
that feature e-texts of critical analysis articles.
c.	 Identify one main point in each essay, with the points referring to each 
writer’s view of Shakespeare and his works, emphasizing the tragic 
plays. 
d.	 Find and quote quotes from Shakespeare’s tragic plays to show your 
understanding of what the critics wrote. 
e.	 Tip: Give quotes from plays different from what the critics quoted.
15.	 Read an e-text of Critical Approaches to Shakespeare: Some Initial 
Observations (2001) by Ian Johnston.
a.	 Find it online at https://www.oneeyedman.net/school-archive/classes/
fulltext/www.mala.bc.ca/~johnstoi/eng366/approaches.htm, cited as a 
featured website above and noted in question/activity 14 above. 
b.	 Identify four approaches and “some other interpretative approaches” 
to Shakespeare’s works. Explain each approach briefly. Be sure to cite 
or refer to phrases in the article. 
c.	 For each approach cited above, choose an example you see from a 
featured website’s tragic plays by Shakespeare. Explain how each 
example fits with one or the other of Johnston’s approaches.
16.	 Visit websites found through searches at the William Shakespeare on the 
Internet or BardWeb featured sites or via sites found through additional 
websites link cited below.
a.	 Find, read, and note definitions of dreams, astronomy and cosmology, 
astrology and alchemy, ghosts and apparitions, and magic, and Shake­
speare’s uses of them in his tragic plays. 
b.	 Select five examples from the tragedies, one for each subject referred 
to just above. 
c.	 Quote from definitions and plays as you explain how your examples 
show each subject’s importance in a tragedy. 
d.	 Compare his uses of topics in a tragedy and in other play types 
(e.g., history, comedy). 

80	
Chapter 11
e.	 Tip: Find Shakespeare’s history and comic plays online as cited in this 
book’s (series 01 volume 01) chapters on his histories and comedies.
17.	 Find and study websites with Shakespeare spin-offs, parodies, other ver­
sions, and phrases.
a.	 Look for Shakespeare Spinoffs and Parodies and List of Titles of Works 
Based on Shakespearean Phrases.
b.	 Find these websites through the Shakespeare on the Internet or Bard­
Web featured websites cited above, or at suggested additional websites 
for which there is a link below. 
c.	 Choose three literary works in which you see and then identify some­
thing based on one of Shakespeare’s tragedies. Hint: Think of his titles 
and quotations. 
d.	 Write your own story title, and play scene, based on two phrases you 
choose from any tragic play title, quotes or excerpts, you find at web­
sites referred to at the beginning of this Question/Activity. Note: story 
title, play scene, need not be connected.
Additional websites for chapter 11 with more data to note
• https://clynjohnson.wordpress.com
{
{ Click the link to “Discovering English Literature . . .” Miscellany, then 
link to a wordpress.com page at netedbooks on Additional Websites, or 
go directly to http://netedbooks.wordpress.com/home. 

Section IV
SEVENTEENTH CENTURY—POETRY


83
Chapter 12
Excerpts from The Passionate Pilgrim, 
Sonnets to Sundry Notes of Music, 
“The Phoenix and the Turtle”
See featured websites/pages on Shakespeare, his poetry, and poems in his 
plays. Start with the Complete Works of William Shakespeare links page 
found at the Bartleby: Great Books Online website. Scroll to and click Poetry 
Index of First Lines link or Poetry Contents link to go to pages that feature 
links to poems other than the well-known sonnets. 
Among these pages of e-texts of poems written by, or attributed to, Wil­
liam Shakespeare, see links to first lines of the fourteen parts of The Passion­
ate Pilgrim (1599), and first lines of the six Sonnets to Sundry Notes of Music 
(1599) (where sundry meaning is diverse). See also links to The Phoenix and 
Turtle [Dove] (1601), and Venus and Adonis (1593). 
First reproduced online in 2000, these poems are from The Oxford Shake­
speare Version of 1914, in an early form of English in which his sonnets, 
other poems, were originally written. 
At the University of Ontario’s Representative Poetry Online, see notes 
after poem’s e-texts and more classic analyses by Coleridge, Twain, Emer­
son, and Edward Dowden. See also modern commentaries on Rise of Poetic 
Interpretation in Shakespeare at Google Books, the Poetry Foundation’s 
editorial by Monroe, and Johnston’s Critical Approaches to Shakespeare. 
Note also the Shakespeare As Poet and Dramatist website, the analysis 
“The Making of Shakespeare’s Dramatic Poetry” at the Project Muse web­
site, Observations on Shakespeare’s Dramatic Poetry by Johnston, plus 
poetry in the plays as cited at the See What Is There, The Wandering Hermit, 
and No Sweat Shakespeare sites, plus analyses at the pbs.org site, and more.

84	
Chapter 12
FEATURED WEBSITES
• www.bartleby.com/70
{
{ Scroll to, click, Poetry—Index of First Lines link, then first line links; or 
click Poetry—Contents then links to poems by title). 
{
{ Click links to e-texts of poems with notes about them at http://rpo.library
.utoronto.ca/poets/shakespeare-william. 
• See commentaries on the poetry at www.britannica.com/biography/
William-Shakespeare/Literary-criticism.
{
{ See the annotated list at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of
_Shakespeare_criticism
{
{ See Edward Dowden at http://search.eb.com/shakespeare/article-9031083, 
http://www.poetryfoundation.org/features/articles/detail/89184. 
{
{ Click X at top of page for big print of seven pages of Poetry Magazine 
founder Harriet Monroe’s comments, 2001 lectures, http://records.viu
.ca/~johnstoi/eng366/lectures/lectures.htm including Critical Approaches 
to Shakespeare and Observations on Shakespeare’s Dramatic Poetry.
• See at http://search.eb.com/shakespeare/article-232442 Shakespeare as 
Poet and Dramatist.
{
{ at http://thewanderinghermit.com/x-poetry/plays.htm poems in the plays, 
http://www.nosweatshakespeare.com/resources/shakespeare-puns, 
{
{ http://www.seewhatisthere.com/poetry-shake.html, plus analyses of 
poems in the plays in “The Rise of Poetic Interpretation in Shakespeare” 
in The Shakespeare Play As Poem after book title search at http://books
.google.com. 
{
{ At www.pbs.org/standarddeviantstv/transcript_shakespeare.html Click 
link to Shakespeare’s Use of Language, The Importance of Words.
{
{ See a review on Making of Shakespeare’s Dramatic Poetry, https://muse
.jhu.edu/article/514275/pdf.
• See Shakespeare quotes at http://www.seewhatisthere.com/poetry-shake
-misc.html, http://absoluteshakespeare.com/trivia/quotes/quotes.htm. 
• Click links by theme subject or play title at http://www.shakespeare-online
.com/quotes.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1.	 Find and read an e-text of “If Music and Sweet Poetry Agree,” a part of 
Shakespeare’s poem The Passionate Pilgrim.
a.	 Find this e-text at the featured website’s page, http://www.bartleby
.com/70/5208.html. 

	
Excerpts from The Passionate Pilgrim
85
b.	 Note the beginning of the poem. 
c.	 What is suggested in a statement that you can identify by the words 
“if” and “then”?
d.	 Identify some examples Shakespeare gave to support his viewpoint. 
e.	 What did he conclude? 
f.	 What did he say about poets as he aimed to back up his claim?
2.	 Find and read e-texts of Sonnets to Sundry Notes of Music such as “As It 
Fell Upon A Day.”
a.	 Find this e-text at the featured website’s page, http://www.bartleby
.com/70/536.html. 
b.	 Quoting some phrases as examples, identify what is merry about a 
month in spring, especially with reference to nature. 
c.	 Which bird is not quite merry, why, and how does it show its mood? 
d.	 What does the narrator think about because of the bird? What does he 
say to the bird? 
e.	 Explain the difference between fellow creatures or people who seem to 
be friends and those who really are friends.
f.	 How does one’s environment seem to react to one’s situation? 
g.	 Which natural feature does the narrator compare with words? Do you 
agree or not? Why? 
h.	 Provide your own examples as you write a poem on a subject you find 
in this poem. 
i.	 Maybe write your poem in the form of a sonnet (defined at http://web
.cn.edu/kwheeler/lit_terms_S.html).
3.	 Find and read an e-text of Shakespeare’s poem The Phoenix and the Turtle 
[Dove].
a.	 Find this e-text at the featured website’s page, http://www.bartleby
.com/70/54.html. 
b.	 Study lines 25 through 27, 29, 30, 33 through 36, 37 through 39, 41 
and 42. 
c.	 Identify, with quotes, examples of a relationship between the two birds, 
then suggest how one or more examples may represent a relationship 
between two people. 
d.	 Tip: See notes at Representative Poetry Online featured website’s page, 
http://rpo.library.utoronto.ca/poems/phoenix-and-turtle.
4.	 Look further at Shakespeare’s poem “The Phoenix and the Turtle [Dove],” 
whose e-text is found online at the featured website’s page, http://www
.bartleby.com/70/54.html.
a.	 Note especially the poem’s beginning verses. 
b.	 Study the descriptions of birds that, as the narrator comments, came 
to commemorate the lives and relationship of the phoenix and the 
turtledove. 

86	
Chapter 12
c.	 Identify what the two commemorated birds represent in general. 
d.	 Identify the other birds at, or trying to come to, the commemoration. 
e.	 Why was each bird allowed at the commemoration, or not?
f.	 Provide brief descriptions. 
g.	 Tip: See notes at Representative Poetry Online featured website’s page, 
http://rpo.library.utoronto.ca/poems/phoenix-and-turtle.
5.	 Study again Shakespeare’s poem “The Phoenix and the Turtle [Dove],” 
whose e-text is found at the featured website’s page http://www.bartleby
.com/70/54.html.
a.	 Note that this poem has been called an allegory. 
b.	 Search for, and read about, this literary term at the Literary Vocabulary 
website: http://web.cn.edu/kwheeler/lit_terms_A.html. 
c.	 Write an essay in which you suggest how this poem is an allegory.
6.	 Find e-texts of poems in Shakespeare’s plays, choose one to study, and 
analyze it.
a.	 Find some of Shakespeare’s poems in his plays at the featured 
sites, http://thewanderinghermit.com/x-poetry/plays.htm, http://www
.nosweatshakespeare.com/resources/shakespeare-puns, and at http://
www.seewhatisthere.com/poetry-shake.html. 
b.	 Find analyses of poems in the plays at www.pbs.org/standarddeviant
stv/transcript_shakespeare.html (click link to Shakespeare’s Use of 
Language, The Importance of Words, etc.), in “The Rise of Poetic Inter­
pretation in Shakespeare” in The Shakespeare Play As Poem (1980) by 
S. Viswanathan after book title search at http://books.google.com, Hal­
liday’s The Poetry of Shakespeare’s Plays at http://books.google.com, 
review of G. R. Hubbard’s The Making of Shakespeare’s Dramatic 
Poetry at https://muse.jhu.edu/article/514275/pdf.
c.	 Find e-texts of the plays in which the poems appear at http://
shakespeare.mit.edu, noting Shakespeare’s Comedies, Histories, and 
Tragedies. 
d.	 Write an essay. Identify poetic features in the plays as critics cited 
above point out. 
e.	 Find examples of poems in the plays as critics define poetry in the 
plays. 
f.	 Explain, as you see it, a chosen poem’s importance in its play. 
g.	 How may this poem be important outside of the play (i.e., in his time, 
and in today’s world, in your life, or for people of any time and place)?
h.	 Tip: In your comments, include a poem’s theme and how it applies to 
its play, then as it, 
7.	 Visit websites with Shakespearean quotations.
a.	 Visit, for example, http://www.seewhatisthere.com/poetry-shake-misc.
html, http://absoluteshakespeare.com/trivia/quotes/quotes.htm, and 

	
Excerpts from The Passionate Pilgrim
87
click links by theme subject or play title at http://www.shakespeare-
online.com/quotes.
b.	 Search for quotations from Shakespeare’s poems. 
c.	 Choose a quotation, by subject if possible. 
d.	 What is the quotation’s main point? 
e.	 Suggest what the poem means to you.
8.	 Find and read two e-texts, one classic essay and one recent noteworthy 
essay on Shakespeare.
a.	 Keep in mind the comment that Shakespeare is “the greatest 
poet of modern times and . . . of all time” as stated by South 
American scholar Otto Carpeaux at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Timeline_of_Shakespeare_criticism#Twentieth_century. 
b.	 See e-texts of essays written by British and American critics and writers 
of the past such as Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Ralph Waldo Emerson, 
Mark Twain, Edward Dowden, and more. See documents by modern 
critics such as Harriet Monroe and Ian Johnston; others cited at www
.britannica.com/biography/William-Shakespeare/Literary-criticism 
with links to more data, including some on the bard’s dramatic poetry, 
poems, and sonnets. 
c.	 Find essays’ e-texts at www.pagebypagebooks.com/Mark_Twain/
Is_Shakespeare_Dead, 
https://archive.org/details/coleridgesessay
s00cole, www.bartleby.com/90/0405.html, plus at http://records.viu
.ca/~johnstoi/eng366/lectures/lectures.htm, a review at G. R. Hibbard’s 
Making of Shakespeare’s Dramatic Poetry at https://muse.jhu.edu/arti
cle/514275/pdf, an annotated list at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time
line_of_Shakespeare_criticism, and a bibliography at http://shaksper
.net/archive/1990/27-september/80-basic-shakespearean-criticism-145.
d.	 Identify from each essay’s main points that refer to the essay writers’ 
views of Shakespeare and his works, especially his poems or poetry in 
the plays. 
e.	 Quote a sentence or two from these essays. Be sure the quotes feature 
main points. 
f.	 Find and quote quotations from Shakespeare’s poems at the featured 
websites, http://www.seewhatisthere.com/poetry-shake-misc.html, 
http://absoluteshakespeare.com/trivia/quotes/quotes.htm, and click 
links by theme, subject, or play title at http://www.shakespeare-online
.com/quotes, then suggest how these quotes from the poems are exam­
ples of the critics’ main points.
g.	 After identifying main points in the two essays you chose, write a 
paragraph in which you comment on how these essay points help you 
understand how Shakespeare and his poems can express a meaning of 
a quote that Carpeaux commented on, stated in question 8a just above, 

88	
Chapter 12
with title search of William Shakespeare by Wikipedians, and scroll to 
page 124.
Additional websites for chapter 12, with more data to note
• https://clynjohnson.wordpress.com
{
{ Click Discovering English Literature in Bits & Bytes, then click link 
to Additional Information to go with chapters; or go directly to https://
netedbooks.wordpress.com/home.

89
Chapter 13
Sonnets plus Dramatic Poetry 
by William Shakespeare
See e-texts of poems, especially sonnets and dramatic poetry, written by or 
attributed to William Shakespeare at each featured website. 
See features of the Folger Shakespeare Library Digital Texts website, not­
ing links to 144 sonnets. On the Bartleby: The Great Books Online website, 
click links to sonnets and other poems numbered I–CLIV (equal to 1–154). 
At both sites, see links to first lines, sonnet numbers.
Poems at the Folger Digital Texts site were placed online starting 2010 
while poems at the Bartleby site, first appeared online in 2000, from “The 
Oxford Shakespeare” version of 1914, providing modern English translation 
of early English in which sonnets were originally written. 
Note also searches by first line or well-known line at the Rhyme Zone web­
site, and the Shakespeare Online site’s quote page with links to Shakespeare 
passages via subject links. 
Note websites on Shakespeare’s dramatic poetry, such as Kim Ballard’s 
Prose and Verse in Shakespeare’s Plays at the British Library a review of 
The Making of Shakespeare’s Dramatic Poetry by G. R. Hibbard (1981), and 
other sites with definitions and examples.
More websites provide insight into, and commentaries on, Shakespeare’s 
sonnets. Note Coleridge’s “Shakespeare, A Poet” in Literary Remains of 
Shakespeare (1819), “Sonnets” in Auden’s Lectures on Shakespeare (2000), 
plus Ian Johnston’s 1999 A Look at Shakespeare’s Sonnets, Kenneth C. Ben­
nett’s 2007 Threading Shakespeare’s Sonnets, data on Shakespearean Sonnet 
Basics and How to Analyze a Shakespearean Sonnet.
Note also more commentaries at sites cited in the additional websites 
linked below.

90	
Chapter 13
FEATURED WEBSITES
• http://www.folger.edu/sonnets
{
{ Click “read poems online in Folger Digital Texts.” 
{
{ Scroll poem links by numbers 1–144 with first lines near them.
{
{ See search area at right where searches by sonnet number, or text by first 
line, are possible, especially for sonnets 145–154.
{
{ See: www.bartleby.com/70/index1.html. 
{
{ Click links to poems arranged by Roman numbers I–CLIV or first lines 
near them.
{
{ Do a popular word search at www.rhymezone.com/shakespeare or search 
by most popular lines to find passages from Shakespeare’s sonnets and 
other works, www.shakespeares-sonnets.com/firstlines.php.
• See Shakespeare’s Sonnets at www.bardweb.net/poetry.html#sonnets.
{
{ See an Outline of the Contents of Shakespeare’s Sonnets by Raymond 
M. Alden at http://www.shakespeare-online.com/sonnets/sonnetgroup­
analysis.html.
{
{ See another group analysis at http://www.handprint.com/SC/SHK/son
nets.html#synopsis.
• See modern and classic Shakespearean scholars at http://www.shakespea
reis.com/interview-searches/the-interviews/scholars, http://web.archive
.org/web/20101222063944, and /http:/records.viu.ca/~johnstoi/eng366/son
nets.htm.
{
{ Ian Johnston’s 1999 article, “A Note on Shakespeare’s Sonnets,” Kenneth 
C. Bennett’s Threading Shakespeare’s Sonnets (2007) at http://campus
.lakeforest.edu/kbennett/sonnets/entirebook.pdf. 
{
{ Nigel Davies’s The Place 2 Be at http://www.reocities.com/Athens/
Troy/4081/Sonnets.html. Note criticism through time such as T. S. Eliot 
at the paragraph starting with “The only way” at www.bartleby.com/200/
sw9.html. 
{
{ See “Sonnets” in Lectures on Shakespeare (2000) by W. H. Auden as 
edited by Arthur Kirsh at Lectures title search at http://books.google.com. 
{
{ See Shakespeare as Poet (with “first importance of a poet”) by Ralph 
Waldo Emerson at www.bartleby.com/90/0405.html.
{
{ See “Shakespeare, a Poet” in Literary Remains of Shakespeare (1819) 
by Samuel Taylor Coleridge at www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/8533/
pg8533-images.html, 
www.pagebypagebooks.com/Mark_Twain/
Is_Shakespeare_Dead (note chapters X and VIII), http://web.uvic
.ca/~mbest1/engl366c/tn3.html with John Dryden’s mixed review com­
ments, and others’ comments in Additional Websites cited below.
• www.shakespeare-online.com

	
Sonnets plus Dramatic Poetry by William Shakespeare
91
{
{ Note Why Study Shakespeare and its links to How to Analyze a Shake­
spearean Sonnet and Shakespearean Sonnet Basics.
{
{ Kim Ballard’s Prose and Verse in Shakespeare’s Plays at British Library 
website: 
http://www.bl.uk/shakespeare/articles/prose-and-verse-in
-shakespeares-plays.
{
{ See review of The Making of Shakespeare’s Dramatic Poetry by G. R. 
Hibbard (1981) at http://muse.jhu.edu/article/514275.
{
{ See dramatic verse defined with Shakespeare notes at https://en.wikipedia
.org/wiki/Verse_drama_and_dramatic_verse, 
http://study.com/acad
emy/lesson/dramatic-poetry-definition-examples.html, http://hubpages
.com/literature/dramatic-poetry/605, and http://oxfordindex.oup.com/
view/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199607747.013.0024.
• Quotations by themes at www.shakespeare-online.com/quotes.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1.	 Read an e-text reproduction of William Shakespeare’s sonnet 91 (91) 
(XCI) found at the featured websites and whose first line starts with Some 
Glory In.
a.	 Find e-text at www.folger.edu/sonnets and www.bartleby.com/70/
index1.html sites. 
b.	 Identify five things that some people glory in, then what every humor 
(i.e., mood) has, and where it finds something (which you should iden­
tify) above the rest. 
c.	 Tell what these particulars are not, and what the narrator believes about 
all these. How? 
d.	 What is better than which four things and how (as adjectives indicate)? 
e.	 Of what does the narrator boast, yet what is he aware of that would be 
wretched?
2.	 Find and read an e-text reproduction of William Shakespeare’s sonnet 
fifty-five (55) (LV), whose first line starts with Not marble, nor. . . .
a.	 Find e-text at www.folger.edu/sonnets and www.bartleby.com/70/
index1.html sites. 
b.	 Scroll to and study the second part of line 2, all of line 3, lines 9 
through 11, and the first and second parts of line 14. 
c.	 Identify what will cause something about a person to endure, noting 
four phrases for one way that the person will endure, and then two other 
phrases for two other ways. 
d.	 Scroll to and study line 1, the first part of line 2, and lines 4 
through 7. 

92	
Chapter 13
e.	 Quoting some phrases, identify two things that will not endure although 
something of the person will, and then note how that person will not be 
affected by those things. 
f.	 Keep in mind critics have identified at least two features that make this 
poem important. Suggest what you think the two features are. Support 
your answer with quotes.
3.	 Study further the e-text reproduction of Shakespeare’s sonnet number 55.
a.	 Find e-text at www.folger.edu/sonnets and www.bartleby.com/70/
index1.htmlsites. 
b.	 Scroll to and reread lines 4 through 8 especially. 
c.	 Quote phrases from these lines as you write a poem (perhaps a sonnet) 
or an essay, applying them to today’s world and to someone in it of the 
present or recent past.
4.	 Find and read an e-text of William Shakespeare’s sonnet 29 (29) whose 
first line starts When in disgrace with. . . .
a.	 Find e-text at www.folger.edu/sonnets and www.bartleby.com/70/
index1.html sites. 
b.	 Scroll to and study lines 1 through 7.
c.	 Identify the narrator’s present state of being. 
d.	 Tell three things he does with relation to it. 
e.	 Study line 8. 
f.	 Suggest what is puzzling about its statement. 
g.	 Study line 9. 
h.	 What does the narrator think of himself in relation to what he wrote in 
the earlier lines? 
i.	 Scroll to and study lines 10 through 14.
j.	 Why does the narrator change his mind? How does he compare himself 
to a particular bird? What does he scorn and why?
5.	 Find and read e-text reproductions of some other sonnets by William 
Shakespeare.
a.	 Find, those sonnets whose first lines and numbers are “Shall I Compare 
Thee to a Summer’s Day” (18), That Time of Year Thou Mayst in Me 
Behold (73), “Like As the Waves Make Towards the Pebbled Shore” 
(60), “How Heavy Do I Journey on the Way” (50), “When to the Ses­
sions of Sweet Silent Thought” (30), “Let Us Not to the Marriage of 
True Minds Admit Impediments” (116), and “Love is too young to 
know . . .” (151). 
b.	 Find e-text at www.folger.edu/sonnets and www.bartleby.com/70/
index1.html sites. 
c.	 Choose three and identify (with quoted phrases) the main point of each. 

	
Sonnets plus Dramatic Poetry by William Shakespeare
93
d.	 Quote more phrases from each sonnet to support the main point you 
see in each one.
6.	 While you keep in mind questions/activities 1 through 5 above, and Wil­
liam Shakespeare’s sonnets online that they refer to, find and read Nigel 
Davies’ e-text introduction to Shakespeare’s sonnets.
a.	 Find online as detailed in tips just below, selecting sonnets by subject 
or first line as listed on Davies’s page at http://www.reocities.com/
Athens/Troy/4081/Sonnets.html formerly found through link at the 
Surfing With the Bard website at www.shakespearehigh.com/library/
surfbard/index.htm. 
b.	 Keep Davies’s introduction in mind as you find, choose, and read e-text 
reproductions of some Shakespeare sonnets found at the featured Fol­
ger and Bartleby featured websites, and at the Surfing With the Bard 
website. 
c.	 Follow Davies’s viewpoints as you analyze three Shakespeare sonnets 
you choose. Tell how he portrayed each one’s theme as he followed or 
altered rules defining a sonnet. 
d.	 Tips: Select sonnets by subject or first line as listed on Davies’s online 
page cited as stated in a) above. Note, for example, subjects such 
as advice to a young man, comments to a woman or about women, 
something about human nature, nature symbolizing or compared with 
human nature, time, poet and muse. See, for example, numbers 12, 
14, 15, 17, 21, 33 through 35, 38, 36, and 65. One of the sonnets you 
choose can be one of the sonnets referred to in questions/activities 1 
through 5 above.
7.	 Visit websites featuring e-texts of documents including Outline of the 
Contents of Shakespeare’s Sonnets by Raymond M. Alden and Quotations 
by Theme at Shakespeare Online.
a.	 Find these e-texts at featured websites including http://www.shake
speare-online.com/sonnets/sonnetgroupanalysis.html and http://www
.shakespeare-online.com/quotes. 
b.	 Search for quotations by subject and the sonnets or other poems in 
which they appear. 
c.	 Find sonnet e-texts at www.folger.edu/sonnets and www.bartleby
.com/70/index1.html sites. 
d.	 Identify the quotation’s main point. 
e.	 Suggest what the sonnet means. 
f.	 Hint: Select a quote from a sonnet featuring a subject such as memory, 
or remembrance, perfection, praise, time, or something else. 
8.	 Find and read e-text reproductions of some classic critical essays on 
Shakespeare and poetry.

94	
Chapter 13
a.	 Look for quotes from writings by noted British and American critics 
and writers of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, such as Samuel 
Taylor Coleridge, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Mark Twain, W. H. Auden, 
and more. 
b.	 Check featured websites for e-texts by John Dryden at http://web
.uvic.ca/~mbest1/engl366c/tn3.html, Samuel Taylor Coleridge at www
.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/8533/pg8533-images.html, Ralph Waldo 
Emerson at www.bartleby.com/90/0405.html, Samuel Clemens or 
Mark Twain at www.pagebypagebooks.com/Mark_Twain/Is_Shake
speare_Dead, and T. S. Eliot at www.bartleby.com/200/sw9.html 
(scroll to paragraph starting “The only way”). 
c.	 Identify from each essay a main point referring to the essay writer’s 
view of Shakespeare and his works, especially his sonnets plus his 
dramatic poetry and his other poems. 
d.	 Quote a sentence or two featuring each essay’s main point. 
e.	 Find and quote quotations from Shakespeare’s sonnets at a featured 
website cited above, then suggest how the quoted sonnets are examples 
of the critics’ main points.
9.	 Find online definitions of dramatic verse and e-texts of examples in Shake­
speare’s plays.
a.	 Check e-text of Ballard’s Prose and Verse in Shakespeare’s Plays 
at http://www.bl.uk/shakespeare/articles/prose-and-verse-in-shake
speares-plays, at http://muse.jhu.edu/article/514275 a review of The 
Making of Shakespeare’s Dramatic Poetry by G. R. Hibbard, plus 
definitions at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Verse_drama_and_dramatic
_verse (with verse variations), plus at http://study.com/academy/lesson/
dramatic-poetry-definition-examples.html, verse and prose in Shake
speare at http://shakespeare-w.com/english/shakespeare/terms.html. 
b.	 Find e-texts of Shakespeare’s dramatic verse in Ballard’s article at Brit­
ish Library site, at the review of Hibbard’s work at http://muse.jhu.edu/
article/514275, a definition at http://hubpages.com/literature/dramatic-
poetry/605, and Shakespeare’s Dramatic Verse Line at http://oxfordin
dex.oup.com/view/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199607747.013.0024. 
c.	 Write an essay in which you list features and four types of verse, plus 
provide a definition of dramatic verse, then suggest, with quotation 
examples, how some of Shakespeare’s works are examples of this liter­
ary form.

	
Sonnets plus Dramatic Poetry by William Shakespeare
95
Additional websites for chapter 13 with more data
• https://clynjohnson.wordpress.com
{
{ Click link to Discovering English Literature in Bits & Bytes . . . Addi­
tional Websites, or go directly to https://www.netedbooks.worpress.com/
home.


97
Chapter 14
Various Writings by John Donne
John Donne’s writings, many complex, range from controversial romantic 
versifications, to poetry with metaphors from science and other subjects, plus 
works with religious overtones. 
Some featured sites, including the Luminarium, show Donne sometimes 
writing in a short literary form (e.g., epigram), as in “An Obscure Writer,” 
“Disinherited,” and nearly twenty other titles. 
Basic features and critical analyses of this format, defined by a variety of 
authors, include wit and conceit, both considered in various ways, often as 
written by metaphysical poets.
Note also the Luminarium and other websites with epigrammatic quotes 
from Donne’s verse letters and other works. 
The Luminarium’s Donne articles area, and other featured websites of 
books online, including Moulton’s Library of Literary Criticism volumes 
1–4, Digital Donne Variorum and e-notes’ annotated essays from Early Mod­
ern Studies Journal (e.g., “Use of Space”) have analyses of Donne, his works, 
from his time to the present, with various views. See Donne in an epigram; 
Coleridge on Donne; T. S. Eliot noting Donne’s traits; H. J. C. Grierson defin­
ing Donne and metaphysical poetry; plus other views of critics in modern 
times and critics from the recent past.
FEATURED WEBSITES
• http://www.gutenberg.org/files/48688/48688-h/48688-h.htm
{
{ See area with Donne’s epigrams in a 1912 publication.
• www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/donne/donnebib.htm
{
{ See Letters to Several Personages.

98	
Chapter 14
• Note Donne’s poems and first lines listed as verse letters or parts of them 
at http://books.wwnorton.com/books/webad.aspx?id=10135. 
• http://www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/donne/donnequotes.htm
• See commentaries on Donne and his works, at Moulton’s Library of Liter­
ary Criticism at http://www.oocities.org/litpageplus/donnmoul.html.
{
{ See Oxford Handbook of John Donne, https://www.amazon.co.uk ed. by 
M. Thomas Hester, others, pages 1, 99, 105.
{
{ www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/donne/donnessays.htm including Sparkes’ . . . 
the Use of Geometric Conceits in the Poetic Works of Donne . . ., and Mor­
gan’s Donne and the Tradition of English Literature, www.humanitiesweb
.org/spa/lcl/ID/42, four annotated bibliographies at http://donnevariorum
.tamu.edu/html/resources/index.html.
{
{ Click links to volumes in pdf format by the years 1912–1967, 1968–
1978, 1979–1996, and 1997–2008.
{
{ See http://www.enotes.com/topics/john-donne/critical-essays/donne-john
#critical-essays-donne-john-criticism
{
{ Click links to e-texts of articles from literary magazines.
{
{ See an excerpt from a preview of article on modern views of Donne’s 
poems, by Helen Gardner; plus introduction and commentary to vol. 2 
of Poems of John Donne edited by Grierson in 1912 at https://catalog
.hathitrust.org/Record/001017306 (click vol. 2 link, scroll to areas).
{
{ http://neoenglishsystem.blogspot.com/2010/11/conceits-and-images-of
-john-donne.html, scroll to sources section and its comment by Joan 
Bennett, literary critic.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1.	 Find online the phrases Samuel Taylor Coleridge used to define “What Is 
an Epigram?”
a.	 Find an e-text of this definition at https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/
poem/what-epigram. 
b.	 Identify two phrases Coleridge used to define an epigram. 
c.	 For other definitions of epigram see sites in the additional sites area 
cited below. 
d.	 Select, list, and state sources of other online definitions of epigram.
2.	 Find and read some e-texts of some of Donne’s epigrams, or epigrammatic 
poems and letters. 
a.	 Find these e-texts at the featured websites, http://www.gutenberg.
org/files/48688/48688-h/48688-h.htm and http://www.luminarium.org/
sevenlit/donne/donnebib.htm.

	
Various Writings by John Donne
99
b.	 Choose one of the following works; one of Donne’s epigrams such as 
An Obscure Writer, or Disinherited; or one of the verse letters (e.g., 
Letter to the Countess of Bedford [I]; especially the first and second 
lines); or one of the elegies (e.g., His Picture; i.e., lines 1 and 2; 3’s 
first part; 13; 17; 19; 20). 
c.	 Identify who Donne was writing about and something of what he said 
about that person. 
d.	 How does Coleridge’s epigram definition aid understanding of the cho­
sen Donne epigram? 
e.	 Write two new epigrammatic poems (two to six lines), being sure to 
work in Coleridge’s defining points while considering what is said in 
question 3d below. 
f.	 The first epigrammatic poem you write should be an up-to-date version 
of one of the subjects referred to in the works above, either the one you 
chose, or another one. 
g.	 The second epigrammatic poem you write should be on an aspect of 
someone of historical note, or of someone who is worth remembering 
today, or an “average” person (of the past or present) with a worthwhile 
or notable memorable aspect.
3.	 Find and read e-texts of Ben Jonson’s Epigrams—To John Donne; and on 
Donne as poet.
a.	 Find these e-texts at www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/jonson/benbib.htm 
(number XXIII) and at http://genius.com/Ben-jonson-epigram-xcvi-to
-john-donne-annotated (XCVI). 
b.	 How did Jonson characterize Donne and his writings? 
c.	 What connection did Jonson see between their works? 
d.	 For definitions of wit, including some as used in Donne’s epigrams, 
go to https://www.litencyc.com/index.php, then search glossary for 
wit to find varied definitions through time; see also https://neoenglish
.wordpress.com/2010/11/07/the-wit-of-john-donne; and more in some 
additional websites below.
4.	 Find and read an e-text of Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s early nineteenth- 
century critical analysis poem On Donne’s Poetry.
a.	 Find this e-text online at http://rpo.library.utoronto.ca/poems/
donnes-poetry. 
b.	 Identify how Coleridge precisely characterized Donne and his writings. 
c.	 Tip: First look at lines 3 and 4, then lines 1 and 2.
5.	 Find some e-texts of epigram-like quotations from John Donne’s works.
a.	 Find e-texts of these quotations at featured websites’ pages includ­
ing www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/donne/donnequotes.htm and in the 
fourth verse at www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/donne/canonization.php.

100	
Chapter 14
b.	 Note especially the quotes beginning: “All mankind is . . .”, “No Man 
is . . .”, “Reason is . . .”, “I wonder . . .”, and “We’ll build in sonnets. . . .”
c.	 Choose three quotations, one or more of those cited in b) above, or 
check other web sites with quotes (e.g., https://www.goodreads.com/
author/quotes/77318.John_Donne). 
d.	 Write essays in which you suggest what each quotation means, and 
why you think so.
e.	 Provide examples from what you know, know about, or have heard or 
read about, to show your understanding.
6.	 Donne’s writings have been identified with the literary terms wit and con­
ceit and, in connection with these terms, he has been called a metaphysical 
poet, plus a “right poet.”
a.	 Find online definitions of, plus e-texts of noted writers and scholars’ 
explanations of these literary terms and these types of poets and their 
poetry. 
b.	 Look online at http://www.poetryfoundation.org/learning/glossary
-term/conceit, http://www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/metaintro.htm, and 
at additional websites below.
c.	 Look for e-texts of works by noted classic writers including John 
Dryden, Philip Sidney, and Samuel Johnson, such as Sidney’s Defence 
of Poesy (considered the first work of literary criticism) in which 
Donne is considered a “right poet” with his poetry a form of writing 
that is a knitting up of memory; Dryden’s Of Dramatick Poesy in which 
he refers to Donne’s extravagant conceits (also known by two other 
phrases); and Johnson’s Lives of the Poets in which he refers to Donne 
and conceit and metaphysical poets (in paragraphs 3, 5, and 8 of his 
Life of Cowley). 
d.	 Note Dryden’s reference at http://www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/
metaintro.htm; Johnson’s Lives of the Poets at www.bartleby
.com/209/775.html; plus Donne referred to in Dryden’s An Essay of 
Dramatick Poesy (aka Of Dramatic Poesie) (1668) edited at https://
andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/Texts/drampoet.html by Jack Lynch 
(currently a professor at Rutgers University); and Sidney’s Apologie 
for Poetry aka Defence of Poesy (1580, 1890) at http://www.stjohns
-chs.org/english/Renaissance/Ren-si.html noting parts 3 through 9, 
then whole work after an 1890 introduction by A. S. Cook at https://
archive.org/details/defenseofpoesyot00sidn (especially pages 2–36, 
etc.). See also page 123 with comment by Dryden on Donne after book 
title search of Glossary of John Dryden’s Literary Terms (1969) by 
H. James Jensen at http://books.google.com; and first two sentences of 
the 1990s item by Kaye Anfield and M. H. Abrams at www.chalacyn
.com/~talyce/text/flea.html.

	
Various Writings by John Donne
101
e.	 Quoting from definitions of conceit in e-texts of documents found 
online as cited above, identify features of conceits, including Dryden’s 
three references. 
f.	 Identify definitions of wit as stated by these commentators. 
g.	 Identify how these classic writers defined poets; metaphysical poets, 
“the right poet”; “right describing note to know a poet by,” and “light 
bringer to ignorance.”
h.	 For more data on conceit, click glossary and do a word search at the 
https://www.litencyc.com/index.php website and see the websites 
http://josbd.com/conceit.html (note Samuel Johnson’s, T. S. Eliot’s, 
and Helen Gardner’s comments), http://neoenglishsystem.blogspot
.com (do search for Donne conceit in search box at right). Note more 
sites in additional websites area below.
7.	 As you quote from e-texts of Donne poems noted just below, and another 
poem by Donne that you select, explain how they are, or have, examples 
of conceit and/or wit, as Dryden, Johnson, Sidney, and others suggested; 
as noted in question/activity 6 above.
a.	 Look at http://allrfree.blogspot.com/2009/07/john-donne-conceit.html, 
then at e-texts of Donne’s poems “Hymn . . . In My Sickness” (under 
Divine Poems) and “The Canonization” (under Songs and Sonnets) 
(noting verses 2 and 4 of Canonization) at www.luminarium.org/seven­
lit/donne/donnebib.htm, then e-text of other poem here.
b.	 Read, identify, and explain, with quotes, comparisons involving 
a  human body, a musical instrument, physicians, cosmographers, a 
patient, a map, physicians’ exams, and the journey of a patient’s soul. 
c.	 Identify and explain, including quotations, the narrator’s examples as 
he challenges someone to show that his loving someone influences or 
hurts things that happen in the world around him or in the world in 
general.
d.	 Identify and explain how the narrator does a turnabout and claims 
unusual things that people in love can cause to happen. 
e.	 For more examples of Donne’s poems being or having conceits: see 
additional sites, http://neoenglishsystem.blogspot.com/2010/11/con­
ceits-and-images-of-john-donne.html.
8.	 Donne wrote many letters in prose and some in verse.
a.	 Find definitions of verse letters online at www.online-literature
.com/article/donne/13732 and www.enotes.com/topics/john-donne/
critical-essays and http://www.oxfordhandbooks.com/view/10.1093/
oxfordhb/9780199218608.001.0001/oxfordhb-9780199218608-e-19.
b.	 See e-texts of Donne’s verse letters at www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/
donne/donnebib.htm and at http://books.wwnorton.com/books/webad
.aspx?id=10135, plus at additional websites with link cited below: 

102	
Chapter 14
John Donne’s Verse Letters (by first lines or persons to whom letters 
were written) and commentaries at http://www.oocities.org/litpagep­
lus/donnmoul.html, and www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/donne/donnes­
says.htm and http://www.ipl.org/div/litcrit.
c.	 Note verse letters with the first lines and “Can we find . . .”, “O thou 
which to search, “Is not thy sacred hunger of science”, “Madam”, 
“Reason is . . .”, “Sir, more than . . ., letters . . .”
d.	 Identify some features of verse letters. 
e.	 Suggest reasons why Donne wrote verse letters.
f.	 Choose a verse letter by Donne. Suggest how it is an example of why 
he wrote this way.
9.	 See in Dryden’s comments the ways he said that Donne wrote on and to 
women.
a.	 Note especially the phrase “He affects the metaphysics not only in his 
satires, but in his amorous verses, where nature only should reign; and 
perplexes the minds of the fair sex with nice speculations of philoso­
phy, when he should engage their hearts. . . .” 
b.	 See an e-text of this phrase on page 6 of Dryden’s Essay on Satire in 
an 1887 edition of The Works of John Dryden, vol.13, after book title 
search at http://books.google.com. 
c.	 Write an essay. Disagree or agree with this comment and tell why you 
think this way.
10.	 Find, read, e-text excerpts from T. S. Eliot’s 1923 critical analysis on 
Donne and his works.
a.	 See e-text after clicking link at www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/donne/
donnessays.htm. 
b.	 Identify five comments Eliot wrote on Donne’s writing then how 
Donne’s works are relevant in modern times. 
c.	 Explain one comment, citing and quoting from a Donne poem e-text 
found online via the link at www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/donne/don
nebib.htm.
11.	 Critic H. J. C. Grierson is also credited along with T. S. Eliot as a twen­
tieth-century critic who revived interest and study in John Donne and his 
works after several centuries.
a.	 Find and read online documents with comments Grierson made about 
Donne and his writings, as can be found at the website pages, www
.bartleby.com/105/1000.html and www.bartleby.com/105/index.html, 
and in the Introduction and commentary to vol. 2 of Poems of John 
Donne edited by Grierson in 1912 now at https://catalog.hathitrust
.org/Record/001017306 (click vol. 2 link, scroll to sections). 

	
Various Writings by John Donne
103
b.	 Select three comments Grierson made about Donne and Donne’s writ­
ing style. 
c.	 Find some Donne works online at featured websites, then choose one 
or more works that show how Grierson’s comments help you gain 
insight into Donne’s works.
12.	 Modern-day scholar M. Thomas Hester suggested that a phrase “a little 
world made cunningly” (first line of Donne’s Divine poem V at www
.bartleby.com/357/95.html) is a way to describe Donne’s poems called 
epigrams, as indicated in Hester’s article “A Little World Made Cun­
ningly” in The Eagle and the Dove: Reassessing John Donne (1986), 
edited by Summers and Pebworth, as stated in the document at the web­
site cited in the additional sites whose link is cited below: www.oocities
.org/milleldred/donnehester2.html.
a.	 At http://www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/donne/donnessays.htm, click 
title link for The Titles/Headings of John Donne’s Epigrams, and note 
in paragraph 4 the first part of the sentence “The title, in other words, 
encapsulates the subject and method of the poem in which the speaker 
juggles’ contrasting meanings. . . .”
b.	 Find two items by Donne, either a brief poem, epigram, letter in 
verse, or quotation, as found at the featured sites, www.luminarium.org/
sevenlit/donne/donnebib.htm, www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/donne/
donnequotes.htm, www.gutenberg.org/files/48688/48688-h/48688-h
.htm, and http://books.wwnorton.com/books/webad.aspx?id=10135. 
c.	 Write an essay. How do chosen articles exemplify what Hester said of 
Donne’s works?
13.	 Select another (approved) online critical analysis article from John 
Donne essays page at featured websites, including the Luminarium, 
Humanities Web pages, Moulton’s Library of Literary Criticism, and the 
Internet Public Library—Donne—Literary Criticism section.
a.	 Search www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/donne/donnessays.htm, www
.humanitiesweb.org (at top, click the Literature link that goes to a 
Library page, then click links for Sort Alphabetically, D, and Donne), 
http://www.ipl.org/div/litcrit, or John Donne at http://www.oocities
.org/litpageplus/donnmoul.html. 
b.	 What is the main point of the article? Refer to three points the article 
writer said to support a viewpoint. 
c.	 Include quotes either from Donne’s writings that the article writer 
stated or referred to, or that you find at featured www.luminarium.org/
sevenlit/donne/donnequotes.htm site.

104	
Chapter 14
Additional websites for chapter 14 with more data to note
• https://clynjohnson.wordpress.com
{
{ Click links to “Discovering English Literature… Additional Websites,” 
then http://netedbooks.wordpress.com/home, then chapter 14, and then 
scroll to list.

105
Chapter 15
Selected Poetry by John Donne
At the John Donne Variorum Project website, an area of the Texas A & M 
University website, see authoritative e-texts of Donne’s poetry in modern 
English; original texts in early English; transcriptions, plus explanatory notes 
and scholarly resources.
See works from their first publication, such as Poems by John Donne 
(1633).
See poems published during Donne’s life (1572 to 1631), and others pub­
lished after his death, or without dates because not known, or not published 
before.
More e-texts of these and other Donne poems in modern printing and 
spelling can be found also at other featured websites such as Humanities 
Web, Luminarium, Representative Poetry Online Literature Network/Online 
Literature, and Great Books Online.
Note phrases and words including “good-morrow,” “valediction,” “dreme,” 
“riding,” “anniversarie,” “sonnet,” and more.
For critical analyses of Donne’s poems, see Luminarium’s essays/articles 
links page to items (e.g., Eliot’s John Donne. For Jonson’s writings on 
Donne, see Poetry Foundation web pages. See also a 2001 article by William 
F. Blissett in Early Modern English Studies and a 1999 article by Scott Nixon 
on Thomas Carew, Jonson, and Donne in Web Archive’s Studies of English 
Literature 1500–1900.
FEATURED WEBSITES
• http://donnevariorum.tamu.edu
{
{ Click Digital Facsimile Editions link.

106	
Chapter 15
{
{ On next page click 1633 Edition of Poems link or a link for the 1635 or 
1669 link, then an index link, then a few title links; or click concordance 
link, then scroll to and click links to particular words or phrases, then 
click link that appears.
{
{ For other poems, see http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/
poets/detail/john-donne. 
{
{ Find e-text to poems by clicking link to Donne’s Poems, Articles, and 
More, then More Poems link, then poem title link, www.humanitiesweb
.org.
{
{ Click the Literature link that goes to a Library page, then click links for 
Sort Alphabetically, D, and Donne, John.
{
{ http://rpo.library.utoronto.ca/poets/donne-john, www.luminarium.org/sev
enlit/donne (works with e-texts and audio clips), http://www.online-
literature.com/donne, http://www.bartleby.com/357/22.html.
• http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/50676 
(elegy on Donne by Jonson) and http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems
-and-poets/poems/detail/44456 (“To John Donne” by Ben Jonson).
{
{ http://www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/donne/donnessays.htm with links to, 
for example,  http://web.archive.org/web/20030703050435/http://www.
geocities.com/milleldred/donneliot.html (T. S. Eliot on John Donne), 
plus something on Donne and Jonson by Carew. 
{
{ http://web.archive.org/web/20040518152051/http://www.geocities
.com/Athens/Acropolis/6586/nixon.html, https://www.matrix.edu.au/hsc
-english-module-a-john-donne-analysis.
• http://extra.shu.ac.uk/emls/si-07/blissett.htm (note 8 and 9 on Donne and 
Ben Jonson).
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES 
1.	 Find and read e-texts of John Donne’s poems The Good Morrow and A 
Valediction Forbidding Mourning.
a.	 Find e-texts of The Good Morrow and A Valediction Forbidding 
Mourning in their original printed format through index page at the 
http://donnevariorum.tamu.edu featured website. Find The Good Mor­
row in the 1633 edition of Donne’s poems, then Valediction poem in the 
1635 and 1669 editions. Also find e-texts in modern form on the John 
Donne Pages of the websites www.humanitiesweb.org, www.online-
literature.com/donne, http://rpo.library.utoronto.ca/poets/donne-john, 
and www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/donne. 

	
Selected Poetry by John Donne
107
b.	 Identify, write on geographical, mathematical, astronomical references, 
as Donne used in relation to personal relationships between a husband 
and wife, as depicted in these poems.
c.	 Why, do you think, these references seem apt and add interesting 
aspects to the subject?
2.	 Study the first stanza of John Donne’s Poem The Good Morrow, and stan­
zas four and five of A Valediction Forbidding Mourning.
a.	 Find e-texts of The Good Morrow and A Valediction Forbidding 
Mourning in their original printed format through index page of the 
1633, http://donnevariorum.tamu.edu published edition at the featured 
website. Also find e-texts in modern form on the John Donne Pages 
of the websites, www.humanitiesweb.org, www.online-literature.com/
donne, http://rpo.library.utoronto.ca/poets/donne-john, and www.lumi
narium.org/sevenlit/donne.
b.	 What did narrator in poem 1 think his life, a companion’s life, was like 
before they met? 
c.	 Identify two types of relationship between a man and woman referred 
to in poem 2.
3.	 Find and read an e-text of John Donne’s poem The Dreame.
a.	 Find this e-text online in its original printed format through index page 
for the 1635 published edition of Donne’s poems at http://donnevari
orum.tamu.edu featured website.
b.	 Identify what Donne wrote about a dream and a particular real-life situation. 
c.	 Imagine and write about a dream and a real-life situation you could 
experience. Suggest how the dream might be different from what the 
real-life situation would actually be.
d.	 Find and read e-texts of John Donne’s poems including A Valediction of 
His Booke and A Valediction of My Name, in the Window.
e.	 Find these e-texts in their original printed format through an index page 
at the http://donnevariorum.tamu.edu featured website cited above.
f.	 Provide quotes. Identify in first poem what the narrator says is valuable 
in a book or journal. 
g.	 Identify the astronomy metaphor and suggest its importance. 
h.	 In the second poem, identify one of the things that a “scratch’d” or 
“engrav’d” name teaches. 
i.	 Suggest what the metaphor involving “starres” means. 
j.	 Identify what the word “valediction” means. 
k.	 Write a poem that is your “valediction” to a subject you choose. 
l.	 Hints: Note verse 1, line 1, then verse 4, line 2, plus verse 6, line 4, and 
more, of the second poem. Search at the www.infoplease.com website 
for a definition of the word “valediction.”

108	
Chapter 15
4.	 Find and read an e-text of John Donne’s poem “Good Friday 1513” [aka 
Riding Westward].
a.	 At www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poets/detail/john-don
nepoetry find an e-text of this poem by clicking link to Donne’s Poems, 
Articles, and More, then More Poems link, then poem title link. See 
an e-text and end notes at http://rpo.library.utoronto.ca/poems/good-
friday-1613-riding-westward and at https://tspace.library.utoronto.ca/
html/1807/4350/poem654.html.
b.	 Hint One: Note especially lines 1 through 12 and 33 through 34.
c.	 Hint Two: Study the end notes at the Representative Poetry Online
Library pages, http://rpo.library.utoronto.ca/poems/good-friday-1613
-riding-westward and https://tspace.library.utoronto.ca/html/1807/4350/
poem654.html, for general astronomical and religious data, plus Ian 
Lancashire’s comments, especially “Is Donne serious”? 
d.	 Identify the astronomical references with relation to religious refer­
ences, and how they relate to the narrator’s life and present action. 
e.	 At http://crossref-it.info/textguide/metaphysical-poets-selected-poe
ms/4/852, www.gradesaver.com/donne-poems/study-guide/summary
-good-friday-1613-riding-westward, www.enotes.com/topics/good-fri
day-1613-riding-westward, www.jstor.org/stable/2872126?seq=1#
page_scan_tab_contents, and http://jamesmcgahey.blogspot.com/2012/
04/john-donne-good-friday-1613-riding.html, see more commentaries 
on this poem. 
f.	 Identify various features the commentators cite in sites cited in e) just 
above. 
g.	 Write an essay on the many facets of this poem. Include its significance 
to you, whether with a religious viewpoint, west and east in civilization, 
and/or something else. 
h.	 At https://seanzabihi.com/2014/07/29/thoughts-on-thoreaus-walking-
the-idea-of-the-west and New Perspectives on the West at www.pbs.org/
weta/thewest/index_cont.htm, study then identify the metaphoric views 
on east and west. Tell how you may connect these viewpoints to parts 
of Donne’s Good Friday.
5.	 Find and read e-texts of some of John Donne’s Holy Sonnets.
a.	 At www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poets/detail/john-do
nnepoetry find these works’ e-texts by clicking link to Donne’s Poems, 
Articles, and More, then More Poems link, then sonnet title links or go 
to www.sonnets.org/donne.htm (click links). 
b.	 See especially lines 1 through 4 of Holy Sonnet VI, lines 1 through 6 
of Holy Sonnet X, and line 1 of Holy Sonnet XIII. 

	
Selected Poetry by John Donne
109
c.	 First, quoting the phrases in the Holy Sonnets referred to just above, 
identify what you think Donne was writing about, and how he wrote 
about the subject. 
d.	 Choose lines from one of the Holy Sonnets referred to just above, then 
write a poem or paragraph that features an example you think of and 
identify with these lines, then include a reason why you think so. 
e.	 Tip: Your reason may be part of your poem or paragraph, or a separate 
statement. 
f.	 Note: Your poem can be a rhyming couplet or four-line verse, or try 
challenging yourself by writing a whole sonnet. 
g.	 Tip: For online definitions of this poetic form, visit the Sonnet Central 
website via the Voice of the Shuttle website at http://vos.ucsb.edu/
browse.asp?id=2404 and note www.sonnets.org/17th.htm plus www
.sonnets.org.
6.	 Find and read e-texts of John Donne’s poetic tributes called the “First 
Anniversarie” and the “Second Anniversarie.”
a.	 Find these e-texts at featured sites such as http://donnevariorum.tamu
.edu, www.humanitiesweb.org, and www.online-literature.com/donne 
http://rpo.library.utoronto.ca/poets/donne-john, and www.luminarium
.org/sevenlit/donne. 
b.	 Write a paragraph identifying and quoting phrases he used to portray 
the young victim as a perfect human being and something more. 
c.	 Note how he related her early death to the decline of the world and the 
universe.
7.	 John Donne’s writings are sometimes considered to be in two or three 
phases that coincide with events in his life.
a.	 Study Donne bio notes on web pages such as www.humanitiesweb
.org/spa/lcb/ID/42, www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/donne/donnebio.htm, 
www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poets/detail/john-donne, 
and www.poetseers.org/the-great-poets/british-poets/john-donne. 
b.	 Identify and list the two or three phases. 
c.	 Choose, identify, for each phase, one of Donne’s poems that could 
belong to each phase. 
d.	 Write an essay, quoting from each work, and suggest why you think 
each one fits with his phases of life.
8.	 Consider John Donne’s poem “Communitie,” also known as “Community.”
a.	 Find an e-text of this poem online at featured sites including www.lumina­
rium.org/sevenlit/donne/community.php, www.humanitiesweb.org/spa/
lcp/ID/3808/c/86, www.online-literature.com/donne/358, www.bartleby
.com/357/22.html, and http://rpo.library.utoronto.ca/poems/community. 

110	
Chapter 15
b.	 Read and study this poem, noting especially the first two lines, then 
any other lines that say more on the subject as you see it. c) Write an 
essay. Suggest how this poem is, or parts of it are, relevant to today’s 
world—that is, the world of the new millennium, the beginning of the 
twenty-first century.
9.	 Read some e-texts of some critical analyses of Donne and his poems.
a.	 Find some e-texts at http://www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/donne/don
nessays.htm and at More Critical Analysis Articles on John Donne in 
additional websites with link below.
b.	 Click link on Luminarium web page to T. S. Eliot’s essay on Donne 
and read the essay. 
c.	 Go to www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/44456 
and http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/
50676 web pages to read Jonson’s epigrams xxiii and xcvi, then read 
number 8 of Blissett’s essay at http://extra.shu.ac.uk/emls/si-07/blis­
sett.htm. 
d.	 List some ways that Eliot described Donne’s poetry as a group of 
writings. 
e.	 Find a poem by Donne at http://donnevariorum.tamu.edu or other fea­
tured website.
f.	 Write an essay. Quote from a poem you chose as you aim to describe 
the points that Eliot as analyst wrote about Donne’s poetry in general, 
then suggest how the poem is an example of what this analyst sees in 
Donne’s poetry.
Additional websites for chapter 15 with more data to note
• https://www.netedbooks.wordpress.com/home
{
{ Click chapter 15, scroll to Additional Sites.

Section V
 SEVENTEENTH CENTURY—PROSE 


113
Chapter 16
“No Man Is an Island,” 
“For Whom the Bell Tolls,” 
and Other Writings
John Donne’s prose works known as meditations, numbering twenty-three 
and titled Devotions Upon Emergent Occasions can be found online at The 
Luminarium website. 
A links page features links to statement links (in numbered order) to these 
works.
This collection of writings by this seventeenth-century British writer, who 
lived from 1572 to 1631, contains a variety of musings written when Donne 
was ill. Featured are Meditations upon our humane [human] condition. 
Other musings include Prayers upon the Several Occasions and Expostu­
lations and Debatements with God, as stated in an e-text reproduction of an 
original printing of the book, found through a link to a digitalized publication 
at the featured Luminarium website. 
An introduction to Donne’s life and work, written by Izaak Walton 
(1593–1683), known for his biographies of churchmen and his The Compleat 
Angler (1653) (a work celebrating the countryside and the pastime of fish­
ing), can be found online (excerpted from a full biography) at an Anglican 
Library featured web page and a review of Walton’s work on Donne is at The 
Inkslinger, a blog named following a poetic statement by Byron; a statement 
that starts But words are things, and a small drop of ink, falling like dew upon 
a thought. . . .
To see how Donne’s work translates into modern times, see web pages on 
twentieth-century critic T. S. Eliot’s comments and twentieth-century author 
Ernest Hemingway’s debt to Donne, plus quotes from classic the television 
program The Twilight Zone, especially an episode called The “Changing of 
the Guard.”

114	
Chapter 16
FEATURED WEBSITES
• http://www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/donne/donnebib.htm
{
{ Scroll to Devotions links.
• http://www.famousliteraryworks.com/donne_for_whom_the_bell_tolls
.htm
{
{ See quote with well-known lines arranged as a poem from Meditation 17.
• Biographies at http://www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/donne/donnebio.htm and 
through links at http://www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/donne/donlinks.htm
{
{ See Izaak Walton at http://www.ccel.org/ccel/donne/devotions.iii.html, 
http://www.anglicanlibrary.org/donne/devotions/intro.htm, https://inkslin
gerblog.wordpress.com/2010/11/26/book-review-the-life-of-dr-john-
donne, and https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poet/john-donne.
• Quotations at http://www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/donne/donnequotes
.htm, http://www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/donne/alphason.htm, and http://
creativequotations.com/one/662.htm
• Donne’s time: https://www.timetoast.com/timelines/107197 and http://time
rime.com/en/timeline/647915/The+Life+of+John+Donne 
• For modern times and Donne, see e-texts by or about T. S. Eliot, Ernest 
Hemingway, and Rod Serling’s The Twilight Zone, at http://community
.middlebury.edu/~harris/donne.html, http://pontificating-randy.blogspot
.se/2015/01/the-twilight-zone-changing-of-guard.html.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES 
1.	 Find and read an e-text of Donne’s “Meditation 17 (XVII)” from his 
Devotions Upon Emergent Occasions, noting the part with the well-known 
phrase “no man is an island” (in paragraph two).
a.	 Find this e-text via featured site at www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/
donne/meditation17.php.
b.	 Identify this quotation’s complete main phrase. 
c.	 As you refer to the metaphors Donne used, suggest what you think the 
phrase means.
2.	 Study further an e-text of Donne’s “Meditation 17 (XVII)” from his Devo­
tions . . ., noting the part with well-known phrase “for whom the bell tolls” 
(in paragraph one).
a.	 Find this e-text via featured site www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/donne/
meditation17.php.
b.	 Adapt question 1 above to this quotation. 
c.	 Keep in mind that this quotation includes a phrase that the twentieth-
century American writer Ernest Hemingway used as a book’s title as 

	
No Man Is an Island
115
stated at the website, http://community.middlebury.edu/~harris/donne
.html. 
d.	 Suggest and compare meanings of this quotation in Donne’s, and 
Hemingway’s works. 
e.	 For more data on Donne and Hemingway, see sites in additional web­
sites cited below.
3.	 Keep in mind the quotation from the e-text of John Donne’s Meditation 17 
from his Devotions Upon Emergent Occasions as referred to in question/
activity 2 above.
a.	 A quote from Meditation 17 quoted in an episode of the classic tele­
vision program The Twilight Zone (specifically its Changing of the 
Guard, episode 102, last episode of season 3). 
b.	 Find the Meditation quote cited online on page 443 of The Twilight 
Zone: Rod Serling’s Wondrous Land by Kenneth Reynolds (2006), 
with an analysis of the episode, after book title search at http://books
.google.com. 
c.	 Write an essay on what you think Donne’s quote meant to this Twilight 
Zone story. 
d.	 For more insight into this Twilight Zone episode, check website reviews 
such as http://www.avclub.com/tvclub/the-twilight-zone-the-changing
-of-the-guard-99423, http://pontificating-randy.blogspot.se/2015/01/
the-twilight-zone-changing-of-guard.html, http://thescope.ca/onscreen/
the-changing-of-the-guard-the-best-of-donald-pleasence-part-2, 
and http://www.twilightzonemuseum.com/show/03.php (scroll to bot­
tom of the page).
4.	 Find e-texts of documents of modern literary times’ people’s connec­
tions to their works and Donne, such as those of T. S. Eliot and Ernest 
Hemingway.
a.	 Read e-texts at http://www.oocities.org/milleldred/donneliot.html, 
http://community.middlebury.edu/~harris/donne.html, and http://cul
turedig.com/?p=21. 
b.	 Write an essay on critic T. S. Eliot’s and author Ernest Hemingway’s 
comments on Donne. How did Donne influence them? 
c.	 Quote from documents by or about Eliot and Hemingway as you aim 
to support your views of the influences.
5.	 Look at, yet again, an e-text of John Donne’s Meditation 17 (XVII) from 
his Devotions . . ., noting the quote that starts “all mankind is” and may 
conclude with “be so translated” (in paragraph one), although clues to the 
“translation” can be found in lines after noted phrases.
a.	 Find this e-text via featured site at www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/
donne/meditation17.php.
b.	 Suggest what the quotation means, featuring a metaphor Donne used. 

116	
Chapter 16
c.	 Write an essay with an example of a noted man or woman from modern 
or historic times. 
d.	 Suggest why you believe what Donne said is true. Refer to the quotes 
and the person.
6.	 Read an e-text of Donne’s “Meditation 14 (XIV)” from Devotions Upon 
Emergent Occasions.
a.	 Find e-text via featured site at www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/donne/
meditation14.htm.
b.	 Suggest and comment on what you think Donne referred to when he 
wrote about “Man’s value” and “much must necessarily be presented 
to his remembrance.” 
c.	 As you comment, consider that Donne was referring to humankind 
and more when he wrote on these subjects and connections between 
them: happiness, time, occasion and opportunity, cobweb, critical days, 
youth, a tree, the sun, birds, and seasons.
7.	 Read more e-text of Donne’s “Meditation 4 (IV)” from Devotions Upon 
Emergent Occasions.
a.	 Find e-text via featured website, www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/donne/
meditation14.htm.
b.	 What is a minute in a person’s life (here identified as “man’s life”) as 
compared metaphorically to a minute in other features of the world?
c.	 How little of life is what, and what is significant about a little of that?
d.	 What of nature is metaphorically compared to something in people’s 
lives, and how?
8.	 Find and choose other quotations by John Donne from his prose that you 
find online.
a.	 Look for quotes at websites such as http://creativequotations.com/
one/662.htm, http://www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/donne/donnequotes
.htm, http://www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/donne/alphason.htm, and 
http://www.giga-usa.com/quotes/authors/john_donne_a001.htm. 
b.	 Suggest what Donne referred to in the quotation you chose. 
c.	 Explain how that quote may be apt today, as well as for Donne’s time 
(when written). 
d.	 Suggest how this quotation fits with Donne’s time and yet was innova­
tive for that time. 
e.	 Tip: for help with understanding the world and time Donne lived in, see 
featured and additional bio and history sites such as www.ccel.org/ccel/
donne/devotions.iii.html and http://timerime.com/en/timeline/647915/
The+Life+of+John+Donne and Unlocking the Hidden Hemingway 
(2002) by Kevin Sullivan, http://fincafoundation.org/news_7.html.

	
No Man Is an Island
117
Additional websites for chapter 16 with more data 
• https://clynjohnson.wordpress.com 
{
{ Click link to “Discovering English Literature . . . Additional Websites,” 
then link to a wordpress.com blog at netedbooks, or go directly to http://
www.netedbooks.wordpress.com/blog.


119
Chapter 17 
Excerpts from Juvenilia or Certaine 
Paradoxes and Problemes
On this page of the Renascence Editions Online website, see some of John 
Donne’s early prose works identified as his Juvenilia because most were writ­
ten before his other writings, were distributed privately during the earlier part 
of his life, but published only after his death, in a 1633 first publication, and 
a 1652 version that his son helped to get published. 
These online versions are from the Facsimile Text Society’s 1936 repro­
duction of the first publication, in early modern English, of these Certaine 
Paradoxes and Problemes by this British writer who lived from 1572 until 
1631 and worked in legal and church occupations. 
Near the page’s top, see a contents titles list for the Paradoxes, then scroll 
to see each part, such as Paradox XI, then scroll further down the page to a 
contents titles list for the Problemes and continue on for each part, such as 
Probleme IV. 
Some titles and subject matter of Certaine Paradoxes and Problemes may 
seem distant from what today’s students can identify with, and some parts 
may be disagreeable, but a few of these works, or parts of them, upon closer 
investigation, have something of note. 
These works can be interesting, meaningful, and have something to say to 
people of any time. For example, an essay often paradoxically and interest­
ingly has a view a title suggests, yet also an opposite view. 
See critics’ points in e-texts on John Donne: The Critical Heritage at 
Google Books with quotes. Note also e-texts of individual critics’ comments, 
including Jonson’s, Eliot’s, Gardner’s.
Tip: Be aware: some seemingly strange words are familiar words with 
early spellings.

120	
Chapter 17
FEATURED WEBSITES 
• http://www.luminarium.org/editions/renascence/juvenilia.htm
{
{ Scroll to sections and also see http://catalog.hathitrust.org/
Record/001648621. 
• Click full view link, then scroll to group of essays by Donne, first Para­
doxes, then Problemes, all numbered.
• After a title search at http://books.google.com, see in John Donne: The 
Critical Heritage comments on what critics of the past said.
{
{ Click links to short comments by critics at http://spenserians.cath.vt.edu/
CommentRecord.php?action=GET&cmmtid=10493, particularly people 
living from 1616–1882 including Ben Jonson, John Dryden, Izaak Wal­
ton, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, and others.
{
{ Click links to older or modern critiques, http://www.luminarium.org/
sevenlit/donne/donnessays.htm. 
{
{ Note critics’ comments at https://quizlet.com/42705672/critics-on-john-
donne-a2-english-literature-flash-cards from critics such as Samuel John­
son, T. S. Eliot, Rupert Brook, Andrew Mousley, etc.).
• http://web.archive.org/web/20010420061706/http://www.gotrice.com/
users/homework/papers/english/englit.htm see John Donne & Tradi­
tion of English Literature and paragraph 3; at http://web.archive.org/
web/20030703050435/http://www.geocities.com/milleldred/donneliot
.html see T.S. Eliot’s essay on how Donne as poet is responsible, and ways 
he is modern.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES 
1.	 Find and read an e-text of one of John Donne’s Paradoxes, the one titled 
Paradox XI on the subject of the mind and body.
a.	 Find this e-text online at featured website, http://www.luminarium.org/
editions/renascence/juvenilia.htm (scroll to sections).
b.	 Quoting some phrases, identify why eyes and ears are important to the 
mind. 
c.	 Provide an example you can think of for each. 
d.	 Select worthy examples rather than those you know of just because of 
their popularity.
2.	 Find and read another e-text of one of John Donne’s Paradoxes, such as 
his Parodox X on the subject of a laughing and a wise man.
a.	 Find e-text at the featured website, www.luminarium.org/editions/rena
scence/juvenilia.htm. 
b.	 Quoting some phrases, identify and comment on why laughing may be 
important to a wise man, or not.

	
Excerpts from Juvenilia
121
3.	 Find and read an e-text of Paradox VII from John Donne’s Paradoxes, 
found online at the http://www.luminarium.org/editions/renascence/juve
nilia.htm featured website.
a.	 Quoting some phrases, identify the ways Donne wrote about old men 
being more fantastic than young men. 
b.	 Tell of an example Donne wrote that seems to be a comment and the 
opposite viewpoint. 
c.	 Suggest how both viewpoints may be true.
4.	 Find and read an e-text of Paradox VI from John Donne’s Paradoxes, 
found online at the http://www.luminarium.org/editions/renascence/juve
nilia.htm featured website.
a.	 Quote some phrases. Identify examples of when Donne actually meant 
“it is possible to find some vertue in women.” 
b.	 Suggest why you think he has a positive view of women, then also an 
opposite view.
5.	 Find and read an e-text of Paradox IV from John Donne’s Paradoxes, 
found online at the http://www.luminarium.org/editions/renascence/juve
nilia.htm featured website.
a.	 Quoting some phrases, identify examples of when Donne wrote “that 
good is more common than evil.” 
b.	 Write a paragraph. Aim to relate something on what Donne wrote for 
today’s world.
6.	 Find and read an e-text of Paradox VIII from John Donne’s Paradoxes, 
found online at the http://www.luminarium.org/editions/renascence/juve
nilia.htm featured website.
a.	 Quoting some phrases, identify examples of something Donne wrote 
that seems to be the opposite of this Paradox’s title phrase “that nature 
is our worst guide.” 
b.	 Tip: To help you answer a) just above, with nature viewed in two 
ways, note the sentences that start “Nature, though oft chased away . . . 
but . . .”; plus “And that poor knowledge whereby we conceive what rain 
is. . . .” 
c.	 Identify an example of something Donne wrote in this Paradox that fits 
with the Paradox’s title phrase.
7.	 Find and read an e-text of Probleme IV: Why is There More Variety of 
Greene Than Other Colours from John Donne’s Problemes, found online 
at the http://www.luminarium.org/editions/renascence/juvenilia.htmfea
tured website. .
a.	 Quote some phrases as you identify different kinds, or shades, of green 
and what Donne connected them with. 
b.	 Suggest reasons why he made these connections.

122	
Chapter 17
8.	 Keep in mind question/activity 7 above and John Donne’s Probleme IV 
of his Problemes, the version found online at the http://www.luminarium
.org/editions/renascence/juvenilia.htm featured website.
a.	 Choose another color and its different kinds or shades, or similar 
shades of green. 
b.	 Suggest your own examples that could be connected with them. 
c.	 Suggest and explain reasons for your choices.
9.	 Study some critics’ comments about Donne and his writings and consider 
how to apply them to Donne’s writings to help you understand Donne and 
his writing style and subjects.
a.	 Find e-texts of some of these comments as the featured web­
sites http://spenserians.cath.vt.edu/CommentRecord.php?action=GET
&cmmtid=10493 (e.g., Ben Jonson, John Dryden, etc.); also T. S. Eliot, 
A. Alvarez, Helen Gardner, and more at http://www.luminarium.org/
sevenlit/donne/donnessays.htm; plus John Donne: The Critical Heri­
tage after title search at http://books.google.com (with comments on, 
and some quotes from, these critics).
b.	 Also find comments at some Additional Websites found via a link 
cited below. See H. Peters’ “twinned forms” comments at http://www
.jstor.org/stable/2861524?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents, comments 
on “paradox as a fundamental structural device” and “an intellec­
tual thrust” at http://www.phil.muni.cz/plonedata/wkaa/Offprints%20
THEPES%204/TPES%204%20(101-108)%20Kruminiene.pdf in Pro­
ceedings from Eighth Conference of British, American, and Canadian 
Studies; see how Donne transformed poetry in Anca Rosu’s article at 
http://escholarship.org/uc/item/3hg071h5, and more. 
c.	 See also comments on Donne’s works such as “In his hands, English 
poetry became” at www.bartleby.com/214/1115.html, on his artful 
“interweaving of argument with poetry” on page 223 Cambridge His­
tory of English Literature (1919) at http://books.google.com. 
d.	 Chose a paradox and probleme by Donne that you find online at 
the featured websites, http://www.luminarium.org/editions/renascence/
juvenilia.htm or http://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/001648621. 
e.	 Write an essay. Cite and comment on some chosen Donne works’ 
points, and critics’ points at sites cited in b) above. How do they reveal 
something of what he wrote on?
Additional websites for chapter 17 with more data to note
• https://clynjohnson.wordpress.com
{
{ Click link to “Discovering English Literature . . . Additional Websites,” 
then link to https://www.netedbooks.wordpress.com/home then link to 
chapter 17, then scroll down for list of additional websites.

Section VI
 EIGHTEENTH CENTURY—
MISCELLANEOUS


125
Chapter 18 
Selections from Preface to 
A Dictionary of the English 
Language, The Rambler, 
The Idler, and The Adventurer 
At featured websites with Eighteenth Century E–Texts, as on a Rutgers Uni­
versity English Literature page, and on a University of Australia page, see 
links to writings by Samuel Johnson (1709–1784), noted eighteenth-century 
British writer, compiler of the first important English-language dictionary, 
and a frequently quoted literary figure called second only to Shakespeare. 
Note links to his works including A Preface to a Dictionary of the English 
Language (1755), essays from The Rambler, Idler, and Adventurer maga­
zines, his biographical Lives of the English Poets including the noteworthy 
Alexander Pope and John Milton with critical analyses, his Preface to Shake­
speare (1765), and his Political Essays including “The Patriot.”
See also links to travel essays collectively titled A Journey to the Western 
Islands of Scotland (1775), and fiction, including Rasselas, A Prince of Abis­
sinia (1759), plus links to his poems such as The Vanity of Human Wishes 
(1749), Drury Lane Prologue (1747), and One and Twenty. 
For more poems and essays, click the One and Twenty poem link at 
Rutgers University site, scroll to search Google box, or click Google search 
box at Adelaide University site.
Search for poems cited in Question 5 below, and essays cited in question 3 
below, and more, after clicking the www.online-literature.com website link. 
Note also wit in e-texts of anecdotes and letters by Johnson; of people he 
knew who wrote of anecdotes he said; what commentators wrote of him; what 
he said of other writers and how he influenced some of them, plus why his 
time was called the “Age of Johnson.”

126	
Chapter 18
FEATURED WEB SITES 
• http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/18th/j.html#johnson Scroll to and 
click title links https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/j/johnson/samuel.
• Do Google searches via One and Twenty page through Rutgers site, or at 
Adelaide site, or scroll at http://allpoetry.com/Samuel-Johnson to The Young 
Author and The Winter’s Walk near page’s bottom or see at www.online-
literature.com/samuel-johnson/johnsons-poetical-works/7, A Word to the 
Wise, or see Lines Written Under a Print Representing Persons Skaiting at 
www.online-literature.com/samuel-johnson/johnsons-poetical-works/33.
• Guide to Quotes at Johnson Sound Bite Page, www.samueljohnson.com/
topics.html, http://todayinsci.com/J/Johnson_Samuel/JohnsonSamuel-
Quotations.htm, letters. 
• Collected by Hester Lynch Thrale Piozzi and found via http://google
.com, http://literarydevices.net/anecdote, and https://web.cn.edu/kwheeler/
lit_terms_A.html, http://literarydevices.net/aphorism.
• For Age of Johnson, see VIII (i.e., parts 4, 26–30, and more) at www
.bartleby.com/220 and http://neoenglishsystem.blogspot.com/2010/12/age-
of-johnson-1744-1784.html.
• For bio-sketches, see www.reocities.com/sschaeff/SamuelJohnsonintro
ductorypage.htm and www.archive.org/details/lifeofsamueljohnpt02bosw 
(with annotated chapters) by Boswell; An Introduction to Dr.  John­
son by Frances Burney in a chapter at http://www.gutenberg.org/
files/5826/5826-h/5826-h.htm#link2H_4_0008, and at https://archive.org/
details/drjohnsonfannybu00bur.
{
{ Flip pages for Johnsonian Passages From the Works of Fanny Burney 
plus at http://books.google.com see Early Journals and Letters of Fanny 
Burney, volume 3; note Literary Remains of Mrs. Piozzi (Thrale) at http://
www.gutenberg.org/files/15045/15045-h/15045-h.htm. 
{
{ Note https://austensmansfield.wordpress.com/2010/09/30/literary-allu­
sions-dr-johnsons-celebrated-judgment, “Jane Austen’s Literary Rela­
tions” (illustration) at http://www.pemberley.com/janeinfo/austinfl.html. 
{
{ C. S. Lewis on Johnson and Austen at http://www.theloiterer.org/ashton/
polar_bear.html#Lewis (named after Jane’s brother’s publication), page 
552 of A Critical Companion to Jane Austen by William Baker (2008) 
at http://books.google.com, and the document “Moral Education in Jane 
Austen’s Novels—the Influence of Samuel Johnson” at https://www.duo
.uio.no/handle/10852/25470.
{
{ See Leslie Stephen’s Samuel Johnson after title search at http://books
.google.com, noting Johnson’s Writings, Literary Career; see also 
Macaulay on Johnson at https://archive.org/details/lordmacaulaysess­
00maca with notes by Francis Storr in an 1892 edition and Macaulay on 
Johnson on pages 55–97 at 

	
Selections from Preface to A Dictionary
127
https://ia800300.us.archive.org/26/items/selectessaysmac02thurgoog/select­
essaysmac02thurgoog.pdf with page 82 on Johnson’s conversational style in 
1895 Samuel Thurber edited ed. plus pages 2, 3, 46 of Eighteenth Century 
British Poets and Their Twentieth Century Lives by Thomas Simons at http://
books.google.com with critics W. Jackson Bate, Lionel Trilling, in Bate’s 
Samuel Johnson 1998, Trilling in Critics in the Modern World 2014 at ama­
zon.com.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
1.	 Find and read e-text of Samuel Johnson’s Preface to a Dictionary of the 
English Language.
a.	 Find this e-text found online at the Rutgers University Eigh­
teenth Century E–Texts featured website http://andromeda.rutgers
.edu/~jlynch/18th/j.html#johnson. 
b.	 Identify Johnson’s reasons for compiling the dictionary and some fea­
tures he put in it. 
c.	 Include quotations from the preface as you answer b) above.
2.	 Select e-texts of six quotes on different topics from more than one work 
by Samuel Johnson such as his magazine essays, letters, lives of poets, and 
Boswell’s biography of him.
a.	 Find these quotes online at Topical Guide to Quotes on the Samuel 
Johnson Sound Bite Page at www.samueljohnson.com/topics.html or 
at http://todayinsci.com/search.htm (type Samuel Johnson in search 
site-wide search box, click links to Samuel Johnson science quotes), 
and something from Letters to and from the Late Samuel Johnson 
published in two volumes from original manuscripts in possession of 
Hester Lynch Thrale Piozzi (1788). Find online via contents after http://
books.google.com title search (with s letter in manuscript looking like 
f) with subjects such as frugality, praise versus flattery, reflections on 
advancement of knowledge, and his opinions on his and others’ travels 
(noting, e.g., pages 31, 64, 92, 103, 295). 
b.	 Write an essay where you identify each work and its subject; tell what 
the author aimed to say. 
c.	 Suggest something for each that you think is an example of, or related 
topic on, each subject as presented in the quotation.
3.	 Find definitions of the words “anecdote” and “aphorism,” then e-text 
examples about Samuel Johnson by biographer James Boswell, then by 
acquaintance Mrs. Thrale by subjects.
a.	 Look for definitions of anecdote and aphorism at http://literarydevices
.net/anecdote and http://literarydevices.net/aphorism, then write an 
essay describing what they are. 

128	
Chapter 18
b.	 Find and note an anecdote about Johnson by his biographer James 
Boswell, found at http://www.reocities.com/sschaeff/SamuelJohn
sonintroductorypage.htm, with an e-text of Boswell’s brief Character­
ization of Dr. Samuel Johnson.
c.	 Find anecdotes about Johnson by Mrs. Thrale Piozzi at http://books
.google.com. Do title search for Johnsoniana: Anecdotes of the Late 
Samuel Johnson During the Last Twenty Years of His Life (1786 and 
1882) or Anecdotes of the Late Samuel Johnson by Hester Lynch Thrale, 
later Mrs. Piozzi, and note subjects in contents of an 1884 version edited 
by Robinia Napier, found at http://books.google.com. See also https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anecdotes_of_the_Late_Samuel_Johnson. 
d.	 How did biographer James Boswell characterize Samuel Johnson with 
an anecdote? 
e.	 Choose and quote three anecdotes Mrs. Thrale used to describe Samuel 
Johnson.
4.	 Study paragraphs and phrases and select three from three different essays 
from Samuel Johnson’s 1750s writings in the Rambler, Idler, and Adven­
turer magazines.
a.	 Find 
e-texts 
at 
http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/18th/j
.html#johnson featured site.
b.	 Write an essay in which you suggest meanings in some paragraphs and 
phrases. 
c.	 Suggest some things as examples of what he said in these paragraphs 
and phrases. 
d.	 Choose, for example, “Adventurer 138,” “Vulture” from Idler, and 
selected Rambler essays (e.g., 9, 13, 22, 36, 41) with subjects noted 
under “front matter.” 
e.	 Write an essay. Quote from three Johnson essays and critics’ analyses. 
Suggest how essays in the Adventurer, Idler, and Rambler are different. 
Consider style and subject.
5.	 Choose and read an e-text of one of Samuel Johnson’s travel essays 
whose collection is titled A Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland 
(1775).
a.	 Find e-text at http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/18th/j.html#johnson 
featured site. b) Select an e-text of, for example, “Loch Ness,” 
“Inverness, “Glasgow,” “Aberdeen,” “Loch Lomond,” “St. Andrews,” 
or another travel essay in the collection. 
b.	 Write an essay in which you quote phrases as you identify features in a 
vivid word portrait of the place in the e-text essay you chose. 
c.	 Being guided by the ways Johnson described a place, write your own 
travel essay about, or a feature of, a place that you know (have lived in 
or visited) or have read about.

	
Selections from Preface to A Dictionary
129
6.	 Find, read, and study some e-texts of some of Samuel Johnson’s poems.
a.	 Find these e-texts online at http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/18th/j
.html#johnson featured website through links that lead to, for example, 
The Poetry Archives. Do Google searches at links via One and Twenty 
page at Rutgers or through Adelaide site. 
b.	 Read an e-text of Vanity of Human Wishes (1749) and two e-texts of 
his other poems (e.g., “Drury Lane Prologue,” “Winter’s Walk,” “Lines 
Written Under a Print Representing Persons Skaiting,” “One and 
Twenty,” “The Young Author,” “A Word to the Wise”). 
c.	 Write an essay on “The Vanity of Human Wishes.”
d.	 As you write the essay, quote specifically the poem’s verses’ main points. 
e.	 Quote one point. Explain how something outside the poem is an exam­
ple of what the poem says. 
f.	 For the two other poems you chose before, identify the main point of 
each poem, including quotations from them, and provide examples to 
illustrate the point.
7.	 Find, choose, and read a chapter from an e-text of Johnson’s novel Ras­
selas (1759).
a.	 Find this e-text at http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/18th/j
.html#johnson or https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/j/johnson/samuel fea­
tured websites. 
b.	 Select www.bibliomania.com website via Rutgers site to see links to 
chapters by titles. 
c.	 Choose a chapter title such as “The Prince Finds a Man of Learning,” 
“The Prince and Princess Leave the Valley,” and “See Many Wonders,” 
“The Happiness of a Life Led According to Nature,” or another chapter. 
d.	 Write an essay on the chapter you chose. 
e.	 Quoting from that chapter, identify its main point, while pointing out 
a twist. 
f.	 Suggest what the point’s importance is in the story and to the main 
character. 
g.	 How may this point be important in real life?
8.	 In his Preface to The Works of Shakespeare (1765), Johnson wrote about 
what became basic features of literary criticism.
a.	 Find and read an e-text of the “Preface” via the Rutgers or Adelaide 
featured websites. 
b.	 Write an essay. Identify, describe, and comment on, with examples, 
three features of literary criticism he wrote about. 
c.	 Tip: Write about, for example, “the three unities,” “the mirrour of life,” 
“instruct by pleasing” or other ideas, as in Lynch’s abridged Johnson 
“Preface” and its nos. 85, 86, and 87 found online at https://andromeda
.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/Texts/prefabr.html. 

130	
Chapter 18
d.	 Tip: Your comments should include something quoted from Shake­
speare’s works. 
e.	 Hint: Note web pages with Lynch’s abridged version of the Preface 
and Johnson Timeline of Everyday Life, 1730–1800 at www.samuel­
johnson.com/timeline.html.
9.	 Find, choose, and read e-texts of critical analysis essays or biographical 
comments by Samuel Johnson about other writers before or during his 
time.
a.	 Look for e-texts of essays or letters by Johnson on other writers 
including Alexander Pope, John Milton, Jonathan Swift, John Dryden; 
plus e-texts of writings by Johnson on some other writers including 
Frances Burney, Jane Austen, and Hester Piozzi. 
b.	 Find e-texts of his essays through the Rutgers and Adelaide featured 
websites by doing a search for individual names or the collective title 
Lives of the English Poets, or via links at https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Lives_of_the_Most_Eminent_English_Poets.
c.	 See also writings about Johnson and Burney in Freya Johnston’s Mak­
ing an Entrance: Fanny Burney and Samuel Johnson including page 
189 in A Celebration of Fanny Burney (2007) ed. by Lorna J. Clark 
after book title search at http://books.google.com, on pages xxv and 
497 in Samuel Johnson: A Biography (2008) by Peter Martin, Dr. 
Johnson and Fanny Burney (1911) by Chauncey Brewster Tinker at 
https://archive.org/details/drjohnsonfannybu00bur, and The Condition 
of Women (especially page 83) in Cambridge Companion to Samuel 
Johnson (1997) by Greg Clingham after title search for Companion 
at http://books.google.com, plus Letters by Samuel Johnson (e.g., vol. 
III page 14 note 4 and page 196, plus vol. V Index with list of letters 
with dates after search for Frances Burney) at http://books.google.com 
then search in Letters of Samuel Johnson (1892) ed. by George Birk­
beck Hill at https://archive.org/stream/lettersjohnson01hilluoft#page/
n5/mode/2up; plus writings on Johnson and Austen through links at 
http://www.theloiterer.org/ashton/ardatJ.html. 
d.	 Find and read e-texts of works by two writers and how they had con­
nections with Johnson. 
e.	 For connections, note Gloria Gross’s “Mentoring Jane Austen: Reflec­
tions on ‘My Dear Dr. Johnson’s” at www.jasna.org/persuasions/
printed/number11/gross.htm and https://doughertyeng275.wordpress
.com/2011/10/16/jane-austen-and-samuel-johnson; Burney and John­
son in A Celebration of Fanny Burney at http://books.google.com, 
pages ix–xi, 437 in Early Journals and Letters of Fanny Burney, 
volume 3 (1779) at http://books.google.com; plus something on style 
in the Lives of the English Poets essays at https://andromeda.rutgers.

	
Selections from Preface to A Dictionary
131
edu/~jlynch/Johnson/Guide/lives.html and names of the most impor­
tant lives as noted at the wikipedia.org page cited in b) just above. 
f.	 Write an essay. Comment on how Johnson’s critical analysis essays 
or comments, and scholars’ or noted biographers’ comments, help you 
understand what Johnson aimed to say about these writers.
10.	 Find e-text excerpts from biographical writings on Johnson by James 
Boswell, Frances (Fanny) Burney D’Arblay, Jane Austen, Thomas B. 
Macauley, and Leslie Stephen.
a.	 See Boswell’s comments at www.reocities.com/sschaeff/Samuel­
Johnsonintroductorypage.htm, www.archive.org/details/lifeofsamu­
eljohnpt02bosw (with annotated chapters), and www.gutenberg.org/
files/1564/1564.txt (abridged version). 
b.	 See Macauley’s comments on pages 55–97, noting conversational 
style on page 82, at https://ia902308.us.archive.org/23/items/lord­
macaulaysess00maca/lordmacaulaysess00maca.pdf, with notes by 
Francis Storr; and note pages 16-52 at https://archive.org/details/
lordmacaulaysess00maca; both being versions of Macauley’s Essay 
on Boswell’s Biography of Johnson.
c.	 See 
Stephen’s 
comments 
at 
https://zhiv.wordpress.
com/2009/09/27/91809-samuel-johnson-leslie-stephen-and-virginia-
woolf, noting last two sentences of paragraph two and following para­
graphs; noting chapters 2 and 4 at http://www.readcentral.com/book/
Leslie-Stephen/Read-Samuel-Johnson-Online and at www.cambridge.
org/zw/academic/subjects/literature/english-literature-1700-1830/
samuel-johnson see a description of a book on Samuel Johnson (1878) 
written by Leslie Stephen, father of author Virginia Woolf; plus see 
Leslie Stephen 1878 biography of Johnson at the archive.org essays 
featured website, noting Stephen on Johnson’s Writings, Literary 
Career, As Literary Dictator.
d.	 See 
Burney’s 
comments 
at 
http://www.gutenberg.org/
files/5826/5826-h/5826-h.htm#link2H_4_0008 with An Introduction 
to Dr. Johnson, and how Burney was inspired by Johnson, what 
she thought of him; plus at https://archive.org/details/drjohnson­
fannybu00bur see Johnsonian Passages From the Works of Fanny 
Burney, and see Early Journals and Letters of Fanny Burney, vol. 
3 at http://books.google.com, http://essays.quotidiana.org/burney/
learned_man_on_evelina. 
e.	 See some Austen comments and references on Johnson at https://
austensmansfield.wordpress.com/2010/09/30/literary-allusions-dr-
johnsons-celebrated-judgment, “Jane Austen’s Literary Relations” 
(illustration) at http://www.pemberley.com/janeinfo/austinfl.html, 
C.  S. Lewis on Johnson and Austen at http://www.theloiterer.org/

132	
Chapter 18
ashton/polar_bear.html#Lewis, and page 552 of A Critical Compan­
ion to Jane Austen by William Baker (2008) at http://books.google.
com; https://austensmansfield.wordpress.com/2010/09/30/literary-
allusions-dr-johnsons-celebrated-judgment, “Jane Austen’s Liter­
ary Relations” (illustration) at http://www.pemberley.com/janeinfo/
austinfl.html, C. S. Lewis on Johnson and Austen at http://www.
theloiterer.org/ashton/polar_bear.html#Lewis, see at http://books.
google.com “Critical Companion to Jane Austen” (2008) by Wil­
liam Baker, with a search inside for Johnson, Samuel and then 
going to page 552, then at www.amazon.com doing search for audio 
clip of Austen’s poem “To the Memory of Mrs. Lefroy” with third 
verse on Johnson, plus others’ comments on Austen and Johnson at 
http://www.jasna.org/persuasions/printed/number11/gross.htm, http://
www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/391209?journalCode
=mp, and https://www.questia.com/library/journal/1G1-178617008/
who-evaluates-whom-and-what-in-jane-austen-s-novels
f.	 Write an essay. Including quotes, identify some things that Boswell, 
Burney, Austen and Piozzi, Stephen, Macauley, Bate, and Trilling 
wrote on Johnson and/or his works in Critics in the Modern World.
11.	 A literary age was named for Samuel Johnson at the time he lived, wrote, 
and shortly after.
a.	 Find and read the first two paragraphs of the e-text at the featured 
websites www.bartleby.com/220 (VIII, 4, 26–30), and http://neoeng
lishsystem.blogspot.com/2010/12/age-of-johnson-1744-1784.html. 
b.	 Helped by section VIII parts at featured bartleby.com web pages cited 
above and the last sentence in paragraph two at the neoenglishsystem 
site, identify Age of Johnson traits. 
c.	 Write an essay, with quotations, about how you think Johnson’s 
poems London and A Vanity of Human Wishes, found through the 
Rutgers featured site, exemplify this Age.
Additional websites for chapter 18 with more data to note 
• https://clynjohnson.wordpress.com
{
{ Click link to Discovering English Literature . . . Additional Websites, 
then link to http://netedbooks.wordpress.com/home.

133
Conclusion
This book, “British Literature—The Beginnings” (volume 1 of a three-
part series: “Discovering English Literature in Bits and Bytes: An Internet 
Approach”) provides a unique way for secondary school students and begin­
ning college and university students to discover in today’s times, literature in 
English from the beginning, and then throughout history, as well as into the 
new millennium (as hinted at in questions and activities by this book’s author).
A unique array of literary forms has dotted the landscape during the begin­
nings of English literature, from about 600 AD to the end of the eighteenth 
century—as this volume (series 1, volume 1) demonstrates. Early documents 
reveal a great variety. There are runes and charms, like intriguing puzzles 
which educate and entertain. Travel writings, including essays, stories, and 
poems, allow readers to experience journeys, as with “The Seafarer’s Jour­
ney,” the epic Canterbury Tales by Geoffrey Chaucer, starting with when 
April comes “and many little birds make melody . . . folk do long to go on 
Pilgrimage”; plus Samuel Johnson’s “Journey to the Hebrides” [in Scotland] 
and “Loch Ness”; plus Shakespeare’s “undiscovered country.” 
There are ancient letters that investigate the nature of knowledge and 
learning between secular and religious leaders; and “talking poems” by one 
of England’s first kings, showing his human side as he grows up, while mir­
roring something of his nation. 
There are early folk or fairy tales emerging as metaphors and allegories as 
in Edmund Spenser’s Faerie Queene. 
Letters in verse such as those to a Countess of Bedford, and meditations 
on “emergent occasions,” highlight John Donne’s works, as shown at the 
Bartleby: Great Books Online, Project Gutenberg: Plain Text Archive, 

134	
Conclusion
Luminarium: Anthology of English Literature, and other websites and digital 
databases.
Poems within plays or dramatic poetry as well as iconic dramatizations 
and model sonnets showcase William Shakespeare, along with another kind 
of unique sonnet by Spencer. 
Then there is the “Age of Johnson” with Dr. Samuel Johnson’s anecdotes 
and dictionary and the iconic biography of him by James Boswell.
And then there is the entrance of Jane Austen onto the literary scene . . . 
with her early letters to her sister and to an acquaintance (Mrs. Hester Lynch 
Thrale Piozzi) who held literary gatherings that had featured Dr. Johnson, 
then Jane starting her novels. Beginnings of references to Johnson, his works, 
and his style appear in her writings and literary viewpoints, although he had 
died before she became a teenager.
From Great Britain and the United States, extending to Canada and some 
Pacific Ocean islands, this book, and its companions, offer a modern day way 
that aims to present original literary documents, and their messages, written 
by iconic literary lights through time, written for their times and beyond, 
and provided and reproduced for today’s world on the Internet in digitized 
formats whether in original writings or printed/transliterated reproductions. 
Chapters present urls of suggested databases to visit, then offer questions 
and activities that spark critical thinking on, and accompany references 
to, quotations from the documents—all from the perspective of the books’ 
author/scholar, with viewpoints shaped primarily by British and American 
literary icons such as Madeleine L’Engle, T. S. Eliot, Emily Dickinson, 
J. R. R. Tolkien, Robert Frost, Rachel Carson, and others, with some quotes 
from their writings.
In ways reflecting metaphorically and literally how a contemporary inven­
tion—the Internet—can introduce historical literary documents to today’s 
students, the chapters in this book (as do all chapters in all volumes of the 
series) reveal the significance of whole historical documents (some of the 
writers’ body of work) and quotations from them through time, plus, more­
over, in today’s society. 
For examples, look for origins of ancient British riddles and how they are 
woven in unique new ways into modern and contemporary British writings 
by J. R. R Tolkien and J. K. Rowling; find out how Shakespeare’s original 
plays have been interwoven into modern and contemporary popular literary 
creations—as with television’s iconic Star Trek episodes and see how literary 
works from literary history have significance in modern times’ television’s 
noteworthy series such as the Twilight Zone, as well as Gilmore Girls, and 
Lost. 
Note also historical literary figures known today through movies and spin-
offs of their works, while noting how these figures first made their marks—as 

	
Conclusion
135
with Jane Austen and the literary circle she early became part of, which 
included her literary mentor Samuel Johnson with his dictionary, adventurer 
and rambler essays, plus “The Story of Rasselas, Prince of Abissinia” at the 
Online Books Page website with links to the Hathi-Trust Digital Library, 
“Journey to the Hebrides” at the Internet Digital Archive, plus Frances 
Birney d’Arblay’s letters and diaries with tidbits on Johnson as provided by 
the Electronic Text Center at the University of Virginia/Wayback Machine 
site, and Hester Lynch Piozzi who wrote of “The Anecdotes of the Late 
Samuel Johnson” as provided at the Project Gutenberg website.
The key to bringing early writings and recent writings into the present can 
be seen well through the Internet and the guidance provided by the “Dis­
covering English Literature in Bits and Bytes” series of books, as has been 
initially indicated in the paragraphs above, and in this book, volume 1: Eng­
lish Literature: British Literature—Beginnings, that is using online features 
including databases such as “Luminarium: Anthology of English Literature,” 
“Northvegr” (the “Northern Way”) with “Miscellaneous Primary Sources—
Anglo-Saxon Charms” plus “Forgotten Ground Regained: A Treasury of 
Alliterative and Accentual Poetry”; “Chaucer: Manuscripts and Books on 
the Web,” “Resources for the Study of Edmund Spenser,” “Shakespeare On 
the Net,” “The Works of John Donne,” “Samuel Johnson Sound Bite Page,” 
plus the Jane Austen Society of North America database, and the Jane Austen 
Pemberly database, with Austen, although born just nine years before his 
death, being considered “Johnson’s most distinguished student” (in Boswell’s 
The Life of Johnson, v. 2, page 141); Gloria Gross’s 1989 “Mentoring Jane 
Austen: Reflections on ‘My Dear Dr. Johnson’s web document; an abstract 
of a 2006 thesis: “Moral Education in Jane Austen’s Fiction: the Influence 
of Dr. Johnson” by Lena Blakkisrud, plus a page on the twentieth century’s 
literary icon C. S. Lewis’s comment halfway down the page of a connection 
between Johnson and Austen in The Voices of Men On Jane Austen website, 
along with her letters including phrases such as “like my dear Dr. Johnson, 
I believe I have dealt more with Notions than Facts” (from a February 8 let­
ter to her sister), plus in her poem (“To the Memory of Mrs. Lefroy”) with 
lines that claim no one is second to, or can be a substitute for, him; also, as 
a brother and nephew claimed, Jane’s “favourite author in prose” was Dr. 
Johnson, as quoted in “Mentoring Jane Austen.”
Other hints of his influence in her writings and other people’s (e.g., 
C. S. Lewis, Cornel West), suggest influences such as Austen being John­
son’s and Shakespeare’s “literary daughter” or Johnson’s “literary critical 
daughter”; with her references to Johnson’s dictionary and essays woven 
into her fiction in ways “not so much quoted but echoed and reflected, and 
that not infrequently” as stated by a James Battersby as quoted in “The 
Friendly Jane Austen” by Natalie Tyler in Google Books. 

136	
Conclusion
Also, Austen’s way of writing seems to have been anticipated in a Rambler 
essay by Johnson, written before she was born. In it he stated: “The works of 
fiction with which the present generation seems more particularly delighted, 
are such as exhibit life in its true state, diversified only by accidents that daily 
happen in the world, and influenced by passions and qualities which are to be 
found in conversing with mankind. . . . Its province is to bring about natural 
events by easy means, and to bring up curiosity without the help of wonder: 
it is therefore precluded from the machines and expedients of the heroic 
romance. . . .” [at www.theloiterer.org/ashton/year00/post500a.html, a site 
with a title of her brothers’ publication]. 
Meanwhile hints of the importance of Austen in the twenty-first century, 
further explored in series 1, volume 2 of the “Discovering English Literature 
in Bits and Bytes” books, is suggested by modern scholar, fervent political 
debater, and sometimes Bernie Sanders supporter, Cornel West, who com­
ments that Austen had “the power to look within, and to change, to transform 
society from the inside” [as stated at www.huffingtonpost.com/kathleen-
anderson/why-cornel-west-loves-jan_b_6140744.html].
Perhaps explainable more succinctly or precisely, it may be said in the 
words of recent writers who delve/have delved into the past as they write/or 
wrote of and during the recent past or present. Consider some modern writ­
ers who have brought the ancients into the present uniquely, while looking 
and venturing forward. Think of, for example, the iconic writer Madeleine 
L’Engle’s comment: “life is like a sonnet . . .”; Jane Austen’s forward-
looking character Mr. Darcy saying “To all this [attainments Miss Bingley 
thought necessary for accomplished women], she must yet add something 
more substantial, in the improvement of her mind by extensive reading.” 
There are also Donne’s “No man is an island entire of itself” in Rod Ser­
ling’s science fiction classic television program: Twilight Zone: “The Chang­
ing of the Guard” set in a boys’ school, and the start of comments by Austen 
on Johnson, plus beginnings of studies of Johnson’s writings influencing 
Austen.
Then there is Tolkien’s riddle poem “The road goes ever on and on . . . /
and whither then? I cannot say”; while Shakespeare’s Hamlet says “There 
are more things in heaven and earth . . . than are dreamt of in your [or, some 
say, our] philosophy.”

137
Appendix 1
More Websites to Note
https://netedbooks.wordpress.com/
BY TOPIC
https://lynlibrarianwriter.wordpress.com/2013/11/15/introducing
-critical-thinking-through-american-literature-on-the-net/
ADJUNCT LIST OF WEBSITES
https://discoverenglitonline.wordpress.com/2016/08/06/adjunct-list-of-web
-sites-to-go-with-introduction-to-all-volumes-of-the-12-book-series-discov
ering-english-literature-in-bits-bytes-an-internet-approach-to-british-and
-american-literature/


139
Index
Accentual or Alliterative Verse (Goia), 
10
accentual poetry, 10
Adventurer essays (Johnson), 125, 127, 
128
Aelfred. See Alfred, King
Aelfric, 15, 16, 17
 and comments by John Earle in 
1884, 17
 and Literature of the Heroic Age, 17
 his Colloquy, 15, 16
 his On the Seasons of the Year, 15, 
17
 his Preface to First Series of 
Catholic Homilies, 17
 his Preface to his Grammar, 17
 his writings called “model of Saxon 
prose,” 17
 his writings similar to but different 
from metrical charms, 17
 Ann Watkins’ translation of 
Colloquy, 15
 See also Anglo-Saxon literature; Old 
English literature
Age of Johnson, 125, 132
 features of, 132
 poetry defining it, 132
Alfred, King (the Great), 19–23
 and archive.org, 20
 and Biography of King Alfred, 21, 
22
 and Bishop of Sherbourne, 21
 and Bishop of Werfrith, 19, 20
 and Boethius’ Consolations of 
Philosophy, 22, 23
 and Bucknell University, 19, 20, 21
 and happening during childhood, 22
 and his Blotsman (last writing), 23
 and his concern for learning and 
knowledge, 19
 and his epitaph in his own words, 20
 and his essays and letters on 
learning and knowledge, 19
 and his interests, 22
 and his last writing (Blotsman), 23
 and his A Letter on the Advancement 
of Learning, 19
 and his Old English translation of St. 
Augustine’s Solilioquies, 22, 23
 and his Poems Now Turned Into 
English Metres, 19, 22
 and his poetry, 19, 20, 22
 and his Preface to St. Augustine’s 
Solilioquies, 19, 20, 22, 23
 and his Prose Preface to Pope 
Gregory’s Pastoral Care, 20, 21

140	
Index
 and his Talking Poems, 22
 and his translation of Boethius’ 
Consolations of Philosophy, 22
 and his translations, 19, 20, 21, 22
 and King Alfred the Great and His 
Kingdom, 19
 and King Alfred’s Poems Now 
Turned Into English Metres, 19
 and King Alfred’s Talking Poems 
(Earl), 22
 and Martin F. Tupper’s translations 
of King Alfred’s poems, 22
 and metaphors, 21
 and Modern Translation to Alfred’s 
Prose Preface of Pastoral Care, 
20
 and Pope Gregory, 20, 21
 and Pope Gregory’s Pastoral Care, 
20
 and “sacred orders,” 20
 and St. Augustine’s Soliloquies, 19, 
20, 23
 and scholar John Richard Green, 22
 and sililoquiorum, 23
 and Sisam’s evaluation of Alfred’s 
verse, 22
 and the earliest work Alfred 
commanded to be translated, 20
 and Winston Churchill on Alfred, 22
 as “Father of English Prose,” 19
 as first English monarch, 19
 fitting tribute to, 23
Alice in Wonderland (sample in Old 
English at oldenglisherobics.net), 
31
allegory, 50, 51
 features of, 50, 51
 in Fairie Queene (Book One), 50
 in Shakespeare’s works. See 
http://www.w-shakespeare.ru/
library/metafori-i-allegorii-v-
proizvedeniyah-shekspira28.html
alliteration, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13
Alliteration.net, 6, 9, 10, 11, 31, 32, 33, 
34, 35, 37
 and fantasy poetry, 37
 and modern poetry, 37, 41
Alliterative Meters: Historical and 
Modern. See Forgotten Ground 
Regained – Editor’s Notes, part 
X
alliterative poetry and verse, 6, 9, 10, 
11, 32
 and Alliterative Revival, 13, 38
 Linking Letters: A Poet’s Guide to 
Alliterative Verse, 10
 modern revival of, 37, 41
 traits of, 5, 6, 11
 The Very Nature of Alliterative 
Verse, 6
anecdotes
 and Hester Lynch Thrale Piozzi, 127
 and James Boswell, 127
 and Samuel Johnson, 125, 127, 128
 and Anecdotes of Late Samuel 
Johnson During Last Twenty 
Years of His Life (Piozzi), 128
Anglo-Saxon alliterative verse, 10, 11
Anglo-Saxon charms, 3, 4, 5, 6
Anglo-Saxon literature
 and Aelfric, 15, 17
 and Aelfric’s Preface to his First 
Series of Catholic Homilies, 17
 and Aelfric’s Preface to his 
Grammar, 17
 and Anglo-Saxon Literature (Earle), 
15, 17
 and Anglo-Saxon Narrative Poetry 
Project, 15
 and Ann Watkins (translator), 15, 16
 and Bede, 16
 and Bede’s Account of Caedmon 
and Caedmon’s Hymn, 16
 and Before the Inevitable Journey 
(Bede), 16
 and Beowulf. See under B
 and Caedmon’s Hymn, 16
 and Cynewulf, 3, 4
 and Colloquy (Aelfric), 15
 and Complete Corpus of Anglo-
Saxon Works, 3
 and Gildas, 17, 33

	
Index
141
 Concerning the Ruin of Britain, 
33
 works of, 33
 and International Society of Anglo-
Saxonists. See bede.net; bede.net/
isas
 and King Alfred the Great, 17
 and metrical charms and runes, 17
 and The Husband’s Message. See 
under H
 and On the Seasons of the Year 
(Aelfric), 17
 and The Seafarer. See under S
 and Vercelli Book, 15
 and The Wanderer. See under W
 and Widsith. See under W
 and The Wife’s Lament. See under 
W
 See also Exeter Book, Old English 
literature
Anglo-Saxon poetry. See http://
anglosaxonpoetry.camden.rutgers.
edu
Aristotle – Poetics – Epic Poetry, 12
Arthur, King
 and Sir Gawain and the Green 
Knight, 9
 in early English literature, 9
Auden, W.H.
 and style of Old English literature, 
31
Augustine, St., 26
 and his Soliloquies, 19, 20, 23
 and his soliloquium, 23
Austen, Jane
 and her being influenced by Samuel 
Johnson, 126, 130, 131
 and her comments on Samuel 
Johnson in a poem, 132
 and her To the Memory of Mrs. 
Lefroy, 132
 A Critical Companion to Jane 
Austen (Baker), 126, 132
 Mentoring Jane Austen: Reflections 
On ‘My Dear Dr. Johnson’ 
(Gross), 130
B-Text Excerpts, 11
Bede, 15, 16, 17
 and his “Before the Inevitable 
Journey,” 16
 and Bede.Net, 15
 and Bede’s Account of Caedmon 
and his Hymn, 17
Beowulf, 10, 11, 12
 and Heorot, 10, 11, 12
 and kennings, 11
 and other Old English poems, 10, 11
 and The Haunted Mere, 12
 and translation by Francis 
Gummere, 11
Birds of Shakespeare Critically 
Examined, Explained, and 
Illustrated, The (Harting), 60
Bishops
 and King Alfred, 19
 Bishop of Sherbourne, 21
 Bishop of Werfrith, 19
 Leofric, Bishop of Exeter, 25, 31
Boswell, James
 and his biography of Samuel 
Johnson, 127, 128, 131
 and Macauley’s essay on Boswell’s 
Biography of Johnson (at archive.
org), 131
Birney, Frances. See D’Arbry, Frances 
Burney
Burney, Frances. See D’Arbry, Frances 
Birney
Caedmon
 and a dream, 16
 his Caedmon’s Hymn, 16
 and Bede’s account, 16
 and first and second parts of the 
hymn, 16
 and subjects in the hymn, 16
The Canterbury Tales, 41–46
 and a philosopher’s stone, 44
 and Arthur Quiller-Couch, 45
 and Canon’s Yeoman’s Tale, 44
 and Chaucer Glossary, 41
 and Chaucer MetaPage, 41

142	
Index
 and commentaries, 43, 45
 and Electronic Canterbury Tales 
Companion, 41, 42
 and John Donne, 45
 and Librarius, 41, 43
 and Manciple’s Tale, 45
 and Michael Murphy, 41
 and Nun’s Priest’s Tale, 45
 and Parson’s Tale, 45
 and Plato, 43
 and Prologue to Nun’s Priest’s Tale, 
45
 and their author as “father of 
English poetry,” 42
 and their General Prologue, 42, 43, 
44
 and their Interlinear Modern/
Original English versions, 41
 and their original Caxton versions, 
41
 and women in the tales, 44
Cantos of Mutabilitie (Spenser), 49, 52
 and Spenser Online, 52
Certaine Paradoxes and Problemes) (or 
Juvenilia) (Donne), 119–122
charms, 3, 4, 5
 ancient and modern, 3, 6, 7, 9
 and counter-charms, 7
 and Harry Potter, 6, 7
 and hiccups, 7
 and spells, 7
 “Journey Charm,” 3, 5
 literary, 9
 “A Swarm of Bees” (metrical 
charm), 3
 “Unfruitful Land” (metrical charm), 
3, 5
Chaucer, Geoffrey, 41–46
 and Arthur Quiller-Couch, 45
 and Chaucer Glossary, 41, 42
 and Chaucer MetaPage, 41, 42
 and Electronic Canterbury Tales 
Companion, 41
 and essays about Chaucer and his 
works, 41
 and his Canterbury Tales, 41–46
 and his Prologue to his Canterbury 
Tales, 43
 and John Dryden, 42, 45
 and Librarius, 43
 and Luminarium, 42
 and Plato, 43
 and the women in the Canterbury 
Tales, 44
 as Father of English Poetry
 claimed by Arthur Quiller-
Couch, 45
 claimed by John Donne, 45
 claimed by John Dryden, 42
 claimed by other writers, 42, 45
Churchill, Winston
 and Alfred’s poetry, 22
Colloquy (Aelfric), 15, 16
Complaints (Spenser), 52
 and Ruines of Time, 52
 and Visions of the Worlds Vanities, 
52
Complaints Containing Sundrie Small 
Pomes of the Worlds Vanitie 
(Spenser), 47
Complete Corpus of Anglo-Saxon 
Poetry, 3
conceits. See Donne, John
Corpus of Middle English Works, 10
Critics in the Modern World (Ley)
 and Samuel Johnson, 132
Cynewulf, 3, 4
 and his Runic Signature, 6
D’Arbry, Frances Burney, 126, 130, 
131, 132
 A Celebration of Fanny Burney, 
(Clark), 130
 Dr. Johnson and Fanny Burney 
(Tinker), 130
 Early Journals and Letters of Fanny 
Burney, 130
 inspired by Samuel Johnson, 131
 An Introduction to Dr. Johnson 
(Burney), 131, 132

	
Index
143
 Johnsonian Passages From the 
Works of Fanny Burney, 131
 letters between Johnson and Burney, 
130
 Making An Entrance: Fanny Burney 
and Dr. Johnson (Johnston, 
Freya), 130
Databases with literary documents by 
titles, types and names (note 
author name databases under 
authors’ names; particular 
databases with particular 
literary types titles; and literary 
universities with databases)
 Note citations of amazon.com, 
archive.org, bartleby.org, 
bibliomania.com, geocities.
com, Google Books, Good 
Reads, gutenberg.org, Hathitrust.
org, HumanitiesWeb, ipl.org, 
Netsurf, Librarius, Literature 
Network, Luminarium, Online 
Literature, Poetry Archives, 
Poetry Foundation, reocities.com, 
Representative Poetry Online, 
Scholars Bank at the University 
of Oregon, Voice of the Shuttle, 
Web Archive, http://web.archive.
org, absoluteshakespeare.com, 
BardWords.Org, https://www.
opensourceshakespeare.org
 BardWebNet Shakespeare 
Resources, 57, 65, 69, 73, 78, 79
 BedeNet.org, 154
 Chaucer Metapage, 41, 42
 Complete Corpus of Anglo-Saxon 
Poetry, 3
 Complete Works of Shakespeare 
at MIT Online, 57–64, 65–72, 
73–80, 89–95
 Eighteenth Century E-Texts (Rutgers 
University), 125
 Electronic Canterbury Tales 
Companion, 41
 Electronic Texts Archives, 9
 Folger Shakespeare Library Digital 
Texts, 89, 90
 Forgotten Ground Regained, 9
 heroicage.net, 16, 17
 John Donne Variorum Digital 
Project on Web (http://
donnevariorum.tamu.edu), 
97–103, 105–110
 Moulton’s Library of Literary 
Criticism, 103
 No Sweat Shakespeare, 83
 Oxford Shakespeare, 83
 Scholarly Resources Online E-Texts, 
58
 Shaksper.net, 57, 58
 Shakespeare Blog, 73
 Shakespeare Navigators, 65, 66, 70
 Shakespeare on the Internet, 74, 
78, 79
 Spenser Online, 47, 48, 49, 50
 Shakespeare Resource Center, 57
 Shakespeare’s Words, 68
 Surfing with the Bard, 93
 See also universities
Death Song. See “Before the Inevitable 
Journey”
Donne, John, 97–104, 105–110, 
113–117, 119–122
 and an Anglican Library, 113
 and archive.org, 106
 and Bartleby.com, 100
 and An Essay of Dramatick Poesy 
(Dryden), 100
 and Cambridge History of 
English Literature, 122
 and Changing of the Guard 
(Twilight Zone episode), 113
 and claiming Geoffrey Chaucer as 
father of English poetry, 45
 and conceits, 100, 101
 and critics and critical analysis, 100, 
122
 and A. Alvarez, 122
 and Anca Rosu, 122
 and Andrew Mousley, 120

144	
Index
 and Ben Jonson, 99, 110, 119, 
120, 122
 and Ernest Hemingway, 114, 115
 and H. Peters, 122
 and H.J.C. Grierson, 98, 102, 103
 and Helen Gardner, 98, 101, 119, 
122
 and “in his hands English poetry 
became,” 122
 and Izaak Walton, 114, 120
 and Joan Bennett (critic), 98
 and John Dryden, 100, 101, 102, 
120, 122
 and Kaye Anfield, 100
 and Life of Cowley (Johnson), 
100
 and Lives of the Poets (Johnson), 
100
 and M.H. Abrams, 100
 and M. Thomas Hester, 103
 and his “a little world made 
cunningly,” 103
 and More Critical Analyses On 
Donne, 110
 and Moulton’s Library of 
Literary Criticism, 103
 and on Donne’s “artful 
interweaving of argument with 
poetry,” 122
 and on “how Donne transformed 
poetry,” 122
 and “paradox as . . . ,” 122
 and Natalie Sparkes
 and The Use of Geometric 
Conceits in the Poetic 
Works of Donne, 98
 and Philip Sidney, 100, 101
 and Rupert Brook, 120
 and Samuel Johnson, 100, 101, 
120
 and Samuel Taylor Coleridge, 
120
 and T.S. Eliot, 101, 102, 110, 
119, 120, 122
 and “twinned forms,” 122
 and Defence of Poesy (Sidney), 100
 and Donne and the Tradition of 
English Literature (Morgan), 98
 and Donne Variorum, 106
 and Donne’s extravagant conceits, 
100
 and Donne’s affecting the 
metaphysics of his satires and his 
verse, 102
 and The Eagle and the Dove: 
Reassessing John Donne (Hester), 
103
 and Early Modern Studies Journal, 
97
 and epigrams by or about him, 97, 
98, 99, 110
 and Epigrams – To John Donne 
(Jonson), 99, 110
 and Essay on Satire (Dryden), 102
 and excerpts from his various 
writings, 119–122
 and Facsimile Text Society, 119
 and Glossary of John Dryden’s 
Literary Terms (Jensen), 100
 and goodreads.com, 99
 and Gutenberg.org, 98, 102
 and H. James Jenkins, 100
 and “interweaving of argument with 
poetry,” 122
 and Luminarium, 98, 99, 100, 101, 
110, 116, 120, 121
 and neoenglish.wordpress.com, 99
 and Of Dramatick Poetry (Dryden), 
100
 and On Donne’s Poetry (Coleridge), 
99
 and his All Mankind is . . . , 100,115
 and his Can we find . . . , 102
 and his Canonization, 101
 and his Certaine Paradoxes and 
Problemes, 119–122
 and his Communitie, 109
 and his conceits, 100, 101
 and his extravagant conceits, 100
 and his Disinherited, 98
 and his Devotions Upon Emergent 
Occasions, 114, 115, 116

	
Index
145
 and his Divine Poems, 101
 and his The Dreame, 107
 and his elegies
 and His Picture, 99
 and his epigrams, 97, 99, 103, 110
 and his Expostulations and 
Debatements With God, 113
 and his First Anniversarie, 109
 and his For Whom the Bell Tolls, 
113, 114
 and his form of writing as a kind of 
“knitting up of memory,” 100
 and his Good Friday 1513, 108
 and his “good is more common than 
evil,” 121
 and his Good Morrow, 106, 107
 and his Hymn . . . in My Sickness, 
101
 and his His Picture, 99
 and his Holy Sonnets, 108, 109
 and his I wonder . . . , 100
 and his “Is not thy sacred hunger of 
. . . ,” 102
 and his Juvenilia, 119–122
 and his “knitting up of memory,” 
100
 and his letters, 97, 103
 and his Letters to Several 
Personages, 97
 and his letters in verse, 97, 101, 102
 and his “Verse Letter to the 
Countess of Bedford,” 99
 and their subjects, 102
 and his Meditations
 Meditation 4, 116
 Meditation 14, 116
 Meditation 17, 114
 Meditations, 113–117 
 Meditations Upon Our Humane 
(Human) Condition, 113
 and his metaphors, 114, 115
 and his “nature is our worst guide,” 
121
 and his “nature, though oft chased 
away,” 121
 and his No Man is An Island, 100, 
113, 114
 and his An Obscure Writer, 99
 and his “Oh that which to 
search . . . ,” 102
 and his Paradoxes, 119, 120, 122
 IV, 119, 121
 VI, 121
 VII, 121
 VIII, 121
 X, 120
 XI, 119, 120
 and his Poems by John Donne 
(Grierson), 98, 102, 105
 and his poetry, 98, 101, 102, 103, 
105–110
 and The Flea, 100
 and his Prayers Upon the Several 
Occasions, 113
 and his Problemes, 119, 120, 122
 IV, 119, 121, 122
 and his “Reason is . . . ,” 100, 102
 and his Riding Westward, 108
 and his Second Anniversarie, 109
 and his “Sir, more than . . . ,” 102
 and his Songs and Sonnets, 101
 and his sonnets, 108, 109
 and Sonnet Central, 109
 and his “that poor knowledge,” 121
 and his “The title, in other words, 
encapsulates . . . .” See http://
www.oocities.org/milleldred/
donnehester2.html
 and his A Valediction Forbidding 
Mourning, 106,107
 and his A Valediction of My Name 
in the Window, 107
 and his A Valediction to His Booke, 
107
 and his “We’ll build in sonnets . . . 
,” 100
 and his “Why Is There More Variety 
Of Greene Than Any Other 
Colours”? 121
 and his wit, 99, 100

146	
Index
 and Lives of the Poets (Johnson), 
100
 and the Inkslinger Blog, 113
 and Is Donne Serious? (Lancashire), 
108
 and Izaak Walton’s introduction to 
John Donne’s life and work, 113, 
114
 and John Donne and Tradition of 
English Literature, 120
 and John Donne Digital Variorum 
or Donne Variorum, 98, 106, 110
 and John Donne: the Critical 
Heritage, 119, 120, 122
 and latency.com, 101
 and Lives of the Poets (Johnson), 
100
 and Luminarium, 101, 102, 106, 
110, 113, 114, 120
 and metaphysical poetry and poets, 
97, 100, 101
 See also conceit; paradoxes; wit
 and modern times, 114, 116
 Changing of the Guard (Twilight 
Zone episode), 113, 114, 115
 Ernest Hemingway, 114, 115, 
116
 Rod Serling, 114
 T.S. Eliot, 114, 115
 The Twilight Zone (tv program), 
113, 114, 115
 The Twilight Zone: Rod Serling’s 
Wondrous Land (Reynolds), 
115
 and More Critical Analyses Articles 
On John Donne, 110
 and Moulton’s Library of Literary 
Criticism, 97
 and neoenglishsytem.blogspot.com, 
101
 and New Perspectives On the West, 
108
 and Of Dramatik Poetry (Dryden), 
100
 and On Donne’s Poetry (Coleridge), 
99
 and Online-Literature.com, 106
 and Oxford Handbook of John 
Donne (Hester), 98
 and Poems of John Donne 
(Grierson), 102
 and Poetry Foundation, 100, 106
 and poets.org, 98
 and Proceedings from Eighth 
Conference Of British, American, 
Canadian Studies, 122
 and quotations, 103, 122
 and Reassessing John Donne, 103
 and Renascence Editions Online, 
119
 and Representative Poetry Online, 
98, 106
 and scholars, 122
 and The Titles/Headings of John 
Donne’s Epigrams, 103
 and The Works of John Donne, 97
 and To John Donne (Jonson), 106
 and T.S. Eliot, 110
 and Twilight Zone (tv program), 114
 and “Twinned Forms,” 122
 and The Use of Geometric Conceits 
in the Poetry of John Donne, 98
 and What is An Epigram? 
(Coleridge), 98, 120
 and wit, 100
 as “light bringer to ignorance,” 101
 as metaphysical poet, 100, 101
 as poet or “right poet,” 100, 101
 at Early Modern Literature Studies, 
97
 at John Donne Variorum Project on 
the Web, 105, 106, 107, 110
drama
 and John Donne, 100
 and William Shakespeare, 57–80
dramatic poetry and dramatic verse
 and John Donne, 100
 and William Shakespeare, 84, 89, 
91, 94
Dryden, John
 criticizing Donne and connects him 
to metaphysical poets. See http://

	
Index
147
www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/
metaintro.htm
 on Donne’s dramatic poetry, 100
Dream of the Rood, 13
Dream Vision poetry, 12, 13
early English literature, 3, 9, 15
 See also Anglo-Saxon literature; Old 
English literature; Early Middle 
English literature
early Middle English literature, 9
early Modern English literature, 9, 12
Eighteenth Century E-Texts (Rutgers 
University), 125
 and Samuel Johnson’s Preface 
to A Dictionary of the English 
Language, 127
Electronic Texts Archives
 and early Middle English verse, 9
 and Old English verse, 9
Eliot, T.S.
 and John Donne, 97, 102, 113, 115
 and “Objective Correlative,” 69
 and William Shakespeare, 69
Epic poetry
 and Aristotle, 12
Epigrams and John Donne, 97
Exeter Book, 25, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 
37
 and Exeter Cathedral Library, 31
 and its poems, 31–37
 and its riddles, 25–30
 function of riddles, 29
 and runes being like synonyms of 
riddles, 29
 and scholars’ commentaries on, 29
 and writing riddles, 30
Faerie Queene (Spenser), 47–54
 and allegory, 50, 51
 and Book One (I), 49, 51
 and Book Five (V), 50
 and Book Four (IV or IIII), 50
 and Book Six (VI), 50
 and Book Three (III), 50
 and Book Three (III), Introduction 
to, 49, 50
 and Book Two (II), 50
 and Britomart (character), 50
 and castle as setting, 50
 and characters and their 
personifications, 50
 and Critics On Spenser’s Style, 51
 and critics’ views, 47, 48, 51
 and C.S. Lewis, 48, 51
 and House of Temperance, 50
 and its language, 54
 and literary devices, 48, 51
 and Notes Explanatory and Critical 
(Upton), 48
 and personifications of virtues, 50
 and Poetry of Spenser, Its Design 
(Courthope), 51
 and Prologue to the Fairie Queene, 
48
 and reading guides to, 54
 and Scholarly Resources Online 
E-Texts, 48, 49
 and scholars, 51
 and Spenser and the Culture of 
Place (Woolway), 51
 and Spenser As A Word Painter and 
Metrical Musician, 51
 and Spenser Online, 47, 49, 50
 and Spenser Review, 47, 48
 and Spenser Studies, 47, 48
 and Spenserians Web site 
(University of Vermont), 47
 and Spenser’s Didactic Purpose in 
Book One of the Fairie Queene, 
51
 and Spenser’s Mission (Saintsbury), 
51
 and Spenser’s Narrative Imagery: 
Visual Structure of the Fairie 
Queene (McMurtry), 51
 and Spenser’s stories retold for 
young readers, 48
 and Studies in Medieval and 
Renaissance Literature, 48
 and translations of, 54

148	
Index
 at Luminarium, 49, 50, 51, 52
 at Scholars Bank, University of 
Oregon, 47, 48, 49, 50, 52, 54
Faerie Queene: A New Edition with 
Glossary, 48
Faerie Queene: Modern English Edition 
(University of Virginia)
Faerie Queene: Renaissance Edition, 
47, 48
“Fair field of folk”
 and Piers Plowman, 11
Father of English Poetry, 45
A Field Guide to Alliterative Verse, 10
Forgotten Ground Regained 
(alliteration.net)
 its’ Alliterative Meters: Historical 
and Modern (Editor’s Notes, part 
X), 5, 7
 its’ Mimicking Old English 
Alliterative Verse (Editor’s Notes, 
part XV), 5, 7
 its’ Translations of Alliterative and 
Accentual Poetry, 5, 7, 31
 its’ A Treasury of Alliterative and 
Accentual Poetry, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 37
Gawain Takes Up the Challenge, 12
Goia, Dana
 and his Accentual or Alliterative 
Verse, 10
 and his Poetry as Enchantment, 10
The Great Vowel Shift, 10, 13
The Green Knight Arrives (Spenser), 12
Gregory (Pope), 19
 and King Alfred the Great, 19, 20
 guide by, 19
A Handbook of Terms for Discussing 
Poetry (Emory University), 49
 and Spenserian Stanza, 49
Harry Potter
 and charms, 6
 and counter-charms, 7
 and “interpretive quests,” 29
 and riddles, 29
 and runes, 29
 as type of synonym of riddles, 29
 and “secretive passages,” 29
 and spells, 6
Harry Potter worldview, 7
The Haunted Mere:
 and Beowulf, 12
The Heroic Age, 15, 16, 17
The Heroic Age: A Journal of Early 
Medieval Northwestern Europe, 
15, 16
Heroic Age of Literature, 17
The High Medieval Dream Vision: 
Poetry, Philosophy and Literary 
Form (Lynch), 13
Historical Prologue of Sir Gawain and 
the Green Knight, 11
Hopkins, Gerard Manley
 and modern poems written in Old 
English style, 37
House of Fame (Chaucer), 13
How to Analyze A Shakespearean 
Sonnet, 89, 91
Husband’s Message, 31, 36
 and Wife’s Lament, 31, 35, 36
Icelandic, Old English, Texts, 3
Idler essays (Johnson), 125, 128
“Instruct by Pleasing” (Johnson), 129
International Society of Anglo-
Saxonists. See bede.net; isasweb.
net
J.K. Rowling Lexicon, 30
Johnson, Samuel, 125–132
 Age of Johnson, 125, 126, 132
 and Alexander Pope, 130
 and anecdotes, 128
 and Anecdotes of the Late Samuel 
Johnson (Thrale), 128
 and Boswell: An Introduction to 
Samuel Johnson (Burney), 126
 and A Celebration of Fanny Burney, 
(Clark), 130
 and Characterization of Dr. Johnson 
(Boswell), 128

	
Index
149
 and Cambridge Companion to 
Samuel Johnson (Clingham), 130
 and The Condition of Women 
(Clingham), 130
 and A Critical Companion to Jane 
Austen, 132
 and critics, 130, 131
 and Critics in the Modern World, 
127, 132
 and C.S. Lewis, 126, 131, 132
 and documents at University of 
Australia in Adelaide, 125, 126, 
129
 and Dr. Johnson and Fanny Burney 
(Tinker), 130
 and Early Journals and Letters of 
Fanny Burney, 130
 and Eighteenth Century British 
Poets and Their Twentieth 
Century Lives  (Simons), 127
 and Eighteenth Century E-Texts, 
127
 and Essay on Boswell’s Biography 
of Johnson (Macauley), 131
 and Fanny Burney D’Arby, 126, 
130, 131, 132
 and Hester Lynch Thrale Piozzi, 
126, 127, 128, 129, 132
 and his Aberdeen (essay), 128
 and his Adventurer essays, 125, 128
 and his basic features of literary 
criticism, 129
 and his conversational style, 127
 and his critical analyses, 130
 and his Drury Lane Prologue, 125, 
129
 and his essays. See individual titles
 and his features of literary criticism, 
129
 and his “Glasgow” (essay), 128
 and his The Happiness of A Life Led 
According to Nature, 129
 and his “instruct by pleasing,” 129
 and his Idler essays, 125, 128
 and his Inverness (essay), 128
 and his A Journey to the Western 
Islands of Scotland, 125, 128
 and his letters, 130
 and his Lines Written Under a Print 
Representing Person Skaiting, 
126, 129
 and his Lives of the English Poets, 
125, 130
 and his Loch Lomond (essay), 128
 and his Loch Ness (essay), 128
 and his London, 132
 and his “the mirror of life,” 129
 and his One and Twenty, 125, 129
 and his The Patriot (essay), 125
 and his poetry, 129, 132
 and his Political Essays, 125
 and his Preface to A Dictionary of 
the English Language, 125, 127
 and his The Preface to the Works of 
Shakespeare, 125, 129, 130
 and his The Prince and Princess 
Leave the Valley, and See Many 
Wonders, 129
 and his The Prince Finds A Man of 
Learning, 129
 and his Rambler essays, 125, 128
 and his Rasselas, 125, 129
 and his science quotations, 127
 and his St. Andrews (essay), 128
 and his style, 128, 129, 130, 132
 and his “the three unities,” 129
 and his travel essays, 128
 and his The Vanity of Human 
Wishes, 125, 129, 132
 and his The Winter’s Walk, 126, 129
 and his wit, 125, 127
 and his A Word to the Wise, 129
 and his The Young Author, 129
 and James Boswell, 127, 128, 130, 
131, 132
 and Jane Austen, 130, 131, 132
 and John Dryden, 130
 and John Milton, 130
 and Johnson’s Writings, Literary 
Career, As Literary Dictator 
(Stephen), 131

150	
Index
 and Jonathan Swift, 130
 and Leslie Stephen, 126, 131, 132
 and Letters By Samuel Johnson 
(Birney),130, 131
 and Letters Of Samuel Johnson, 
(Hill), 130, 131
 and Letters To and From the Late 
Samuel Johnson, 125, 126, 127, 
130, 131
 and Lionel Trilling, 127, 128, 132
 and literary age, 125, 132
 and literary devices, 127
 and The Literary Remains of Mrs. 
Piozzi (Thrale), 126, 130
 and Making An Entrance: Fanny 
Burney and Samuel Johnson 
(Johnston), 130
 and Mentoring Jane Austen: 
Reflections on ‘My Dear Dr. 
Johnson’ (Gross), 130
 and neoenglishsystem.blogspot.com, 
131
 and Samuel Johnson: A Biography 
(Martin), 130
 and Samuel Johnson Timeline of 
Everyday Life (1730–1800), 130
 and scholars, 130
 and Topical Guide to Quotes on the 
Samuel Johnson Sound Bite Page, 
127
 and Thomas B. Macaulay, 131, 132
 and To the Memory of Mrs. LeFroy 
(Austen), 132
 and travel, 128
 and Virginia Woolf, 131
 and W. Jackson Bate, 127, 132
 and William Shakespeare, 129
 anecdotes
 definitions and examples of, 127, 
128
 Anecdotes of the Late Samuel 
Johnson, 128
 aphorisms, 127
 archive.org, 126, 127, 130, 131
 as mentor to women writers, 131, 
132
 as person inspiring others, 131, 132
 at bartleby.com, 132
 at bibliomania.com, 129
 biographers and biographies, 126, 
128, 130, 131, 132
 Characterization of Dr. Samuel 
Johnson (Boswell), 128
 Condition of Women in Cambridge 
Companion to Samuel Johnson 
(Clingham), 130
 critical analyses of and by other 
writers, 125, 127, 128, 130, 131, 
132
 Early Journals and Letters of Fanny 
Burney, 126, 130
 Eighteenth Century British Poets 
and Their Twentieth Century 
Lives (Simons), 125
 Eighteenth Century E-Texts, 125
 Google Books (https://books.google.
com), 126, 130, 132
 gutenberg.org, 131
 An Introduction to Dr. Johnson 
(Burney), 126, 130
 Inverness (essay), 128
 Jane Austen’s Literary Relations, 131
 Johnson’s Writings, Literary 
Career, As Literary Dictator 
(Stephen), 131
 Johnsonian Passages From the 
Works of Fanny Burney, 131
 Johnsonian Timeline of Everyday 
Life, 1730–1800, 130
 Johnsoniana, 128
 Johnsoniana: Anecdotes of Late 
Samuel Johnson During Last 20 
Years of Life  (Piozzi), 126, 128, 
130
 poetry defining the Age of Johnson, 
132
 quotations, 126, 127
 Rutgers University, 127, 129, 130
 Samuel Johnson (Bate), 127, 132
 Samuel Johnson (Stephen), 131
 Samuel Johnson: A Biography 
(Martin), 130

	
Index
151
 Samuel Johnson Sound Bite Page, 
126, 127
 Topical Guide to Quotes on the 
Samuel Johnson Sound Bite Page, 
126, 127
 travel essays, 128
 www.samueljohnson.com, 127
Jonson, Ben
 and John Donne, 119, 120, 122
 and William Shakespeare, 74, 79
Johnston, Ian (scholar-critic)
 and William Shakespeare, 73, 79
A Journey Charm, 3, 4, 5
Juvenilia, or Certaine Paradoxes and 
Problemes (Donne), 119–122
Kennings, 11, 14
 and Beowulf, 11
 and Bertha Rogers, 11
 and Seamus Heaney, 11
 definitions, 11
 Eddic and Skadic kennings, 11, 14
 examples, 11
 Kennings and Anglo-Saxon 
Literature, 11, 14
King Alfred the Great. See Alfred, King 
(The Great)
King Arthur. See Arthur, King
Lang, Jeanie
 and Spenser’s writings for young 
readers, 48
Langland, William
 and his The Vision of Piers 
Plowman, 9, 11
A Letter On the Advancement of 
Learning (Alfred), 19–23
letters by Samuel Johnson
and Letters By Samuel Johnson 
(Birney),130, 131
and Letters Of Samuel Johnson, 
(Hill), 130, 131
and Letters To and From the Late 
Samuel Johnson (Piozzi), 125, 
126, 127, 130, 131
letters in verse by John Donne, 97, 09, 
101, 102
 and his “Verse Letter to the 
Countess of Bedford,” 99
 and their subjects, 102
Lewis, C.S.:
 and Samuel Johnson, 126, 131, 132
 and Edmund Spenser’s Faerie 
Queene, 47, 48, 51
Linking Letters: A Poet’s Guide to 
Alliterative Verse, 9, 10
Literary Remains of Mrs. Piozzi 
(Thrale), 126, 130
Lives of the English Poets (Johnson), 
130
Macauley, Thomas B.
 essay on Boswell biography of 
Johnson, 131
Making An Entrance: Fanny Burney and 
Samuel Johnson (Johnston, F), 130
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
 and The Complete Works of 
Shakespeare, 57–64, 65–72, 
73–80, 83–88
Medieval Resources, 13
 and The High Medieval Dream 
Vision: Poetry, Philosophy, and 
Literary Form, 13
 and Prosody of Old and Middle 
English Verse, 13
Mentoring Jane Austen: Reflections on 
‘My Dear Dr. Johnson,’ 130
metaphors
 and Exeter Book, 33
 and John Donne, 115
 and William Shakespeare, 92
metaphysical poetry and poets, 97
metrical charms and runes, 3–7
 and Bruce Dickins (translator), 3
 and definition of runes, 5
 and Harry Potter, 6, 7
 and J.R.R. Tolkien, 3, 5, 6
 and Marijane Osbourne (translator), 
3, 5

152	
Index
  and Mimicking Old English Verse 
Forms in Modern English, 6
 and modern alliterative verse, 6
 and Runic Alphabet, 5
 and The Very Nature of Alliterative 
Verse, 6
 Anglo-Saxon Rune Poem, 3
 Fates of the Apostles (Cynewulf), 
4, 6
 The Rhyming Poem, 4
 The Rune Poem, 4, 5, 6
 and glossary, 42
 and Prosody of Old and Middle 
English Verse, 13
 See also Anglo-Saxon literature; 
Northern European Study Texts; 
Old English literature
Middle English literature
Modern English
 and Old English verse forms, 35, 37
Modern Revival of alliterative verse, 37
Modern Revival of Old English 
Literature, 37
New Northvegr Center (http://www.
runewebvitki.com/the-new-
northvegr-center), 3, 4, 6, 12, 13, 
15
 See also some similar documents 
at http://www.northvegr.
net (click Runes link); http://
anglosaxonpoetry.camden.rutgers.
edu
Norton Anthology of English Literature, 
13
Northern European Study Texts 
(Northvegr). See New Northvegr 
Center
Northumbrian English, 31
Northvegr (Northern European Study 
Texts). See New Northvegr Center
“Objective Correlative,” 69
An Obscure Writer (Donne), 97
Old English, 3, 4
Old English alliterative verse, 9, 10, 11
Old English Era, 9–13
Old English literature, 3, 4, 9–13, 
15–17, 19–23, 25–30, 31–37
 and Bishop Leofric, 25
 and The Exeter Book, 25, 31
 and The Exeter Book poems, 31–37
 and The Exeter Book riddles, 25–30
 and Exeter Cathedral Library, 31
 and gnomic verse, 29
 and Harry Potter, 6, 7
 and J.K. Rowling, 30
 and J.R.R. Tolkien, 3, 6, 29, 34
 and Narrative Poetry Project, 15
 and phrases of
 “the best epitaph,” 35
 “the power of poetry,” 36, 37
 “the wife’s lament,” 36
 and resources
 at Old English Newsletter online, 
26
 at universities, 26, 30
 and sample translation using part of 
Alice and Wonderland, 31
 and Theodore Roosevelt, 30
 and writings by Anonymous, 25–30
 charms, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
 metrical charms, 4, 5
 riddles, 4, 25–30
 See also list of riddles under R 
below
 runes, 3, 4, 5, 6
 and hiccoughs
 and kennings, 33, 34
 and Skaldic poetry, 33
 and traveling, 35
 See also Anglo-Saxon literature; 
http://anglosaxonpoetry.camden.
rutgers.edu; kennings; Old 
English poetry
Old English poetry, 3–6
 and modern renditions, 36
 Concerning the Ruin of Britain, 33
 The Husband’s Message, 31, 36
 Order of the World, 36

	
Index
153
 Prosody of Old and Middle English 
Verse, 13
 The Rhyming Poem, 31, 36
 The Ruined City, 31, 32
 The Rune Poem, 3, 5, 6
 The Seafarer, 4, 31, 34, 35
 The Wanderer, 31, 33, 34
 and birds, 35
 Widsith, 35
 The Wife’s Lament, 31, 35
 See also Old English poetry style 
revived by modern writers; 
Anglo-Saxon literature; Northern 
European Study Texts; Old 
English literature
Old English poetry style revived by 
modern writers
 C.S. Lewis, 31 
 Ezra Pound, 33, 37
 G.M Hopkins, 31, 37
 J.R.R. Tolkien, 34, 37
 P.K. Page, 37
 Robert Frost, 33
 Seamus Heaney, 31, 33
 W.H. Auden, 31
Old English writers other than 
Anonymous
 Aelfric, 15, 16, 17
 Alfred, 19–23
 Bede, 15, 16, 17
 Caedmon, 16
 Cynewulf, 3, 4, 6
 Gildas, 17, 33
 The Pearl Poet, 9, 12
 Scribes A and B, 9
 Venerable Bede. See Bede
Old English Riddles from the Exeter 
Book (Alexander), 25–30, 31
On “Mimicking Old English verse 
forms in Modern English.” See 
Forgotten Ground Regained: 
Editor’s Notes – Part XV
On the Lineage of English Language 
(Quiller-Couch), 45
Osbourne, Marijane
 and runes, 3, 4
Page, P.K.
 and modern verse recreating Old 
English verse, 37
paradoxes. See Donne, John
Parliament of Fowles (Chaucer), 13
The Passionate Pilgrim (Shakespeare), 
83, 84
 and its If Music and Sweet Poetry 
Agree, 84
The Pearl Poet, 9, 12
The Pearl, 13
The Phoenix and the Turtle[dove] 
(Shakespeare), 83, 85, 86
 as allegory, 86
Piers Plowman. See The Vision of Piers 
Plowman
Piozzi, Hester Lynch Thrale
 and Samuel Johnson, 128, 130, 132
Poetic Meter in English: Roots and 
Possibilities (Moore), 10
Poetry
 and dream vision, 13, 14
 and Edmund Spenser, 47–54
 and Donne, John, 105–110
 and “power of poetry,” 37
 and Shakespeare, William, 83, 89
 and Spenserian stanza, 54
 as dramatic verse and verse in plays, 
89, 91, 94, 100
 in epic form, 12
 in Shakespeare’s plays, 89, 91, 94
 in sonnet form
 at Sonnet Central online, 49
 Shakespearean Sonnet, 83, 84, 
85, 89–94
 Spenserian Sonnet, 49, 53
 See http://www.sonnets.org/
basicforms.htm
 of fifteenth century England, 41–46
 of fourteenth century England, 9, 11
 of seventeenth century England, 
57–99
 of sixteenth century England, 47–54
 of thirteenth century England, 9, 
11, 13
Poetry As Enchantment (Goia), 10

154	
Index
Pound, Ezra
 and Old English poetry style, 37
Preface to A Dictionary of the English 
Language (Johnson), 125, 127
Preface to the Works of Shakespeare 
(Johnson), 125, 129, 130
Preface to St. Augustine’s Soliloquies, 
19, 20, 23
The Prince and Princess Leave the 
Valley (Johnson), 129
The Prince Finds A Man of Learning 
(Johnson), 129
Prose Preface to Pope Gregory’s 
Pastoral Care (Alfred), 19, 20, 21
Quiller-Couch, Arthur:
 and Geoffrey Chaucer, 45
quotations
 by themes in Shakespeare’s works, 91
Rambler essays (Johnson), 125
Rasselas, A Prince of Abissinia 
(Johnson), 125, 129
Revival of early English literary forms 
in modern times
 and poets of modern times
 Ezra Pound, 37
 G.M. Hopkins, 37
 J.R.R. Tolkien, 37
 P.K. Page, 37
 Robert Frost, 37
The Rhyming Poem, 36
 See also The Riming Poem
Riddle Ages, 28, 31
 See also riddles by number
riddles, 4, 25–30
 and Anglo-Saxon Riddles of the 
‘Exeter Book’, 26, 29
 and Beowulf, 27
 and Exeter Book, 25, 26, 27
 and gnomic verses, 29
 and Harry Potter, 25, 29, 30
 and Introduction to Anglo-Saxon 
Poetry (Bradley), 27
 and J.R.R. Tolkien, 25, 29
 and J.K. Rowling, 25, 29, 30
 and J.K. Rowling Lexicon, 30
 and The Hobbit, 29
 and Karl Young on “most riddles 
open with . . . ,” 26, 27
 and Marie Nelson on “four functions 
of the riddle,” 27
 and Marie Nelson on “two types of 
challenging endings of riddles,” 
27
 and Nature of the Riddle (Crossley-
Holland), 27
 and Riddles Ages Web site, 28
 and runes like synonyms of riddles, 
29
 and Riddles from the Exeter Book, 
28
 and The Riddles of Harry Potter: 
Secret Passages and Interpretive 
Quests (Wolosky), 29
 and Theodore Roosevelt, 30
 riddle eight, 29
 riddle eighty-five, 29
 riddle fifty-six, 29
 riddle forty-five, 26
 riddle forty-four, 28
 riddle forty-nine, 28
 riddle forty-seven, 27
 riddle ninety-one, 28
 riddle seventy-six, 26
 riddle sixty-nine, 29
 riddle twenty-five, 26
 riddle twenty-four, 29
 riddle twenty-seven, 26
 riddle twenty-three, 26
 riddle twenty-six, 27
 riddle thirty-three, 26, 29
 riddle thirty-four, 29
 riddle thirty-nine, 29
riddles by number, 28
 See also Riddle Ages
riddles in modern literature
 and J.K. Rowling, 25, 29
 and J.R.R. Tolkien, 29, 34, 37
 and Theodore Roosevelt, 30

	
Index
155
 in Harry Potter, 29
 in The Hobbit, 29
 in Lord of the Rings, 34
The Riming Poem, 5, 32
 See also The Rhyming Poem
The Ruined City, 32, 33
 as “a waste place of ruins,” 33
Rune Poem, 5
 and men (as translated by Bruce 
Dickins), 5
 and narrators, 5
 and translations, 5
 and women (as translated by 
Marijane Osborn), 5
runes, 3, 5, 6
 and Bruce Dickins, 5
 and The Hobbit, 29
 and Marjorie Osbourne, 5
 and Runic Alphabet, 5, 6
 and Signature Verses, 6
 defined, 5
 meanings of, 5
 subjects of, 5
 synonym-like, 29
Runic Alphabet, 5, 6
Runic Poem, 3, 4, 5
Runic Signature Verses, 6
 and Cynewulf’s Fates of the 
Apostles, 6
The Seafarer, 4, 31, 34, 35
Shakespeare, William, 57–64, 65–72, 
73–80, 83–88, 89–95
 “and comedy as . . . ,” 61
 and his achievement as dramatist,” 
62
 and seven ages of man, 59
 and animals in his works, 59, 60, 
75, 85
 and approaches to Shakespeare’s 
works, 61
 and codes and ciphers, 64, 72
 and first lines, 60
 and imagination, 62
 and importance of words, 84
 and metaphors, 75
 and the “Objective Correlative,” 69
 and on genre and gender, 61
 and on Shakespeare and his poetry, 
94
 and poetry as allegory, 86
 and quotations from his works, 59, 
60, 63, 66, 78, 84, 86
 and Shakespeare and Childhood, 67
 and Shakespeare Blog, 73
 and Shakespeare on gender and 
genre, 68, 69
 and The Shakespeare Play As Poem 
(Viswanathan), 84
 and Shakespeare’s style, 69
 and Shakespearean codes or ciphers, 
64
 and Shakespeare’s influence on 
other writings, 63
 and topics in his plays, 79, 80
 and women in his works, 68, 69
 as “greatest poet of modern times 
. . . and all time,” 87
 BardWeb, 65
 Bartlett’s Familiar Shakespeare 
Quotations, 60
 Birds of Shakespeare Critically 
Examined, Explained, and 
Illustrate (Harting), 60
 celestialtimepiece.com (Oates), 73
 Character Building: Shakespeare’s 
Children in Context (Piesse), 67
 Characters of Shakespeare, 62
 Child Characters in Shakespeare, 67
 The Complete Works of 
Shakespeare, 57–64, 65–72, 
73–80, 83–88
 children in his plays, 67
 comedy is . . . , 62, 63
 criticism and critics
 and Elizabeth Barrett Browning, 
66
 and Edward Dowden, 62
 and Mark Twain, 62
 and Ralph Waldo Emerson, 62
 and Samuel Taylor Coleridge, 62
 and William Hazlitt, 62

156	
Index
 critical analyses, 57, 61, 62, 65, 
69, 73, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 
93, 94
 Critical Approaches to 
Shakespeare (Johnston), 61, 
68, 79, 87, 94
 Shakespeare and His Critics, 58
 Shakespeare As Poet and 
Dramatist, 84
 drama
 and Royal Shakespeare 
Company, 73
 Dramatic Structure: Comedy and 
Tragedy and Shakespeare
 Observations on Shakespeare’s 
Dramatic Poetry, 84
 The Poetry of Shakespeare’s 
Plays, 86
 Prose and Verse in 
Shakespeare’s Plays, 89, 91
 The Shakespeare Play As Poem, 
86
 his characters, 62, 68, 75, 76, 77, 78
 See also Character Building: 
Shakespeare’s Children 
in Context; Characters of 
Shakespeare; Child Characters 
in Shakespeare; children in his 
plays; Portrayals of Children 
in Shakespeare’s Plays
 Albany, 75
 Anne Bullen, 68
 Antony , 73, 75, 76, 77, 78
 Banquo, 76
 Brutus, 76, 78 
 Calpurnia, 68, 76
 Cassio, 77
 Cassius, 76
 Characters of Shakespeare, 62
 characters related to one another, 
59
 characters who are clowns 
(Greene), 62
 characters who are disguised, 58
 Cleopatra, 73, 75, 76, 77
 Constance, 68
 Cordelia, 68, 75
 Cymbeline, 57
 Demitrius, 77
 Duke of York
 and his garden, 67
 Edgar, 73
 Edmund, 75
 Elinor, 68
 Enobarbus, 75, 76
 Erpingham, 72 Flavius, 70
 fool, 75
 Fortinbras, 75
 Friar Lawrence, 75
 Gertrude, 75
 Gloucester, 75
 Goneril, 75
 Hamlet, 73, 75, 78
 Horatio, 75
 Iago, 77
 Jacques, 58
 Juliet, 73, 75, 77
 Julius Caesar, 68, 73, 76, 78
 Katherine of Arragon, 68
 King Arthur, 68
 King Henry IV, 67, 68
 King Henry V, 62, 71
 King Henry VIII, 68
 King John, 68
 King Lear, 73, 75, 77
 Laertes, 75
 Lepidus, 76
 MacBeth, 73, 76
 MacDuff (the younger), 68
 Michael Williams, 72
 Miranda, 68
 Octavian, 76
 Ophelia, 75, 77
 Othello, 77
 Philo, 77
 Pistol, 72
 Polonius, 75
 Portia, 68
 Prince Hal, 68, 71
 Regan, 75
 Richard II, 68
 Richard III, 68

	
Index
157
 Rodrigo, 77
 Romeo, 73, 75, 77, 78
 Shakespeare’s Clowns, 62
 two young princes, 68
 witches, 76
 his comedies, 57–64
 All’s Well That Ends Well, 57, 64
 As You Like It, 58, 59, 60, 63 
Cymbeline, 57, 59
 Measure for Measure, 57, 62
 The Merry Wives of Windsor, 64
 A Midsummer Night’s Dream, 
57, 62
 Much Ado About Nothing, 57, 64
 The Tempest, 57, 59, 63, 64
 Twelfth Night, 57, 64
 The Winter’s Tale, 57, 59
 his dramatic poetry, 80, 87, 91, 94
 dramatic verse defined, 94
 The Making of Shakespeare’s 
Dramatic Poetry (Hubbard), 
84, 86, 89, 91, 94
 Observations on Shakespeare’s 
Dramatic Poetry (Johnston, 
Ian), 83
 The Poetry of Shakespeare’s 
Plays (Halliday), 86
 Prose and Verse in 
Shakespeare’s Plays, 91, 94
 The Shakespeare Play As Poem, 
84, 86
 Shakespeare’s Dramatic Verse 
Line, 94
 his history plays, 65–72
 Henry IV, 65, 67, 68, 70
 Henry V, 65, 71
 Henry VI, 65
 Henry VIII, 65, 68
 Julius Caesar
 See Shakespeare, William: his 
tragic plays
 King John, 65
 Richard II, 65, 67, 68
 Richard III, 65, 68, 70
 Timon of Athens, 70
 his influence on other writers, 63
 his monologues
 monologues for men, 60–61, 69
 monologues for women, 60–61, 
69
 his poems (selections)
 How heavy do I journey on the 
Way, 92
 If Music and Sweet Poetry Agree, 
84
 Like as the Waves Make Towards 
the Pebbled Shore, 92
 Not Marble, nor.., 91
 The Passionate Pilgrim, 84
 Phoenix and the Turtle[dove], 85
 Shall I compare thee to.., 92
 Some Glory in.., 91
 Venus and Adonis, 83
 When in disgrace with . . . , 92
 his poetry, 83–88; 89, 90, 91, 92, 
93, 94, 95
 and bartleby.com, 84, 85
 and commentaries, 84, 87
 and Edward Dowden, 84
 and Harriet Monroe, 84
 and his As It Fell Upon A Day, 
85
 and his If Music and Sweet 
Poetry Agree, 84
 and his The Passionate Pilgrim, 
83
 and his The Phoenix and the 
Turtle[dove], 83, 84, 85
 and his Sonnets to Sundry Notes 
of Music, 83, 85
 and Critical Approaches to 
Shakespeare, 83, 84
 and A Handbook of Terms for 
Discussing Poetry (Emory 
University), 64
 and Literary Vocabulary Web 
site, 86
 and The Making Of 
Shakespeare’s Dramatic 
Poetry, 83, 84, 86

158	
Index
 and No Sweat Shakespeare 
Web site, 83 and of a poem’s 
importance in a play, 86
 and Of Shakespeare, A Poet 
(Coleridge), 69
 and The Oxford Shakespeare, 83
 and pbs.org, 83, 86
 and Poetry Foundation, 84
 and Poetry – Index of First Lines 
(bartleby.org), 84
 and Poetry Magazine, 84
 and The Poetry of Shakespeare’s 
Plays, 86
 and Project Muse Web site, 83
 and quotations, 84, 86, 87
 and Representative Poetry 
Online, 83, 84, 86
 and The Rise of Poetic 
Interpretation in Shakespeare, 
83, 84, 86
 and Shakespeare As Poet and 
Dramatist, 83, 84
 and “Shakespeare as the greatest 
poet of modern time . . . and 
all times,” 87
 and The Shakespeare Play As 
Poem, 86
 and Shakespeare’s Dramatic 
Verse Line, 94
 See also his poetry in the plays; 
Sonnets, Shakespearean
 his poetry in the plays, 89, 90, 91, 
94
 his sonnets, 83, 85
 and BardNet, 90
 and Bartleby: Great Books 
Online, 89, 90, 91, 93, 94
 and British Library Web site, 
91
 and critical analyses, 94, 95
 and dramatic verse defined, 91, 
94
 and dramatic verse in 
Shakespeare’s plays, 94
 and examples of Shakespearean 
sonnet, 94
 and Folger Shakespeare Library 
Digital Texts, 89, 90, 91, 93
 and How to Analyze A 
Shakespeare Sonnet, 89, 91
 and Introduction to 
Shakespeare’s Sonnets 
(Davies), 93
 and Is Shakespeare Dead? 
(Twain), 94
 and John Dryden, 90, 94
 and Lectures On Shakespeare 
(Auden), 89, 90
 and Literary Remains of 
Shakespeare, 89, 90
 and A Look At Shakespeare’s 
Sonnets (Johnston, Ian), 89
 and The Making of Shakespeare’s 
Dramatic Poetry (Hibbard), 
89, 91, 94
 and A Note On Shakespeare’s 
Sonnets (Johnston, Ian), 90
 and Mark Twain, 90, 94
 and An Outline of the Contents 
of Shakespeare’s Sonnets 
(Alden), 90, 93
 and The Oxford Shakespeare, 89
 and Prose and Verse in 
Shakespeare’s Plays (Ballard), 
89, 91, 94
 and Quotations by Theme at 
Shakespeare Online, 93, 94
 and Ralph Waldo Emerson, 90, 
94
 and Rhyme Zone, 89, 90
 and rules for defining a 
sonnet, 93
 and Samuel Taylor Coleridge, , 
89, 90, 94
 and scholars, 90
 and Shakespeare, A Poet 
(Coleridge), 89, 90
 and Shakespeare Online, 89, 93
 and Shakespeare’s Dramatic 
Verse Online, 94
 and Shakespearean Sonnet 
Basics, 89, 91

	
Index
159
 and Threading Shakespeare’s 
Sonnets (Bennett), 89, 90
 See also Sonnets, Shakespearean, 
89–95
 his sonnets by first lines, 93
 his sonnets by number (e.g., 12, 14, 
15, 17, 21, 33–35, 38, 64, 65), 93
 his sonnets by title
 How heavy do I . . . (50 or L), 92
 Let us not to . . . (116 or CXVI), 
92
 Like as the waves . . . (60 or LX), 
92
 Love is too . . . (151 or CLI), 92
 Not Marble, nor . . . (55 or LV), 
91, 92
 Shall I compare thee . . . (18 or 
XVIII), 92
 Some Glory in . . . (91 or XCI), 
91
 Sonnets to Sundry Notes of 
Music, 83, 85
 That Time of Year . . . (73 or 
LXXIII), 92
 When in disgrace . . . (29 or 
XXIX), 92
 When to the sessions of . . . (30 
or XXX), 92
 his subjects in his sonnets, 93, 94
 his themes in his sonnets, 93
 his tragic plays, 73–80
 Antony and Cleopatra, 73, 75, 
76, 77
 Hamlet, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78
 Julius Caesar, 73, 75, 76, 78
 King Lear, 73, 75
 Macbeth, 73, 74, 75, 76
 Othello, 77
 Romeo and Juliet, 73, 75, 76, 77
 miscellaneous
 and De Shakespeare A T.S. Eliot 
(Fluchere), 62
 and Francis Bacon, 64
 and Literary Remains of 
Shakespeare (Coleridge), 90
 and literary vocabulary, 86
 and quotations, 69, 70, 71, 87
 and The British Library, 89
 and Hollywood Bard, 63
 and Men vs. Women: Examining 
Relationship between Genre 
and Gender in Shakespeare? 
(Kurzawski), 61
 and The Oxford Shakespeare, 83
 and PBS and Shakespeare, 83
 and Portrayals of Children in 
Shakespeare’s Plays, 67
 and Preface to Shakespeare 
(Johnson), 58, 62
 and Rise of Poetic Interpretation 
in Shakespeare, 83, 84
 and A Sentence from Shakespeare 
(Huxley), 71
 and Search for Transcendence in 
Shakespeare (Eliot), 69
 and Shake Sphere: A 
Comprehensive Shakespeare 
Study Guide, 57
 and Shakespeare and the 
Classical Tradition, 58
 and Shakespeare, His Mind and 
Art (Dowden), 62
 and Shakespeare’s Life, Times, 
and Places, 73
 and Shakespeare Navigators, 65, 
66, 70
 and Shakespeare on the Internet, 
58
 and Shakespeare’s Dramatic Art 
Form
 and Shakespeare’s Influence On 
Other Artists, 66, 71
 and Shakespeare’s Last Plays 
(Freeh), 69
 and Shakespeare’s Use of 
Language, 84, 86
 and Shakespearean Code or 
Cipher, 64, 66
 and Shakespearean Code 
references, 64, 66, 72
 and Shakespearean Monologues, 
65

160	
Index
 and Star Trek (the media 
franchise) and Shakespeare, 
63, 65, 70, 71
 and Star Trek references, 70, 71
 and Studies in Shakespeare 
(Johnston), 68
 and Surfing with the Bard, 93
 and To Bardly Go, 63
 and Titles from Shakespeare, 
66, 80
 and Titles Inspired By 
Shakespeare Phrases, 66, 80
 and T.S. Eliot, 94
 and T.S. Eliot and Shakespeare 
(Marcus), 61, 73
 and The Wandering Hermit Web 
site, 83, 84
 and Why Study Shakespeare, 91
 and www.shakespeareonline.
com, 90, 91
 on the Internet
 Note also 
opensourceshakespeare.
org, shakespearestudyguide, 
stratford-on-avon.co.uk, 
Internet Shakespeare Editions, 
Shakespeare.Net, and 
ShakespearesWords.com
 and absoluteshakespeare.com, 
86, 87
 and BardWebNet Shakespeare 
Resource Center, 57, 69, 79
 and Bartleby: Great Books 
Online, 57, 84, 85, 86
 and British Library, 94
 and celestialtimepiece.com, 73
 and englishscholar.com, 70
 and Folger Shakespeare Library 
Digital Texts, 89, 90, 91, 92, 
93
 and Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, 57–64, 65–72, 
73–80, 89–95
 and nosweatshakespeare.com, 83
 and Shakespeare on the Internet, 
68, 73, 80
 and ShakespeareOnline, 90, 91
 and Shaksper.net, 57
 and Surfing with the Bard, 93
 and The Wandering Hermit, 83, 
86
 and William Shakespeare on the 
Internet, 79
 other writers, critics, and scholars on 
Shakespeare
 Raymond H. Alden, 93
 W.H. Auden, 90, 94
 Francis Bacon, Sir, 62
 as “forgotten prince” in a 
Shakespearean code?, 72
 W. Jackson Bate, 127, 132
 Kenneth C. Bennett, 89, 90
 Otto Carpeaux, 87
 Samuel Taylor Coleridge, 57, 61, 
62, 89, 90, 94
 Nigel Davies, 90, 93
 Edward Dowden, 61, 62, 84
 John Dryden, 94
 T. S. Eliot, 57, 61, 73, 90, 94
 Ralph Waldo Emerson, 61, 94
 Patricia W. Greene and her 
Shakespearean Clowns, 62
 James Edmund Harting, 60
 William Hazlett, 61, 62
 G.R. Hubbard, 86, 91, 94
 Aldous Huxley, 61
 Ben Johnson, 73, 74
 Samuel Johnson, 57, 61, 125, 
129–130
 Ian Johnston, 61, 62, 73, 83, 84, 
89
 Kristen Kursawski, 61
 Harriet Monroe, 83, 84
 Joyce Carol Oates, 73
 Mark Twain, 61, 62, 90
 still other scholars and critics, 57, 
58, 62, 63, 65, 66, 73, 74, 83, 84, 
89, 90, 91, 93, 94
Shepheardes Calendar (Spenser), 47, 52
 and April, 52
 and December, 52
 and October, 52

	
Index
161
Signature Verses, Runic
 and Cynewulf, 6
Sir Gawain and the Green Knight 
(Spenser), 9, 10, 12
 and epic poetry, 12
 and Gawain Takes Up the 
Challenge, 12
 and The Green Knight Arrives, 12
 and Historical Prologue to, 11
Sonnets, 83, 85, 89–95, 105, 108, 109
 and John Donne, 105, 108, 109
 and his Holy Sonnets, 108, 109
 and Sonnet Central, 53, 109
 Shakespeare’s Sonnets to Sundry 
Notes of Music 83, 85
 and their As It Fell Upon A Day, 
85
 Shakespearean Sonnets, 83, 89–95
 Spenserian Sonnets, 47, 49, 53
 See also Shakespeare, William: “and 
his sonnets”
Spells
 and Harry Potter, 6
 types of, 6
Spenser, Edmund, 47–54
 and allegory, 50
 and C.S. Lewis (critic), 47, 48, 51
 and C.S. Lewis On Spenser’s Fairie 
Queene, 51
 and Critics On Spenser’s Style, 51
 and Edmund Spenser Online Web 
Site, 47
 and his Amoretti, 53
 and his Cantos of Mutabilitie, 47, 52
 and his Complaints Containing 
Sundrie Small Poems of the 
Worlds Vanitie, 47, 52
 and his Fairie Queene, 47, 51, 54
 and its “a gentle knight . . . ,” 
48, 54
 and his Fowre Hymnes, 47
 and his Most Happy Letters 
(Amoretti LXXIV), 53, 54
 and his One Day I Wrote Her Name 
(Amoretti LXXV), 53, 54
 and his Shepheard’s Calendar, 47, 
52
 and his The Ruines of Time 
(Complaint), 52
 and his language, 54
 and his poetry, 47, 51
 and his Visions of the Worlds 
Vanities (Complaint), 52
 and How to Read The ‘Fairie 
Queene’, 54
 and literary devices, 51, 53
 and Luminarium, 47, 50
 and personification, 50
 and Poetry Foundation Online, 51, 
53
 and Poetry of Spenser, Its Design 
(Courthorpe), 51
 and quotations, 49, 50, 54, 51, 52, 54
 and Renascence Essays at 
Luminarium, 47
 and Representative Poetry Online 
(University of Toronto), 47, 53
 and Saintsbury, George, 51
 and Scholars Bank, 50, 52
 and scholars through time, 51
 and Sonnet Central, 53
 and Spenser and the Culture of 
Place (Woolway), 51
 and Spenser As A Word Painter and 
Metrical Musician, 51
 and Spenser Online, 50, 52
 and Spenser Review, 47, 48
 and Spenser Studies, 47, 48
 and Spenser’s Didactic Purpose in 
Faerie Queene: Book One, 51
 and Spenser’s Mission (Saintsbury), 
51
 and Spenser’s Narrative Imagery: 
Visual Structure of the Faerie 
Queene (McMurtry), 51
 and Spenser’s Stories Retold 
For Young Readers (Lang and 
McCleod), 48
 and women in Spenser’s works, 49, 
50

162	
Index
Star Trek (TV program)
 and its Memory Alpha Library, 70
 and John Donne, 113, 114, 115
 and William Shakespeare, 63, 70, 71
 and To Bardly Go, 63
Spenserian Stanza, 49, 53, 54
A Swarm of Bees (charm), 3, 5
Talking Poems (Alfred), 22
“Three Unities” (Johnson), 129
Timelines and Literature
 Age of Johnson (aka Age of 
Transition) (1744–1784), 125, 
132
 Anglo-Saxon Era (5th Century 
CE-1066) 3–37
 Early Modern English Era (1550s–
late 1700s)
 See Johnson, Samuel; 
metaphysical poetry and 
poets; conceit; paradoxes; wit; 
Shakespeare, William
 Elizabethan Age (1558–1603), 57–64, 
65–72, 73–80, 83–88, 89–95
 See also Shakespeare, William
 Great Vowel Shift era (1500–1800), 
10, 13
 Middle English Era (1100–1500), 
9–14, 15–18, 41–46, 47–54
 Note early Middle English Era, 
1100–1350; interim Middle 
English period in late 14th 
century and early 15th century; 
late Middle English Era, 
1430s–1650s
 See also Canterbury Tales; 
Chaucer, Geoffrey; Amoretti, 
Cantos of Mutabilitie, 
Fairie Queene, Shepheardes 
Calendar; Spenser, Edmund
 Old English Era (500 CE-1100), 
3–7, 9–14, 15–18, 19–23, 25–30, 
31–37
 Renaissance Era (14th–17th 
centuries), 65–72, 73–80, 
83–88, 89–95, 97–104, 105–110, 
113–117, 119–122
 See also Donne, John; 
Shakespeare, William; 
Spencer, Edmund
 14th, 15th, 16th centuries, 47–54
 16th and 17th centuries, 47–54, 57–95
 17th century, 97–104, 
105–110,113–117, 119–122
 18th century, 128–132
To the Memory of Mrs. Lefroy (Austen), 
132
 and line referring to Samuel 
Johnson, 132
Tolkien, J.R.R.
 and alliterative poems and verse, 6, 
10, 11, 37
 and Alliterative Poetry and J.R.R. 
Tolkien (Deane), 10
 and his Alliterative Poems, 6
 and his The Hobbit, 25, 29
 and his Lord of the Rings, 34
 and how he used alliterative verse, 6
 and riddles, 25, 29
 and runes, 29
 and Tolkien Trail, 29
 and use of alliteration, 6, 9, 37
 and The Wanderer, 34
 and word games, 29
Tragedy, definition of, 74, 80 (notes)
Travel writings through time, 3, 4, 16, 
31, 33, 34, 35, 41–46, 50, 54, 83, 
108, 125, 128, 129, 132
A Treasury of Alliterative and Accentual 
Verse, 9–14
Unfruitful Land (metrical charm), 3, 4, 5
Universities and colleges featuring 
databases or some authoritative 
data
 The Use of Geometric Conceits the 
Poetic Works of Donne, 98
 See, in book’s text, references to: 
Brooklyn College, Bucknell 
University, California; State 

	
Index
163
University, Cambridge University, 
Harvard University, Rutgers 
University; Texas A & M 
University, Towson College, 
University of Australia at 
Adelaide;University of Florida, 
University of Oregon, University 
of Toronto in Canada,; University 
of Vermont, University of Virginia)
Vercelli Book, 15
The Very Nature of Alliterative Verse, 6
verse letters
 and John Donne, 101, 102
Viking Runes Through Time, 5
Vikings in England
 See Swedish Vikings in England at 
Northvegr.net, 3; http://vsnrweb-
publications.org.uk/Swedish%20
Vikings%20in%20England.pdf
The Vision of Piers Plowman 
(Langland), 9, 11, 13
The Wanderer, 31, 33, 34
 and different translations, 34
 and J.R.R.Tolkien’s Lord of the 
Rings, 34
Widsith, 32, 35
 and modern translation by Bella 
Millett, 35
Wife’s Lament, 31, 32, 35, 36
 and Husband’s Message, 31, 32, 36
Wit
 and John Donne, 99, 100
 and Samuel Johnson, 126
Women Mentored and Inspired By 
Samuel Johnson
 Fanny Burney D’Arby, 126, 130, 
131, 132
 Hester Lynch Thrale Piozzi, 126, 
127, 128, 130, 131, 132
 Jane Austen, 126, 130, 131, 132
 Virginia Woolf, 131


165
About the Author
Carolyn M. Johnson is author of reference and textbooks including Using 
Internet Sources to Teach Critical Thinking Skills in the Sciences for second­
ary and beginning college and university students and “Discovering Nature 
with Young People”; plus magazine articles, poems, puzzles, and reviews 
SJU Graduate English Newsletter, Modern Haiku, Library Journal, New 
Library Scene, Christian Library Journal, and Abstracts of English Stud­
ies. She has MLS (Library and Information Science) and MA (English and 
American Literature) degrees from St. John’s University, Queens, NY, a BA 
(English Literature) from Hunter College, NYC, and an AA (Liberal Arts) 
from Queensborough Community College, Queens, NY; she has worked as a 
graduate student assistant in the LIS Division at St. John’s University, library 
assistant at QCC library, and librarian at NY Botanical Garden Library and 
Pace University Library.


