
Distributed Power Amplifiers for RF and
Microwave Communications
For a listing of recent titles in the
Artech House Microwave Library,
turn to the back of this book.

Distributed Power Amplifiers for RF and
Microwave Communications
Narendra KumarAndrei Grebennikov
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication DataA catalog record for this book is available from the
U.S. Library of Congress
British Library Cataloguing in Publication DataA catalog record for this book is available from the British
Library.
ISBN-13: 978-1-60807-831-8
Cover design by John Gomes
© 2015 Artech House685 Canton St.Norwood, MA 02062
All rights reserved. Printed and bound in the United States of America. No part of this book may be
reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,
recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the
publisher.
All terms mentioned in this book that are known to be trademarks or service marks have been

appropriately capitalized. Artech House cannot attest to the accuracy of this information. Use of a
term in this book should not be regarded as affecting the validity of any trademark or service mark.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Contents
Preface
CHAPTER 1
Two-Port Network Parameters
1.1 Impedance, Admittance, and ABCD Matrices
1.2 Scattering Parameters
1.3 Conversions Between Two-Port Networks
1.4 Practical Two-Port Networks
1.4.1 Single-Element Networks
1.4.2 π- and T-Type Networks
1.5 Lumped Elements
1.5.1 Inductors
1.5.2 Capacitors
1.6 Transmission Lines
1.6.1 Basic Parameters
1.6.2 Microstrip Line
1.6.3 Coplanar Waveguide
1.7 Noise Figure
References
CHAPTER 2
Power Amplifier Design Fundamentals
2.1 Main Characteristics
2.2 Impedance Matching
2.3 Gain and Stability
2.4 Basic Classes of Operation
2.5 Nonlinear Active Device Models
2.5.1 LDMOSFETs
2.5.2 GaAs MESFETs and GaN HEMTs
2.5.3 Low-Voltage and High-Voltage HBTs
2.6 DC Biasing
2.7 Impedance Transformers and Power Combiners

2.8 Directional Couplers
References
CHAPTER 3
Overview of Broadband Power Amplifiers
3.1 Bode-Fano Criterion
3.2 Matching Networks with Lumped Elements
3.3 Matching Networks with Mixed Lumped and Distributed Elements
3.4 Matching Networks with Transmission Lines
3.5 Lossy Matching Circuits
3.6 Push-Pull and Balanced Power Amplifiers
3.6.1 Basic Push-Pull Configuration
3.6.2 Baluns
3.6.3 Balanced Power Amplifiers
3.7 Practical Broadband RF and Microwave Power Amplifiers
References
CHAPTER 4
Distributed Amplification Concept and Its Design Methodology
4.1 Concept of Distributed Amplification
4.2 Image Impedance Method
4.3 Theoretical Analysis of Distributed Amplification
4.3.1 Analytical Approach to Two-Port Theory
4.3.2 Analytical Approach to Admittance Theory
4.3.3 Analytical Approach to Wave Theory
4.4 Gain/Power-Bandwidth Trade-Off
4.5 Practical Design Methodology
4.5.1 Design Goal/Specifications
4.5.2 Device Selection
4.5.3 Theoretical Analysis (Zero-Order Analysis)
4.5.4 Analysis with VCCS and Cgd (First-Order Analysis)
4.5.5 DC Biasing Circuitry Design
4.5.6 Device Modeling of GaN HEMTs
4.5.7 Loading Device into Distributed Output Network
4.5.8 Synthesizing Distributed Input/Output Networks
4.5.9 Layout Design
4.5.10 Full-Wave Simulation/Layout Optimization
References

CHAPTER 5
Efficiency Analysis of Distributed Amplifiers
5.1 Efficiency Limitations of Distributed Amplifiers
5.2 Virtual Impedance Analysis Using Multicurrent Sources
5.3 Simulation Analysis of Efficiency Analysis
5.4 Design Example of High-Efficiency Distributed Amplifier
5.5 Broadband Impedance Transformer Design
References
CHAPTER 6
Stability Analysis of Distributed Amplifiers
6.1 Motivation for Conducting Stability Analyses
6.2 Method of Stability Analysis
6.2.1 K-Factor Stability of a Two-Port Network
6.2.2 Feedback and NDF Factor
6.2.3 Pole-Zero Identification Method
6.3 Analysis and Conditions of Stability in Distributed Amplifiers
6.4 Parametric Oscillation Detection in Distributed Amplifiers
6.4.1 Stability Analysis of Distributed Amplifiers
6.4.2 Circuit Stabilization Technique
References
CHAPTER 7
Implementation of Distributed Amplifiers
7.1 Vacuum-Tube Distributed Amplifier
7.2 Microwave GaAs FET Distributed Amplifiers
7.2.1 Basic Configuration with Microstrip Lines
7.2.2 Basic Configuration with Lumped Elements
7.2.3 Capacitive Coupling
7.3 Tapered Distributed Amplifier
7.4 Power Combining
7.5 Bandpass Configuration
7.6 Parallel and Series Feedback
7.7 Cascode Distributed Amplifiers
7.8 Extended Resonance Technique
7.9 Cascaded Distributed Amplifiers
7.10 Matrix Distributed Amplifiers
7.11 CMOS Distributed Amplifiers
References

CHAPTER 8
Distributed Power Amplifiers
8.1 Dual-Fed Distributed Power Amplifier
8.2 Tapered Termination Cascaded Distributed Power Amplifier
8.3 Vectorially Combined Distributed Power Amplifier
8.3.1 Overview of Vectorially Combined DPA with Load Pull
Determination
8.3.2 Impedance Transformer Design via Real-Frequency Technique
8.4 Drain-Line High-Power Device Loading Compensation
References
About the Authors
Index
Preface
The main objective of this book is to present all relevant information and
comprehensive 
design 
methodologies 
for 
wideband 
amplifiers—
specifically, distributed amplifiers in general and their main components in
particular—in different RF and microwave applications including well-
known historical and recent architectures, theoretical approaches, circuit
simulation, and practical implementation techniques. This comprehensive
book will be useful for lecturing to promote a systematic way of thinking
with analytical calculations and practical verification of wideband
amplifiers providing the link between theory and practice of RF and
microwave distributed amplifiers. Therefore, this book is recommended to
academicians, researchers, and professors, and provides good coverage
to practicing designers and engineers because it contains numerous well-
known and novel practical circuits, architectures, and theoretical
approaches with a detailed description of their operational principles.
Chapter 1 introduces basic two-port networks by describing the
behavior of two-port parameters including impedance, admittance and
ABD matrices, scattering parameters, conversion between two-port
networks, and practical two-port circuits. Lumped elements, particularly
inductors and capacitors, are also discussed. Monolithic implementation of
lumped inductors and capacitors is usually required at microwave

frequencies and for portable devices. Transmission-line theory is
introduced and followed by design formulas; curves are given for several
types of transmission lines including striplines, microstrip lines, slotlines,
and coplanar waveguides. Noise phenomena such as noise figure, additive
white noise, low-frequency fluctuations, and flicker noise are discussed at
the end of the chapter.
In Chapter 2, the design fundamentals of power amplifiers are
presented. Design is generally a complicated procedure where it is
necessary to provide simultaneously accurate active device modeling,
effective impedance matching depending on the technical requirements
and operating conditions, stability during operation, and simplicity in
practical implementation. The main characteristics, principles, and
impedance matching techniques are described. The quality of power
amplifier designs is evaluated by determining the realized maximum
power gain under stable operating conditions with minimum amplifier
stages, and the requirement of linearity or high efficiency can be
considered where it is needed. For stable operation, it is necessary to
evaluate the operating frequency domains where the active device may
be potentially unstable. To avoid parasitic oscillations, the stabilization
circuit technique for different frequency domains (from low frequencies up
to high frequencies close to the device transition frequencies) is
discussed. The device bias conditions, which are generally different for
linearity or efficiency improvement, depend on the power amplifier
operating class and the type of active device. The basic classes, Classes
A, AB, B, and C, of power amplifier operations are introduced, analyzed,
and illustrated. All necessary steps to provide an accurate device
modeling procedure, starting with the determination of a device’s small-
signal equivalent circuit parameters, are described. A variety of nonlinear
models for MOSFET, MESFET, HEMT, and BJT devices including HBTs,
which are very attractive for modern monolithic microwave integrated
circuits, are described. The procedure for designing for dc biasing is
discussed and, finally, an overview of impedance transformers and power
combiners and directional couplers is given.
An overview of broadband power amplifiers is given in Chapter 3. The
chapter begins with the Bode-Fano criterion, explaining about the
bandwidth analysis of a broadband power amplifier. A matching circuit is
crucial to providing maximum power transfer from one point to another
point, in which transformation using lumped elements, mixed-lumped,

and distributed elements will be discussed to give choices to designers
trying to meet technical requirements. In addition, transformation with
transmission lines and power amplifiers with lossy compensation networks
are discussed in this chapter. Push-pull and balanced power amplifier
topologies are discussed to give us an understanding of circuit principles
and design implementation. At the end of the chapter, several practical
broadband RF and microwave power amplifier topologies are introduced.
Chapter 4 introduces the concept of distributed amplification by means
of gain and the bandwidth product of an amplifier stage. The concept
explains how the gain stages are connected such that their capacitances
are isolated, yet the output currents still combine in an additive fashion.
The resulting topology forms an artificial transmission line and is
extended to an image impedance method. A theoretical analysis of the
distributed amplifier is presented with several approaches (i.e., two-port,
admittance, and wave theories). The approach via two-port theory
considers only a unilateral small-signal transistor model. The admittance
method is more general because there is no simplifying assumption
regarding the transistor model. Finally, the wave theory method, which
uses the normalized transmission matrix approach, has the advantage of
displaying the traveling wave nature of a distributed amplifier. The
gain/power-bandwidth trade-off is discussed to give an overview of the
influence a simple bandpass amplifier circuit has over the bandwidth
response. The design methodology for a practical distributed amplifier is
presented, which provides guidelines for designers who desire to realize a
distributed amplifier in a timely manner, without any tedious optimization
at the board level. Layout design guidelines (PCB selection, full-wave
simulation, layout optimization, via-hole simulation, and so forth) should
be taken into consideration during the design stage.
Chapter 5 introduces the limitations of the conventional distributed
amplifier and an analytical approach for achieving high-efficiency
performance in distributed amplifiers, where the multicurrent sources
must be combined to a single load by presenting optimum virtual
impedance to each current source. The systematic generalized design
equations are given and a summary of the equations are presented in
table form. Obviously, to keep the output impedance of the distributed
amplifier 
closer 
to 
50Ω 
(and 
to 
avoid 
additional 
impedance
transformation), the magnitude and phase properties of the current
source (or transistor) must be adjusted. The adjustment can be made

according to the designer’s need, the complexity of the design circuit, and
so forth. A few design examples of high-efficiency distributed amplifiers
are discussed. A parallel coupled-line approach is adopted as a test
vehicle for broadband impedance transformation purposes. As an
important point, note that the design concept presented provides
appropriate guidelines for maximizing the efficiency of a distributed
amplifier.
The basic principle and motivation for using stability analyses (with K-
factor, feedback and NDF factor, and pole-zero identification methods)
with the intent of understanding the strategies are discussed in Chapter 6.
The pole-zero identification technique is applied to a distributed amplifier
to provide an understanding of the origin of oscillation due to the
multiple-loop nature. The analysis considers the distributed amplifier to
be a basic feedback oscillator circuit; that is, a Hartley oscillator using a
simplified transistor model. The origin of the distributed amplifier
oscillation can be traced to the transconductance nature or multiple-loop
nature of the feedback network. An explanation of odd-mode oscillation in
a distributed amplifier topology is discussed, which is useful for practical
applications. 
Large-signal 
stability 
analysis 
based 
on 
pole-zero
identification is applied to analyze the parametric oscillations in high-
efficiency distributed amplifiers. The parametric oscillation is correlated to
a gain expansion phenomenon that directly affects the critical poles of the
circuit. Large-signal stability analysis is then used to stabilize a high-
efficiency distributed amplifier with a minimum impact on circuit
performance.
Chapter 7 introduces the design implementation of a distributed
amplifier. A distributed amplifier overcomes the difficulty of conventional
amplifiers by offering a broadband frequency response. The concept of a
vacuum-tube distributed amplifier based on combining interelectrode
capacitances with series wire inductors is discussed using an analytical
approach. A distributed amplifier with a microwave GaAs FET, including
configuration with microstrip lines, lumped elements, and capacitive
coupling, is discussed. A tapered distributed amplifier offers high-
efficiency performance and eliminates dummy termination. Other
implementations of distributed amplifiers such as power combining,
bandpass, and parallel and series feedback configurations are discussed.
A cascade distributed amplifier topology minimizes the degeneration at
higher frequencies, improves the isolation between inputs and outputs,

and reduces the drain-line loading effect. Also, an extended-resonance
power-combining technique can be used to form a resonant power
combining/dividing structure, which can benefit wideband performance.
High gain over a wide frequency range can be achieved by cascading
several stages of a single-stage amplifier, a so-called cascaded distributed
amplifier. Lastly, the operating principles for matrix and CMOS distributed
amplifiers are described.
Chapter 8 discusses high-power applications of distributed amplifiers for
which power devices are used instead of the small-signal devices, so-
called distributed power amplifiers. The need to achieve high output
power over a wide frequency range can be addressed in both the device
technology and circuit design areas. Realization of distributed power
amplifiers has posed a challenge due to electrical and thermal limitations,
typically with a GaAs or HBT transistor, and AlGaN/GaN technology has
established itself as a strong contender for such applications. A dual-feed
distributed power amplifier incorporates a termination adjustment
approach that allows for efficient power combining at the load
termination. The approach is cost effective and results in efficiency-
bandwidth improvement for high-power applications. Another suitable
topology for distributed power amplifiers is introduced that employs
tapering the interstage termination with a cascaded connection. This
topology permits various device technologies to be cascaded for the low-
power stage to the high-power stage to offer high-gain and high-output
power performance simultaneously. Another distributed power amplifier
that features vectorially combined current with a load pull impedance
determination technique is a feasible solution for high output power
applications. A design example for a broadband matching network with
minimum reasonable loss and a low-cost implementation over the entire
bandwidth response via a real-frequency technique is explained. Lastly,
loading compensation with a cascade distributed power amplifier for GaN
HEMT is discussed.

CHAPTER 1
Two-Port Network Parameters
Two-port equivalent circuits are widely used in radio-frequency (RF) and
microwave circuit design to describe the electrical behavior of both active
devices and passive networks [1, 2]. The two-port network impedance Z-
parameters and admittance Y-parameters are very important in the
characterization of the nonlinear properties of any type of the bipolar or
field-effect transistors used as an active device of the power amplifier.
The transmission ABCD-parameters of a two-port network are very
convenient for designing the distributed circuits of, for example,
transmission lines or cascaded active or passive elements. The scattering
S-parameters are useful for characterizing linear circuits and required to
simplify the measurement procedure. Transmission lines are widely used
in the matching networks of high-power or low-noise amplifiers,
directional couplers, power combiners, and power dividers. Monolithic
implementation of lumped inductors and capacitors is usually required at
microwave frequencies and for portable devices.
1.1 Impedance, Admittance, and ABCD Matrices
The basic diagram of a two-port transmission system can be represented
by the equivalent circuit shown in Figure 1.1, where VS is the voltage
source, ZS is the source impedance, ZL is the load impedance, and the
linear network is a time-invariant two-port network without independent
source. The two independent phasor currents I1 and I2 (flowing across
input and output terminals) and phasor voltages V1 and V2 characterize
such a two-port network. For autonomous oscillator systems, in order to
provide an appropriate analysis in the frequency domain of the two-port
network in the negative one-port representation, it is sufficient to set the
source impedance to infinity. For a power amplifier design, the elements
of the matching circuits, which are assumed to be linear or appropriately
linearized, can be found among the linear network elements, or additional
two-port linear networks can be used to describe their frequency domain
behavior.

Figure 1.1 Basic diagram of two-port nonautonomous transmission system.
For a two-port network, the following equations can be considered as
boundary conditions:
 (1.1)
 (1.2)
Suppose that it is possible to obtain a unique solution for the linear
time-invariant circuit shown in Figure 1.1. Then, the two linearly
independent equations, which describe the general two-port network in
terms of circuit variables V1, V2, I1, and I2, can be expressed in matrix
form as
 (1.3)
or
 (1.4)
The complex 2 × 2 matrices [M] and [N] in (1.3) are independent of the
source and load impedances ZS and ZL, respectively, and voltages VS and
VL, respectively. They depend only on the circuit elements inside the
linear network.
If matrix [M] in (1.3) is nonsingular with  M  ≠ 0, this matrix
equation can be rewritten in terms of [I] as
 (1.5)
where [Z] is the open-circuit impedance two-port network matrix. In a
scalar form, the matrix of (1.5) is given by
 (1.6)
 (1.7)
where Z11 and Z22 are the open-circuit driving-point impedances, and

Z12 and Z21 are the open-circuit transfer impedances of the two-port
network. The voltage components V1 and V2 due to the input current I1
can be found by setting I2 = 0 in (1.6) and (1.7), resulting in an open-
circuited output terminal. Similarly, the same voltage components V1 and
V2 are determined by setting I1 = 0 when the input terminal becomes
open circuited. The resulting driving-point impedances can be written as
 (1.8)
whereas the two transfer impedances are
 (1.9)
A dual analysis can be used to derive the short-circuit admittance
matrix when the current components I1 and I2 are considered as outputs
caused by V1 and V2. If matrix [N] in (1.3) is nonsingular with  N  ≠ 0,
this matrix equation can be rewritten in terms of [V] as
 (1.10)
where [Y] is the short-circuit admittance two-port network matrix. In a
scalar form, the matrix of (1.10) is written as
 (1.11)
 (1.12)
where Y11 and Y22 are the short-circuit driving-point admittances, and
Y12 and Y21 are the short-circuit transfer admittances of the two-port
network. In this case, the current components I1 and I2 due to the input
voltage source V1 are determined by setting V2 = 0 in (1.11) and (1.12),
thus creating a short-circuited output terminal. Similarly, the same current
components I1 and I2 are determined by setting V1 = 0 when the input
terminal becomes short circuited. As a result, the two driving-point
admittances are

 (1.13)
whereas the two transfer admittances are
 (1.14)
The transmission parameters, which are often used for passive device
analysis, are determined for the independent input voltage source V1 and
input current I1 in terms of the output voltage V2 and output current I2.
In this case, if the submatrix
given in (1.4) is nonsingular, one can obtain
 (1.15)
where [ABCD] is the forward transmission two-port network matrix. In a
scalar form, (1.15) can be written as
 (1.16)
 (1.17)
where A, B, C, and D are the transmission parameters. The voltage
source V1 and current component I1 are determined by setting I2 = 0 for
the open-circuited output terminal in (1.16) and (1.17) as
 (1.18)
where A is the reverse voltage transfer function and C is the reverse
transfer admittance. Similarly, the input independent variables V1 and I1
are determined by setting V2 = 0 when the output terminal is short
circuited as

 (1.19)
where B is the reverse transfer impedance and D is the reverse current
transfer function. The reason a minus sign is associated with I2 in (1.15)
through (1.17) is that historically the input signal for transmission
networks is considered as flowing to the input port, whereas the output
current is flowing to the load. The direction of the current −I2 entering
the load is shown in Figure 1.2.
Figure 1.2 Basic diagram of loaded two-port transmission system.
1.2 Scattering Parameters
The concept of incident and reflected voltage and current parameters can
be illustrated by the single-port network shown in Figure 1.3, where the
network impedance Z is connected to the signal source VS with the
internal impedance ZS.
Figure 1.3 Incident and reflected voltages and currents.
In a common case, the terminal current I and voltage V consist of incident

and reflected components (assume their root-mean-square or rms
values). When the load impedance Z is equal to the conjugate of the
source impedance expressed as Z = 
, the terminal current I becomes
the incident current Ii, which is written as
 (1.20)
The terminal voltage V, defined as the incident voltage Vi, can be
determined from
 (1.21)
Consequently, the incident power, which is equal to the maximum
available power from the source, can be obtained by
 (1.22)
The incident power can be rewritten in a normalized form using (1.21)
as
 (1.23)
This allows the normalized incident voltage wave a to be defined as the
square root of the incident power Pi by
 (1.24)
Similarly, the normalized reflected voltage wave b, defined as the
square root of the reflected power Pr, can be written as
 (1.25)
The incident power Pi can be expressed through the incident current Ii
and the reflected power Pr can be expressed, respectively, through the
reflected current Ir as

 (1.26)
 (1.27)
As a result, the normalized incident voltage wave a and reflected
voltage wave b can be given by
 (1.28)
 (1.29)
The parameters a and b can also be called the normalized incident and
reflected current waves or simply normalized incident and reflected
waves, respectively, since the normalized current waves and the
normalized voltage waves represent the same parameters.
The voltage V and current I related to the normalized incident and
reflected waves a and b can be written as
 (1.30)
 (1.31)
where
 (1.32)
The source impedance ZS is often purely real and, therefore, is used as
the normalized impedance. In microwave design technique, the
characteristic impedance of passive two-port networks (including
transmission lines and connectors) is considered real and equal to 50Ω.
This is very important for measuring S-parameters when all transmission
lines, source, and load should have the same real impedance. For ZS = 
= Z0, 
where Z0 is the characteristic impedance, the ratio of the
normalized reflected wave and the normalized incident wave for a single-
port network is called the reflection coefficient Γ defined as
 (1.33)

where Z = V/I.
For the two-port network shown in Figure 1.4, the normalized reflected
waves b1 and b2 can also be represented, respectively, by the normalized
incident waves a1 and a2 as
 (1.34)
 (1.35)
or, in matrix form,
 (1.36)
where the incident waves a1 and a2 and the reflected waves b1 and b2
for complex source and load impedances ZS and ZL are given by
 (1.37)
 (1.38)
where S11, S12, S21, and S22 are the S-parameters of the two-port
network.
Figure 1.4 Basic diagram of S-parameter two-port network.
From (1.36) it follows that, if a2 = 0, then
 (1.39)
where S11 is the reflection coefficient and S21 is the transmission
coefficient for ideal matching conditions at the output terminal when
there is no incident power reflected from the load.

Similarly,
 (1.40)
where S12 is the transmission coefficient and S22 is the reflection
coefficient for ideal matching conditions at the input terminal.
1.3 Conversions Between Two-Port Networks
The parameters describing the same two-port network through different
two-port matrices (impedance, admittance, or transmission) can be cross-
converted, and the elements of each matrix can be expressed by the
elements of other matrices. For example, (1.11) and (1.12) for the
admittance Y-parameters can be easily solved for the independent input
voltage source V1 and input current I1 as
 (1.41)
 (1.42)
By comparing equivalent equations (1.16) and (1.17), and (1.41) and
(1.42), the direct relationships between the transmission ABCD-
parameters and admittance Y-parameters can be written as
 (1.43)
 (1.44)
where 
.
A summary of the relationships between the impedance Z-parameters,
admittance Y-parameters, and transmission ABCD-parameters is shown in
Table 1.1, where
To 
convert S-parameters to the admittance Y-parameters, it is

convenient to represent (1.37) and (1.38) as
 (1.45)
 (1.46)
where it is assumed that the source and load impedances are real and
equal to ZS = ZL = Z0.
Table 1.1 Relationships Between Z-, Y-, and ABCD-Parameters
[Z]
[Y]
[ABCD]
[Z]
Z11 Z12
Z21 Z22
[Y]
Y11 Y12
Y21 Y22
[ABCD]
A B
C D
Substituting (1.45) and (1.46) into (1.11) and (1.12) results in
 (1.47)
 (1.48)
which can then be respectively converted to
 (1.49)
 (1.50)
In this case, (1.49) and (1.50) can be solved for the reflected waves b1
and b2 as
 (1.51)
 (1.52)

Comparing equivalent equations (1.34) and (1.35), and (1.51) and
(1.52) gives the following relationships between the scattering S-
parameters and admittance Y-parameters:
 (1.53)
 (1.54)
 (1.55)
 (1.56)
The relationships among the S-parameters and the Z- and ABCD-
parameters can be obtained in a similar fashion. Table 1.2 shows the
conversions between S-parameters and Z-, Y-, and ABCD-parameters for
the simplified case when the source impedance ZS and the load
impedance ZL are equal to the characteristic impedance Z0 [3].
Table 1.2 Conversions between S-Parameters and Z-, Y-, and ABCD-Parameters
S-parameters through Z-, Y-, and ABCD-parameters Z-, Y-, and ABCD-parameters through S-parameters
1.4 Practical Two-Port Networks

1.4.1 Single-Element Networks
The simplest networks, which include only one element, can be
constructed by a series-connected admittance Y, as shown in Figure
1.5(a), or by a parallel-connected impedance Z, as shown in Figure
1.5(b).
Figure 1.5 Single-element networks.
The two-port network consisting of the single series admittance Y can
be described in a system of the admittance Y-parameters as
 (1.57)
 (1.58)
or, in matrix form,
 (1.59)
which means that Y11 = Y22 = Y and Y12 = Y21 = −Y. The resulting
matrix is a singular matrix with  Y  = 0. Consequently, it is impossible
to determine such a two-port network with the series admittance Y-
parameters through a system of the impedance Z-parameters. However,
by using the transmission ABCD-parameters, it can be described by
 (1.60)
Similarly, for a two-port network with the single parallel impedance Z,
 (1.61)
which means that Z11 = Z12 = Z21 = Z22 = Z. The resulting matrix is a
singular matrix with  Z  = 0. In this case, it is impossible to determine

such a two-port network with the parallel impedance Z-parameters
through a system of the admittance Y-parameters. By using the
transmission ABCD-parameters, this two-port network can be described
by
 (1.62)
1.4.2 π- and T-Type Networks
The basic configurations of a two-port network that usually describe the
electrical properties of the active devices can be represented in the form
of a π-circuit, shown in Figure 1.6(a), or a T-circuit, shown in Figure
1.6(b). Here, the π-circuit includes the current source gmV1 and the T-
circuit includes the voltage source rmI1.
Figure 1.6 Basic diagrams of π- and T-type networks.
By deriving the two loop equations using Kirchhoff’s current law or
applying (1.13) and (1.14) for the π-circuit, we can obtain
 (1.63)
 (1.64)
Equations (1.63) and (1.64) can be rewritten as matrix equation (1.3)

with
Since matrix [M] is nonsingular, such a two-port network can be
described by a system of the admittance Y-parameters as
 (1.65)
Similarly, for a two-port network in the form of a T-circuit using
Kirchhoff’s voltage law or applying (1.8) and (1.9), one can obtain
 (1.66)
If gm = 0 for a π-circuit and rm = 0 for a T-circuit, their corresponding
matrices in a system of the transmission ABCD-parameters can be written
as follows:
For a π-Circuit:
 (1.67)
For a T-Circuit:
 (1.68)
Based on the appropriate relationships between impedances of a T-
circuit and admittances of a π-circuit, these two circuits become
equivalent with the respect to the effect on any other two-port network.
For the π-circuit shown in Figure 1.7(a),

Figure 1.7 Equivalence of π- and T-circuits.
 (1.69)
 (1.70)
Solving (1.69) and (1.70) for voltages V13 and V23 yields
 (1.71)
 (1.72)
Similarly, for the T-circuit shown in Fig. 1.7(b),
 (1.73)
 (1.74)
and the equations for currents I1 and I2 can be obtained by
 (1.75)
 (1.76)

To establish a T-to-π transformation, it is necessary to equate the
coefficients for V13 and V23 in (1.75) and (1.76) to the corresponding
coefficients in (1.69) and (1.70). Similarly, to establish a π-to-T
transformation, it is necessary to equate the coefficients for I1 and I2 in
(1.73) and (1.74) to the corresponding coefficients in (1.71) and (1.72).
The resulting relationships between admittances for a π-circuit and
impedances for a T-circuit are given in Table 1.3.
Table 1.3 Relationships Between π- and T-Circuit Parameters
T- to π-transformation π- to T-transformation
1.5 Lumped Elements
Generally, passive hybrid or integrated circuits are designed based on
lumped elements, distributed elements, or a combination of both types of
elements. Distributed elements represent any sections of the transmission
lines of different lengths, types, and characteristic impedances. The basic
lumped elements are inductors and capacitors that are small in size in
comparison with the transmission-line wavelength λ, and usually their
linear dimensions are less than λ/10 or even λ/16. In applications where
lumped elements are used, their basic advantages are small physical size
and low production costs. However, their main drawbacks are a lower
quality factor and reduced power-handling capability compared with
distributed elements.
1.5.1 Inductors
Inductors are lumped elements that store energy in a magnetic field. The
lumped 
inductors 
can 
be 
implemented 
using 
several 
different
configurations such as a short section of a strip conductor or wire, a single
loop, or a spiral. The printed high-impedance microstrip-section inductor
is usually used for low inductance values, typically less than 2 nH, and
often meandered to reduce the component size. The printed microstrip
single-loop inductors are not very popular due to their limited inductance
per unit area. The approximate expression for the microstrip short-section
inductance in free space is given by

 (1.77)
where the conductor length l, conductor width W, and conductor thickness
t are in microns, and the term Kg accounts for the presence of a ground
plane defined as
 (1.78)
where h is the spacing from the ground plane [4, 5].
Spiral inductors can have a circular configuration, a rectangular (square)
configuration [shown in Figure 1.8(a)], or an octagonal configuration
[shown in Figure 1.8(b)], if the technology allows 45° routing. The circular
geometry is superior in electrical performance, whereas the rectangular
shapes are easy to lay out and fabricate. Printed inductors are based on
using thin-film or thick-film Si or GaAs fabrication processes, and the inner
conductor is pulled out to connect with other circuitry through a bondwire,
an air bridge, or by using multilevel crossover metal. The general
expression for a spiral inductor, which is also valid for its planar
integration with an accuracy of around 3%, is based on a Wheeler
formula and can be obtained as
 (1.79)
where
n = number of turns
davg = (dout + din)/2 = average diameter
ρ = (dout + din)/(dout − din) = fill ratio
dout = outer diameter (μm)
din = inner diameter (μm)
and the coefficients K1 and K2 are layout dependent, where square: K1 =
2.34, K2 = 2.75; hexagonal: K1 = 2.33, K2 = 3.82; and octagonal: K1 =
2.25, K2 = 3.55 [6, 7].

Figure 1.8 Spiral inductor layouts.
In contrast to the capacitors, high-quality inductors cannot be readily
available in a standard complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor
(CMOS) technology. Therefore, it is necessary to use special techniques to
improve the inductor electrical performance. By using a standard CMOS
technology with only two metal layers and a heavily doped substrate, the
spiral inductor will have a large series resistance compared with three-
four metal layer technologies, and the substrate losses become a very
important factor due to the relatively low resistivity of silicon. A major
source of substrate losses is the capacitive coupling when current is
flowing not only through the metal strip, but also through the silicon
substrate. Another important source of substrate losses is the inductive
coupling when, due to the planar inductor structure, the magnetic field
penetrates deeply into the silicon substrate, inducing current loops and
related losses. However, the latter effects are particularly important for
large-area inductors and can be overcome by using silicon micromachining
techniques [8].
The simplified equivalent circuit for the CMOS spiral microstrip inductor
is shown in Figure 1.9, where Ls models the self and mutual inductances,
Rs is the series coil resistance, Cox is the parasitic oxide capacitance from
the metal layer to the substrate, Rsi is the resistance of the conductive
silicon substrate, Csi is the silicon substrate parasitic capacitance, and Cc
is the parasitic coupling capacitance [9]. The parasitic silicon substrate
capacitance Csi is sufficiently small and in most cases it can be neglected.

Figure 1.9 Equivalent circuit of a square spiral inductor.
Such a model shows an accurate agreement between simulated and
measured data within 10% across a variety of inductor geometries and
substrate dopings up to 20 GHz [10]. At frequencies well below the
inductor self-resonant radian frequency ωSRF, the coupling capacitance Cc
between metal segments due to fringing fields in both the dielectric and
air regions can also be neglected since the relative dielectric constant of
the oxide is sufficiently small [11]. In this case, if one side of the inductor
is grounded, the self-resonant radian frequency of the spiral inductor can
be approximately calculated from
 (1.80)
At frequencies higher than the self-resonant frequency ωSRF, the
inductor exhibits a capacitive behavior. The self-resonant frequency ωSRF
is limited mainly by the parasitic oxide capacitance Cox, which is inversely
proportional to the oxide thickness between the metal layer and
substrate. The frequency at which the inductor quality factor Q is maximal
can be obtained as
 (1.81)
The inductor metal conductor series resistance Rs can be easily

calculated at low frequencies as the product of the sheet resistance and
the number of squares of the metal trace. However, at high frequencies,
the skin effect and other magnetic field effects will cause a nonuniform
current distribution in the inductor profile. In this case, a simple increase
in a diameter of the inductor metal turn does not necessarily reduce
correspondingly the inductor series resistance. For example, for the same
inductance value, the difference in resistance between two inductors,
when one of them has a two times wider metal strip, is a factor of only
1.35 [12]. Moreover, at very high frequencies, the largest contribution to
the series resistance does not come from the longer outer turns, but from
the inner turns. This phenomenon is a result of the generation of circular
eddy currents in the inner conductors, whose direction is such that they
oppose the original change in magnetic field. On the inner side of the
inner turn, coil current and eddy current flow in the same direction, so the
current density is larger than average. On the outer side, both currents
cancel, and the current density is smaller than average. As a result, the
current in the inner turn is pushed to the inside of the conductor.
In hybrid or monolithic applications, bondwires are used to interconnect
different components such as lumped elements, planar transmission lines,
solid-state devices, and integrated circuits. These bondwires, which are
usually made of gold or aluminium, have 0.5- to 1.0-mil diameters, and
their lengths are electrically shorter compared with the operating
wavelength. To characterize the electrical behavior of the bondwires,
simple formulas in terms of their inductances and series resistances can
be used. As a first-order approximation, the parasitic capacitance
associated with bondwires can be neglected. In this case, the bondwire
inductance can be estimated as follows when l >> d, where l is the
bondwire length in microns and d is the bondwire diameter in microns:
 (1.82)
where C = tanh(4δ/d)/4 is the frequency-dependent correction factor,
which is a function of the bondwire’s diameter and its material’s skin
depth δ [6, 13].
1.5.2 Capacitors
Capacitors are lumped elements that store energy due to an electric field
between two electrodes (or plates) when a voltage is applied across

them. In this case, charge of equal magnitude but opposite sign
accumulates on the opposing capacitor plates. The capacitance depends
on the area of the plates, separation, and dielectric material between
them. The basic structure of a chip capacitor, shown in Figure 1.10(a),
consists of two parallel plates, each of area A = W × l, which are
separated by a dielectric material of thickness d and permittivity ε0εr,
where ε0 is the free-space permittivity (8.85 × 10–12 F/m) and εr is the
relative dielectric constant.
Chip capacitors are usually used in hybrid integrated circuits when
relatively high capacitance values are required. In the parallel-plate
configuration, the equation for calculating the capacitance is commonly
written as
 (1.83)
where W, l, and d are dimensions in millimeters. Generally, the low-
frequency bypass capacitor values are expressed in microfarads and
nanofarads, high-frequency blocking and tuning capacitors are expressed
in picofarads, and parasitic or fringing capacitances are written in
femtofarads. The basic formula given by (1.83) can also be applied to
capacitors based on a multilayer technique [5]. The lumped-element
equivalent circuit of a capacitor is shown in Figure 1.10(b), where Ls is
the series plate inductance, Rs is the series contact and plate resistance,
and Cp is the parasitic parallel capacitance. When C >> Cp, the radian
frequency ωSRF, at which the reactances of series elements C and Ls
become equal, is called the capacitor self-resonant frequency, and the
capacitor impedance is equal to the resistance Rs.

Figure 1.10 Parallel capacitor topology and its equivalent circuit.
For monolithic applications where relatively low capacitances (typically
less than 0.5 pF) are required, planar series capacitances in the form of
microstrip or interdigital configurations can be used. These capacitors are
simply formed by gaps in the center conductor of the microstrip lines, and
they do not require any dielectric films. The gap capacitor shown in Figure
1.11(a) can be equivalently represented by a series coupling capacitance
and two parallel fringing capacitances [14]. The interdigital capacitor is a
multifinger periodic structure, as shown in Figure 1.11(b), where the
capacitance occurs across the narrow gap between thin-film transmission-
line conductors [15]. These gaps are essentially very long and folded to
use a small amount of area. In this case, it is important to keep the size
of the capacitor very small relative to the wavelength, so that it can be
treated as a lumped element. A larger total width-to-length ratio results
in the desired greater shunt capacitance and lower series inductance. An
approximate expression for the total capacitance of an interdigital
structure with s = W and length l less than a quarter wavelength can be
given by
 (1.84)
where N is the number of fingers and

 (1.85)
 (1.86)
where h is the spacing from the ground plane.
Series planar capacitors with larger values, which are called metal–
insulator–metal (MIM) capacitors, can be realized by using an additional
thin dielectric layer (typically less than 0.5 µm) between two metal
plates, as shown in Figure 1.11(c) [5]. The bottom plate of the capacitor
uses a thin unplated metal, and typically the dielectric material is silicon
nitride (Si3N4) for integrated circuits on GaAs and silicon dioxide (SiO2)
for integrated circuits on Si. The top plate uses a thick plated conductor to
reduce the loss in the capacitor. These capacitors are used to achieve
higher capacitance values in small areas (10 pF and greater), with typical
tolerances from 10% to 15%. The capacitance can be calculated
according to (1.83).
Figure 1.11 Different series capacitor topologies.
1.6 Transmission Lines

Transmission lines are widely used in matching circuits of power
amplifiers, in hybrid couplers, or in power combiners and dividers. When
the propagated signal wavelength is compared to its physical dimension,
the transmission line can be considered to be a two-port network with
distributed parameters, where the voltages and currents vary in
magnitude and phase over length.
1.6.1 Basic Parameters
Schematically, a transmission line is often represented as a two-wire line,
as shown in Figure 1.12(a), where its electrical parameters are distributed
along its length. The physical properties of a transmission line are
determined by four basic parameters:
1. The series inductance L due to the self-inductive phenomena of two
conductors
2. The shunt capacitance C in view of the proximity between two
conductors
3. The series resistance R due to the finite conductivity of the conductors
4. The shunt conductance G, which is related to the dielectric losses in the
material.
As a result, a transmission line of length Δx represents a lumped-
element circuit, as shown in Figure 1.12(b), where ΔL, ΔC, ΔR, and ΔG are
the series inductance, shunt capacitance, series resistance, and shunt
conductance per unit length, respectively. If all of these elements are
distributed uniformly along the transmission line, and their values do not
depend on the chosen position of Δx, this transmission line is called the
uniform transmission line [16]. Any finite length of the uniform
transmission line can be viewed as a cascade of section length Δx.

Figure 1.12 Transmission-line schematics.
To define the distribution of the voltages and currents along the uniform
transmission line, it is necessary to write the differential equations using
Kirchhoff’s voltage law for instantaneous values of the voltages and
currents in the line section of length Δx, distant x from its beginning. For
the sinusoidal steady-state condition, the telegrapher equations for V(x)
and I(x) are given by
 (1.87)
 (1.88)
where γ = α + jβ = 
 is the complex propagation
constant (which is a function of frequency), α is the attenuation constant,
and β is the phase constant. The general solutions of (1.87) and (1.88)
for voltage and current of the traveling wave in the transmission line can
be written as
 (1.89)

 (1.90)
where 
 is the characteristic impedance of the
transmission line; Vi = A1 exp(−γx) and Vr = A2 exp(γx) represent the
incident voltage and the reflected voltage, respectively; and Ii = A1
exp(−γx)/Z0 and Ir = A2 exp(γx)/Z0 are the incident current and the
reflected current, respectively. From (1.89) and (1.90), it follows that the
characteristic impedance of transmission line Z0 represents the ratio of
the incident (reflected) voltage to the incident (reflected) current at any
position on the line as
 (1.91)
For a lossless transmission line, when R = G = 0 and the voltage and
current do not change with position, the attenuation constant α = 0, the
propagation constant γ = jβ = 
 and the phase constant β = 
 Consequently, the characteristic impedance is reduced to Z0 = 
 and represents a real number. The wavelength is defined as λ =
2π/β = 
 and the phase velocity as vp = ω/β = 
.
Figure 1.13 represents a transmission line of the characteristic
impedance Z0 terminated with a load ZL. In this case, the constants A1
and A2 are determined at the position x = l by
 (1.92)
 (1.93)
and are equal to
 (1.94)
 (1.95)
As a result, wave equations for voltage V(x) and current I(x) can be
rewritten as

 (1.96)
 (1.97)
which allows their determination at any position on the transmission line.
Figure 1.13 Loaded transmission line.
The voltage and current amplitudes at x = 0 as functions of the voltage
and current amplitudes at x = l can be determined from (1.96) and (1.97)
as
 (1.98)
 (1.99)
By using the ratios coshx = [exp(x) + exp(−x)]/2 and sinhx = [exp(x)
− exp(−x)]/2, (1.98) and (1.99) can be rewritten in the form
 (1.100)
 (1.101)
which represents the transmission equations of the symmetrical reciprocal
two-port network expressed through the ABCD-parameters when AD − BC
= 1 and A = D. Consequently, the transmission ABCD-matrix of the
lossless transmission line with α = 0 can be defined as
 (1.102)

Using the formulas to transform ABCD-parameters into S-parameters
yields
 (1.103)
where θ = βl is the electrical length of the transmission line.
In the case of the loaded lossless transmission line, the reflection
coefficient Γ is defined as the ratio between the reflected voltage wave
and the incident voltage wave given at a position x as
 (1.104)
By taking into account (1.94) and (1.95), the reflection coefficient for x
= l can be defined as
 (1.105)
where Γ represents the load reflection coefficient and Z = ZL = V(l)/I(l). If
the load is mismatched, only part of the available power from the source
is delivered to the load. This power loss is called the return loss (RL), and
it is calculated in decibels as
 (1.106)
For a matched load when Γ = 0, a return loss is of ∞ dB. A total reflection
with Γ = 1 means a return loss of 0 dB when all incident power is
reflected.
According to the general solution for voltage at a position x in the
transmission line,
 (1.107)
Hence, the maximum amplitude (when the incident and reflected waves
are in phase) is
 (1.108)
and the minimum amplitude (when these two waves are out of phase) is
 (1.109)

The ratio of Vmax to Vmin, which is a function of the reflection
coefficient Γ, represents the voltage standing wave ratio (VSWR). The
VSWR is a measure of mismatch and can be written as
 (1.110)
which can change from 1 to ∞ (where VSWR = 1 implies a matched load).
For a load impedance with zero imaginary part when ZL = RL, the VSWR
can be calculated as VSWR = RL/Z0 when RL ≥ Z0 and VSWR = Z0/RL
when Z0 ≥ RL.
From (1.100) and (1.101), it follows that the input impedance of the
loaded lossless transmission line can be obtained as
 (1.111)
which gives an important dependence between the input impedance, the
transmission-line 
parameters 
(electrical 
length 
and 
characteristic
impedance), and the arbitrary load impedance.
1.6.2 Microstrip Line
Planar transmission lines as an evolution of the coaxial and parallel-wire
lines are compact and readily adaptable to hybrid and monolithic
integrated circuit fabrication technologies at RF and microwave
frequencies [17]. In a microstrip line, the grounded metallization surface
covers only one side of dielectric substrate, as shown in Figure 1.14.
Figure 1.14 Microstrip-line structure.
Such a configuration is equivalent to a pair-wire system for the image of
the conductor in the ground plane, which produces the required symmetry

[18]. In this case, the electric and magnetic field lines are located in both
the dielectric region between the strip conductor and the ground plane
and in the air region above the substrate. As a result, the electromagnetic
wave propagated along a microstrip line is not a pure TEM, since the
phase velocities in these two regions are not the same. However, in a
quasistatic approximation, which gives sufficiently accurate results as long
as the height of the dielectric substrate is very small compared with the
wavelength, it is possible to obtain the explicit analytical expressions for
its electrical characteristics. Since a microstrip line is an open structure, it
has a major fabrication advantage over the stripline due to simplicity of
practical realization, interconnection, and adjustments.
The exact expression for the characteristic impedance of a lossless
microstrip line even with finite strip thickness is complicated [19, 20].
However, in practice, it is possible to use a sufficiently simple formula to
estimate the characteristic impedance Z0 of a microstrip line with zero
strip thickness [21]:
 (1.112)
Figure 1.15 shows the characteristic impedance Z0 of a microstrip line
with zero strip thickness as a function of the normalized strip width W/h
for various εr. Conductor loss is a result of several factors related to the
metallic material composing the ground plane and walls, among which
are conductivity, skin effect, and surface ruggedness. For most microstrip
lines (except some kinds of semiconductor substrate such as silicon), the
conductor loss is much more significant than the dielectric loss. The
conductor losses increase with increasing characteristic impedance due to
greater resistance of narrow strips.

Figure 1.15 Microstrip-line characteristic impedance versus W/h.
1.6.3 Coplanar Waveguide
A coplanar waveguide (CPW) is similar in structure to a slotline, the only
difference being a third conductor centered in the slot region. The center
strip conductor and two outer grounded conductors lie in the same plane
on the substrate surface, as shown in Figure 1.16 [22, 23]. A coplanar
configuration has some advantages such as low dispersion, ease of
attaching shunt and series circuit components, no need for via holes, and
simple realization of short-circuited ends, which makes a coplanar
waveguide very suitable for hybrid and monolithic integrated circuits. In
contrast to the microstrip and stripline, the coplanar waveguide has
shielding between adjacent lines that creates better isolation between
them.
Figure 1.16 Coplanar waveguide structure.

However, like microstrip and striplines, the coplanar waveguide can be
also described by a quasi-TEM approximation for both numerical and
analytical calculations. Because of the high dielectric constant of the
substrate, most of the RF energy is stored in the dielectric, and the
loading effect of the grounded cover is negligible if it is more than two
slot widths away from the surface. Similarly, the thickness of the dielectric
substrate with higher relative dielectric constants is not so critical, and
practically it should be one or two times the width W of the slots. Figure
1.17 shows the characteristic impedance Z0 of a coplanar waveguide as a
function of the parameter s/(s + 2W) for various εr according to the
approximate expression of the characteristic impedance Z0 for zero metal
thickness, which is satisfactorily accurate for a wide range of substrate
thicknesses, given in [24].
Figure 1.17 Coplanar waveguide characteristic impedance versus s/(s + 2W).
1.7 Noise Figure
Electrical circuits have several primary noise sources. Thermal or white
noise is created by random motion of charge carriers due to thermal
excitation, being always found in any conducting medium whose
temperature is above absolute zero whatever the nature of the
conduction process or the nature of the mobile charge carriers [25]. This
random motion of carriers creates a fluctuating voltage on the terminals
of each resistive element that increases with temperature. However, if

the average value of such a voltage is zero, then the noise power on its
terminal is not zero being proportional to the resistance of the conductor
and to its absolute temperature. The resistor as a thermal noise source
can be represented by either of the noise sources shown in Figure 1.18.
Figure 1.18 Equivalent circuits to represent thermal noise sources.
The noise voltage source and noise current source can be described by
Nyquist equations through their mean-square noise voltage and noise
current values, respectively, as
 (1.113)
 (1.114)
where k = 1.38 × 10–23 J/K is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute
temperature, and kT = 4 × 10–21 W/Hz = −174 dBm/Hz at ambient
temperature T = 290 K. The thermal noise is proportional to the
frequency bandwidth Δf, and it can be represented by the voltage source
in series with resistor R, or by the current source in parallel to the resistor
R. The maximum noise power can be delivered to the load when R = RL,
where RL is the load resistance, being equal to kTΔf. Hence, the noise
power density when the noise power is normalized by Δf is independent of
frequency and is considered to be white noise. The rms noise voltage and
current are proportional to the square root of the frequency bandwidth Δf.
Shot noise is associated with the carrier injection through the device p-n
junction, being generated by the movement of individual electrons within
the current flow. In each forward-biased junction, there is a potential
barrier that can be overcome by the carriers with higher thermal energy.
Such a process is random and mean-square noise current can be given by
 (1.115)

where q is the electron charge and I is the direct current flowing through
the p-n junction. The shot noise depends on the thermal energy of the
carriers near the potential barrier and its power density is independent of
frequency. It has essentially a flat spectral distribution and can be treated
as the thermal or white type of noise with current source  connected in
parallel to the small-signal junction resistance. In a voltage noise
representation, when the noise voltage source is connected in series with
such a resistor, it can be written as
 (1.116)
where r = kT/qI is the junction resistance.
It is well known that any linear noisy two-port network can be
represented as a noise-free two-port part with noise sources at the input
and the output connected in a different way [26, 27]. For example, the
noisy linear two-port network with internal noise sources shown in Figure
1.19(a) can be redrawn, either in the impedance form with external series
voltage noise sources [Figure 1.19(b)] or in the admittance form with
external parallel current noise sources [Figure 1.19(c)].
However, to fully describe the noise properties of the two-port network
at fixed frequency, sometimes it is convenient to represent it through the
noise-free two-port part and the noise sources equivalently located at the
input. Such a circuit is equivalent to the configurations with noise sources
located at the input and the output [28]. In this case, it is enough to use
four parameters: the noise spectral densities of both noise sources and
the real and imaginary parts of its correlation spectral density. These four
parameters can be defined by measurements at the two-port network
terminals. The two-port network current and voltage amplitudes are
related to each other through a system of two linear algebraic equations.
By taking into account the noise sources at the input and the output,
these equations in the impedance and admittance forms can be
respectively written as
 (1.117)
 (1.118)
and
 (1.119)

 (1.120)
where the voltage and current noise amplitudes represent the Fourier
transforms of noise fluctuations.
The equivalent two-port network with voltage and current noise sources
located at its input is shown in Figure 1.20(a), where [Y] is the two-port
network admittance matrix, and the ratios between current and voltage
amplitudes can be written as
 (1.121)
 (1.122)
From comparison of (1.119) and (1.120) with (1.121) and (1.122), it
follows that
 (1.123)
 (1.124)
representing the relationships between the current noise sources at the
input and the output corresponding to the circuit shown in Figure 1.19(c)
and the voltage and current noise sources at the input only corresponding
to the circuit shown in Figure 1.20(a). In this case, (1.123) and (1.124)
are valid only if Y21 ≠ 0, which always takes place in practice. Similar
equations can be written for the circuit with the series noise voltage
source followed by a parallel noise current source shown in Figure 1.20(b)
in terms of impedance Z-parameters to represent the relationships
between the voltage noise sources at the input and the output
corresponding to the circuit shown in Figure 1.19(b). The use of voltage
and current noise sources at the input enables the combination of all
internal two-port network noise sources.

Figure 1.19 Linear two-port network with noise sources.
To evaluate the quality of the two-port network, it is important to know
the amount of noise added to a signal passing through it. Usually this can
be done by introducing an important parameter such as noise figure or
noise factor. The noise figure of the two-port network is intended to be an
indication of its noisiness. The lower the noise figure, the less noise that
is contributed by the two-port network. The noise figure is defined as
 (1.125)
where Sin/Nin is the signal-to-noise ratio available at the input and
Sout/Nout is the signal-to-noise ratio available at the output.

Figure 1.20 Linear two-port network with noise sources at input.
For a two-port network characterized by the available power gain GA,
the noise figure can be rewritten as
 (1.126)
where Nadd is the additional noise power added by the two-port network
referred to the input. From (1.126) it follows that the noise figure
depends on the source impedance ZS shown in Figure 1.21(a), but not on
the circuit connected to the output of the two-port network.

Figure 1.21 Linear two-port networks used to calculate noise figures.
Hence, if the two-port network is driven from the source with
impedance ZS = RS + jXS, the noise figure F of this two-port network in
terms of the model shown in Figure 1.21(b) with input voltage and current
noise sources and a noise-free two-port network can be obtained by
 (1.127)
where
 (1.128)

is the equivalent input-referred noise resistance corresponding to the
noise voltage source, where 
 = 
 (1.129)
is the equivalent input-referred noise conductance corresponding to the
noise current source, where 
 and
 (1.130)
is the correlation coefficient representing a complex number less than or
equal to unity in magnitude [27]. Here, Gn and Rn generally do not
represent the particular circuit immittances but depend on the bias level
resulting in a dependence of the noise figure on the operating bias point
of the active device.
As the source impedance ZS is varied over all values with positive RS,
the noise figure F has a minimum value of
 (1.131)
which occurs for the optimum source impedance ZSopt = RSopt + jXSopt
given by
 (1.132)
 (1.133)
As a result, the noise figure F for the input impedance ZS, which is not
optimum, can be expressed in terms of Fmin as
 (1.134)
Similarly, the noise figure F can be equivalently expressed using a
model shown in Figure 1.21(c) with source admittance YS = GS + jBS as

 (1.135)
where Fmin is the minimum noise figure of the two-port network, which
can be realized with respect to the source admittance YS; YSopt = GSopt
+ jBSopt is the optimal source admittance; and Rn is the equivalent noise
resistance, which measures how rapidly the noise figure degrades when
the source admittance YS deviates from its optimum value YSopt [29].
Since the admittance YS is generally complex, then its real and imaginary
parts can be controlled independently. To obtain the minimum value of
the noise figure, the two matching conditions of GS = GSopt and BS =
BSopt must be satisfied.
In a multistage transmitter system, the input signal travels through a
cascade of many different components, each of which may degrade the
signal-to-noise ratio to some degree. For a cascade of two stages having
available gains GA1 and GA2 and noise figures F1 and F2, using (1.126)
results in the output-to-input noise power ratio Nout/Nin written as
 (1.136)
where Nadd1 and Nadd2 are the additional noise powers added by the
first and second stages, respectively. Consequently, an overall noise
figure F1,2 for a two-stage system based on (1.125) can be given by
 (1.137)
Equation (1.137) can be generalized to a multistage transmitter system
with n stages as
 (1.138)
which means that the noise figure of the first stage has the predominant
effect on the overall noise figure, unless GA1 is small or F2 is large [30].

References
[1] L. O. Chua, C. A. Desoer, and E. S. Kuh, Linear and Nonlinear Circuits, New York: McGraw-Hill,
1987.
[2] D. M. Pozar, Microwave Engineering, New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2004.
[3] D. A. Frickey, “Conversions Between S, Z, Y, h, ABCD, and T Parameters Which Are Valid for
Complex Source and Load Impedances,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol. MTT-42,
pp. 205–211, Feb. 1994.
[4] E. F. Terman, Radio Engineer’s Handbook, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1945.
[5] I. J. Bahl, Lumped Elements for RF and Microwave Circuits, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 2003.
[6] H. A. Wheeler, “Simple Inductance Formulas for Radio Coils,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 16, pp. 1398–1400,
Oct. 1928.
[7] S. S. Mohan et al., “Simple Accurate Expressions for Planar Spiral Inductances,” IEEE J. Solid-
State Circuits, Vol. SC-34, pp. 1419–1424, Oct. 1999.
[8] J. M. Lopez-Villegas et al., “Improvement of the Quality Factor of RF Integrated Inductors by
Layout Optimization,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-48, pp. 76–83, Jan. 2000.
[9] J. R. Long and M. A. Copeland, “The Modeling, Characterization, and Design of Monolithic
Inductors for Silicon RF ICs,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-32, pp. 357–369, Mar. 1997.
[10] N. A. Talwalkar, C. P. Yue, and S. S. Wong, “Analysis and Synthesis of On-Chip Spiral
Inductors,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. ED-52, pp. 176–182, Feb. 2005.
[11] N. M. Nguyen and R. G. Meyer, “Si IC-Compatible Inductors and LC Passive Filters,” IEEE J.
Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-25, pp. 1028–1031, Aug. 1990.
[12] J. Craninckx and M. S. J. Steyaert, “A 1.8-GHz Low-Phase-Noise CMOS VCO Using Optimized
Hollow Spiral Inductors,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-32, pp. 736–744, May 1997.
[13] S. L. March, ‘‘Simple Equations Characterize Bond Wires,’’ Microwaves & RF, Vol. 30, pp. 105–
110, Nov. 1991.
[14] P. Benedek and P. Silvester, “Equivalent Capacitances of Microstrip Gaps and Steps,” IEEE
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-20, pp. 729–733, Nov. 1972.
[15] G. D. Alley, “Interdigital Capacitors and Their Applications in Lumped Element Microwave
Integrated Circuits,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol. MTT-18, pp. 1028–1033, Dec.
1970.
[16] S. A. Schelkunoff, “The Impedance Concept and Its Application to Problems of Reflection,
Refraction, Shielding and Power Absorption,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., Vol. 17, pp. 17–48, Jan. 1938.
[17] R. M. Barrett, “Microwave Printed Circuits—The Early Years,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory
Tech., Vol. MTT-32, pp. 983–990, Sep. 1984.
[18] D. D. Grieg and H. F. Engelmann, “Microstrip—A New Transmission Technique for the
Kilomegacycle Range,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 40, pp. 1644–1650, Dec. 1952.
[19] E. O. Hammerstad, “Equations for Microstrip Circuit Design,” Proc. 5th Europ. Microwave Conf.,
1975, pp. 268–272.
[20] I. J. Bahl and R. Garg, “Simple and Accurate Formulas for Microstrip with Finite Strip Thickness,”
Proc. IEEE, Vol. 65, pp. 1611–1612, Nov. 1977.
[21] R. S. Carson, High-Frequency Amplifiers. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1975.
[22] C. P. Weng, “Coplanar Waveguide: A Surface Strip Transmission Line Suitable for Nonreciprocal
Gyromagnetic Device Applications,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol. MTT-17, pp.
1087–1090, Dec. 1969.
[23] R. N. Simons, Coplanar Waveguide Circuits, Components, and Systems, New York: John Wiley
& Sons, 2001.
[24] G. Ghione and C. Naldli, “Analytical Formulas for Coplanar Lines in Hybrid and Monolithic,”

Electronics Lett., Vol. 20, pp. 179–181, Feb. 1984.
[25] A. van der Ziel, Noise, Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1954.
[26] H. C. Montgomery, “Transistor Noise in Circuit Applications,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 40, pp. 1461–1471,
1952.
[27] H. Rothe and W. Dahlke, “Theory of Noise Fourpoles,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 44, pp. 811–818, June
1956.
[28] A. G. T. Becking, H. Groendijk, and K. S. Knol, “The Noise Factor of Four-Terminal Networks,”
Philips Res. Rep., Vol. 10, pp. 349–357, 1955.
[29] IRE Subcommittee 7.9 on Noise (H. A. Haus, Chairman), “Representation of Noise in Linear
Twoports,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 48, pp. 69–74, Jan. 1960.
[30] H. T. Friis, “Noise Figures of Radio Receivers,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 32, pp. 419–422, July 1944.

CHAPTER 2
Power Amplifier Design Fundamentals
Power amplifier design requires accurate active device modeling, effective
impedance matching (depending on the technical requirements and
operating conditions), stability during operation, and ease of practical
implementation. The quality of a power amplifier design is evaluated by
its ability to achieve maximum power gain across the required frequency
bandwidth under stable operating conditions with minimum amplifier
stages, and the requirements for linearity or high efficiency can be
considered where it is needed. For stable operation, it is necessary to
evaluate the operating frequency domains in which the active device may
be potentially unstable.
2.1 Main Characteristics
Power amplifier design aims for maximum power gain and efficiency for a
given value of output power with a predictable degree of stability. To
extract the maximum power from a source generator, it is a well-known
fact that the external load should have a vector value that is a conjugate
of the internal impedance of the source [1]. The power delivered from a
generator to a load when matched on this basis is called the available
power of the generator [2]. In this case, the power gain of a four-terminal
network is defined as the ratio of the power delivered to the load
connected at the output terminals to the power available from the
generator connected to the input terminals, usually measured in decibels,
and this ratio is called the power gain irrespective of whether it is greater
than or less than 1 [3, 4].
Figure 2.1 shows the basic block schematic for a single-stage power
amplifier circuit, which includes an active device, an input matching circuit
to match with the source impedance, and an output matching circuit to
match with the load impedance. Generally, the two-port active device is
characterized by a system of the immittance W-parameters, that is, any
system of the impedance Z-parameters or admittance Y-parameters [5,
6]. The input and output matching circuits transform the source and load
immittances WS and WL into specified values between ports 1–2 and 3–4,

respectively, by means of which the optimal design operation mode of the
power amplifier is realized.
Figure 2.1 Block schematic of single-stage power amplifier.
The given technical requirements and the convenience of the design
realization (using the appropriate types of the active devices and circuit
schematics) determine the choice of system for the admittance Y-
parameters or impedance Z-parameters. For the given input and output
voltages, let the active device be characterized by a matrix of Y-
parameters. In this case, the source of the input signal is represented by
the current source with an internal admittance YS, and a load is
characterized by the load admittance YL, as shown in Figure 2.2(a). If a
two-port active device is described by a system of Z-parameters, the
source of the input signal is represented by the voltage source with an
internal impedance ZS, whereas the load is characterized by the load
impedance ZL, as shown in Figure 2.2(b). In both cases, the admittances
YS and YL and the impedances ZS and ZL are seen looking toward the
source and load through the input and output matching circuits.

Figure 2.2 Two-port loaded amplifier networks.
To calculate the electrical characteristics of a power amplifier, first
consider a system of the admittance Y-parameters. The active device in
this case is described by the following system of two equations:
 (2.1)
Depending on impedance matching at the input and output device
ports, several definitions of the amplifier power gain in terms of Y-
parameters can be derived:
Operating power gain (GP = PL/Pin) is the ratio of power dissipated in
the active load GL to power delivered to the input port of the active
device with admittance Yin. This gain is independent of GS but is strongly
dependent on GL.
Available power gain (GA = Pout/PS) is the ratio of power available at
the output port of the active device with admittance Yout to power
available from the source GS. This power gain depends on GS but not GL.
Transducer power gain (GT = PL/PS) is the ratio of power dissipated in
the active load GL to power available from the source GS. This power
gain assumes complex-conjugate impedance matching at the input and

output ports of the active device being dependent on both GS and GL.
Maximum available gain (MAG) is the theoretical power gain of the active
device when its reverse transfer admittance Y12 is set equal to zero. It
represents a theoretical limit on the gain that can be achieved with the
given active device, assuming complex-conjugate impedance matching of
the input and output ports of the active device with the source and load,
respectively.
In practice, to characterize an amplifier circuit gain property, generally
two types of power gain are used: operating power gain GP and
transducer power gain GT. The operating power gain GP is used when we
need to calculate the power at the input port of the device, which is
necessary to provide the given power delivered to the load. However, to
analyze the stability conditions, it is important to know both the value of
the source impedance and the value of the load impedance. Therefore, in
this case it is preferable to use the transducer power gain GT, which must
be maximized within the restrictions imposed by the stability
consideration.
First, consider the evaluation of GP in terms of the two-port network Y-
parameters. If V1 is the amplitude at the input port of the active device,
then
 (2.2)
where Yin = I1/V1 is the input admittance (between input ports 1–2) of a
two-port network loaded on the admittance YL. Given that I2 = −YLV2,
the expression for Yin is defined from (2.1) as
 (2.3)
The output power dissipated in a load is obtained by
 (2.4)
As a result, the operating power gain GP can be written as

 (2.5)
The operating power gain GP does not depend on the source
parameters and characterizes only the effectiveness of the power delivery
from the input port of the active device to the load. This gain helps to
evaluate the gain property of a multistage amplifier when the overall
operating power gain GP(total) is equal to the product of each stage GP.
The transducer power gain GT includes an assumption of the complex-
conjugate matching of the load and the source. This means that 
where 
 is the source admittance conjugately matched to the input port
of the active device Yin.
If IS = YSV1 + I1, then the expression for the source current IS using
(2.1) can be defined by
 (2.6)
From (2.4) and (2.6) it follows that the transducer power gain GT can
be written as
 (2.7)
Similarly, the operating and transducer power gains GP and GT and the
input and output impedances Zin and Zout can be expressed through the
same analytical forms of a system of Z-parameters. Thus, by using the
immittance W-parameters, they can be generalized as
 (2.8)
 (2.9)
 (2.10)

 (2.11)
where Wij (i, j = 1, 2) are the immittance two-port parameters of the
active device equivalent circuit.
From (2.8) and (2.9) it follows that if W12 = 0, then Win = W11 and
Wout = W22. As a result, in the case of the complex-conjugate matching
at the input and output ports of the active device, the expression for MAG
is obtained from (2.10) or (2.11) as
 (2.12)
the magnitude of which depends only on the active device immittance
parameters.
The bipolar transistor, simplified, small-signal π-hybrid equivalent circuit
shown in Figure 2.3 provides an example for a conjugately matched
bipolar power amplifier.
Figure 2.3 Simplified equivalent circuit of matched bipolar power amplifier.
The impedance Z-parameters of the equivalent circuit of the bipolar
transistor in a common-emitter configuration can be written as
 (2.13)
where
gm = device transconductance
rb = series base resistance
Cπ = base-emitter capacitance including both diffusion and junction

components
Cc = feedback collector capacitance.
By setting the device feedback impedance Z12 to zero and complex-
conjugate matching the conditions at the input as RS = ReZin and Lin =
−ImZin/ω and at the output as RL = ReZout and Lout = −ImZout/ω, the
small-signal transducer power gain GT can be calculated by
 (2.14)
where fT = gm/2πCπ is the device transition frequency. Equation (2.14)
gives a well-known expression for maximum operating frequency of the
bipolar junction transistor (BJT) device when the maximum available gain
is equal to unity:
 (2.15)
Figure 2.4 shows the simplified circuit schematic for a conjugately
matched field-effect transistor (FET) power amplifier. The admittance Y-
parameters of the small-signal equivalent circuit of any FET device in a
common-source configuration can be written as
 (2.16)
where
gm = device transconductance
Rgs = gate-source resistance
Cgs = gate-source capacitance
Cgd = feedback gate-drain capacitance
Cds = drain-source capacitance
Rds = differential drain-source resistance.

Figure 2.4 Simplified equivalent circuit of matched FET power amplifier.
Since the value of the gate-drain capacitance Cgd is usually relatively
small, the effect of feedback admittance Y12 can be neglected in a
simplified case. Then, it is necessary to set RS = Rgs and Lin = 1/ω2Cgs
for input matching, while RL = Rds and Lout = 1/ω2Cds for output
matching. Hence, the small-signal transducer power gain GT can
approximately be calculated by
 (2.17)
where fT = gm/2πCgs is the device transition frequency and MAG is the
maximum available gain representing a theoretical limit for the power
gain that can be achieved under complex-conjugate matching conditions.
Equation (2.17) gives a well-known expression for maximum operating
frequency of the FET device when the maximum available gain is equal to
unity:
 (2.18)
From (2.14) and (2.17) it follows that the small-signal power gain of a
conjugately matched power amplifier for any type of active device drops
off as 1/f 2 or 6 dB per octave. Therefore, if a power gain GT is known at
the transition frequency fT, then GT(f) can readily be predicted at a
certain frequency f by
 (2.19)
Note that the previous analysis is based on the linear small-signal

consideration when the nonlinear device current source as a function of
both input and output voltages can be generally characterized by the
linear transconductance gm as a function of the input voltage, and the
output differential resistance Rds is a function of the output voltage. This
is a result of a Taylor series expansion of the output current as a function
of the input and output voltages with maintaining only the dc and linear
components. Such an approach helps to explain and derive the maximum
achievable power amplifier parameters in a linear approximation. In this
case, the active device is operated in a Class A mode when one-half of
the dc power is dissipated in the device, while the other half is
transformed to the fundamental-frequency output power flowing into the
load, resulting in a maximum ideal collector efficiency of 50%. The device
output resistance Rout remains constant and can be calculated as a ratio
of the dc supply voltage to the dc current flowing through the active
device. In a nonlinear case, for a complex-conjugate matching procedure,
the device output immittance under large-signal consideration should be
calculated using a Fourier series analysis of the output current and
voltage fundamental components. This means that, unlike a linear Class A
mode, the active device is operated in a device linear region for only part
of the entire period, and its output resistance is defined as a ratio of the
fundamental-frequency output voltage to the fundamental-frequency
output current. This is not a physical resistance resulting in a power loss
inside the device, but an equivalent resistance that must be used in
conjugate matching procedures. In this case, the complex-conjugate
matching is valid and necessary, first, to compensate for the reactive part
of the device output impedance and, second, to provide a proper load
resistance resulting in a maximum power gain for a given supply voltage
and required output power delivered to the load. Note that this is not the
maximum available small-signal power gain that can be achieved in a
linear operation mode, but a maximum achievable large-signal power
gain that can be achieved for a particular operation mode with a certain
conduction angle. Of course, the maximum large-signal power gain is
smaller than the small-signal power gain for the same input power, since
the output power in a nonlinear operation mode also includes the powers
at the harmonic components of the fundamental frequency and the large-
signal transconductance is lower than the small-signal one.
Therefore, it makes more practical sense not to introduce separately
the concepts of the gain match with respect to the linear power amplifiers

and the power match in nonlinear power amplifiers since the maximum
large-signal power gain as a function of the conduction angle corresponds
to the maximum fundamental-frequency output power delivered to the
load due to large-signal conjugate output matching. It is very important
to provide conjugate matching at both input and output device ports to
achieve maximum power gain in a large-signal mode. In Class A mode,
the maximum small-signal power gain ideally remains constant regardless
of the output power level.
The transistor characterization in a large-signal mode can be done
based on an equivalent quasi-harmonic nonlinear approximation under
the condition of sinusoidal port voltages [7]. In this case, the large-signal
impedances are generally determined in the following manner. The
designer tunes the load network (often by trial and error) to maximize the
output power to the required level using a particular transistor at a
specified frequency and supply voltage. Then, the transistor is removed
from the circuit and the impedance seen by the collector is measured at
the carrier frequency. The complex conjugate of the measured impedance
then represents the equivalent large-signal output impedance of the
transistor at that frequency, supply voltage, and output power. A similar
design process is used to measure the input impedance of the transistor
and to maximize the power-added efficiency of the power amplifier. It is
especially important with power transistors in the microwave region either
to characterize the transistors in the packaging configuration in which
they will be utilized in the circuit application, or to accurately know the
package parameters so that suitable corrections can be made if the
transistors are mounted in a different environment [8].
2.2 Impedance Matching
Impedance matching is necessary to provide maximum delivery to the
load of the RF power available from the source. This means that, when
the electrical signal propagates in the circuit, a portion of this signal will
be reflected at the interface between the sections with different
impedances. Therefore, it is necessary to establish the conditions that
allow the entire electrical signal to be transmitted without any reflection.
To determine the optimum value for load impedance ZL at which the
power delivered to the load is maximized, consider the equivalent circuit
shown in Figure 2.5(a).

The power delivered to the load can be defined as
 (2.20)
where
ZS = RS + jXS = source impedance
ZL = RL + jXL = load impedance
VS = source voltage amplitude
Vin = load voltage amplitude.
Substituting the real and imaginary parts of the source and load
impedances ZS and ZL into (2.20) yields
 (2.21)
Assume the source impedance ZS is fixed and it is necessary to vary the
real and imaginary parts of the load impedance ZL until maximum power
is delivered to the load. To maximize the output power, we must apply
the following analytical conditions in the form of derivatives with respect
to the output power:
 (2.22)
Then, applying these conditions to (2.21), the following system of two
equations can be obtained with some simplifications:
 (2.23)
XL(XL + XS) = 0 (2.24)
By solving (2.23) and (2.24) simultaneously for RS and XS, we can
obtain
RS = RL XL = −XS (2.25)
or, in an impedance form,

ZL = Z∗S (2.26)
where ∗ denotes the complex-conjugate value [3, 9].
Equation (2.26) is called the impedance conjugate matching condition,
and its fulfillment results in a maximum power delivered to the load for
fixed source impedance. It should be noted that the term impedance was
introduced by Oliver Lodge in 1889, and it referred to the ratio V/I in the
special circuit comprised of a resistance and an inductance, where I and V
are the amplitudes of an alternating current and the driving force that
produced it [10].
The admittance conjugate matching condition, applied to the equivalent
circuit shown in Figure 2.5(b), is written as
 (2.27)
which can be readily obtained in the same way.
Figure 2.5 Equivalent circuits with (a) voltage and (b) current sources.
Thus, the conjugate matching conditions in a common case can be
determined through the immittance W-parameters, which represent any

system of the impedance Z-parameters or admittance Y-parameters, in
the form of
 (2.28)
where WS is the source immittance and WL is the load immittance. The
term immittance was introduced by Bode to refer to a complex number,
which may be either the impedance or the admittance of a system [11].
For a single-stage power amplifier, the matching circuit is connected
between the source and the input of an active device, as shown in Figure
2.6(a), and between the output of an active device and the load, as
shown in Figure 2.6(b). In the latter case, the main objective is to
properly transform the load immittance WL to the optimum device output
immittance Wout, the value of which is properly determined by the supply
voltage, the output power, the saturation voltage of the active device,
and the selected class of the active device operation to maximize the
operating efficiency and output power of the power amplifier. For a
multistage power amplifier, the load represents an input circuit for the
next stage. Therefore, the matching circuit is connected between the
output of the active device of the preceding amplifier stage and the input
of the active device of the succeeding stage of the power amplifier, as
shown in Figure 2.6(c).

Figure 2.6 Matching circuit arrangements.
Note that (2.28) is given in a general immittance form without
indication of whether it is used in a small-signal or large-signal
application. In the latter case, this only means that the device immittance
W-parameters are fundamentally averaged over large-signal swings
across the device equivalent circuit parameters and that the conjugate
matching principle is valid in both the small-signal application and the
large-signal application where the optimum equivalent device output
resistance (or conductance) at the fundamental frequency is matched to
the load resistance (or conductance). In addition, the effect of the device
output reactive elements is eliminated by the conjugate reactance of the
load network. In addition, the matching circuits should be designed to
realize the required voltage and current waveforms at the device output,
to provide the stabile operating conditions and to satisfy the requirements
for the power amplifier amplitude and phase characteristics. The losses in
the matching circuits must be as small as possible to deliver the output
power to the load with maximum efficiency. Finally, it is desirable for the

matching circuit to be easy to tune.
Generally, matching networks take advantage of various configurations
that can be used to connect a generating system efficiently to its useful
load. However, to obtain high transmission efficiency, these networks
should be properly designed. The lumped matching circuits shown in
Figure 2.7 in the form of an (a) L-transformer, (b) π-transformer, or (c) T-
transformer have proved for a long time to be effective for power
amplifier design [1]. The simplest and most popular matching network is
the matching circuit in the form of the L-transformer. The transforming
properties of this matching circuit can be analyzed by using the equivalent
transformation of a parallel into a series representation of RX circuit.
Figure 2.7 Matching circuits in the form of L-, π-, and T-transformers.
Consider the parallel RX circuit shown in Figure 2.8(a), where R1 is the
real (resistive) part and X1 is the imaginary (reactive) part of the circuit
impedance Z1 = jX1R1/(R1 + jX1), and the series RX circuit shown in
Figure 2.8(b), where R2 is the resistive part and X2 is the reactive part of
the circuit impedance Z2 = R2 + jX2. These two circuits, series and

parallel, can be considered equivalent at some frequency if Z1 = Z2,
resulting in
 (2.29)
Equation (2.29) can be rearranged by two separate equations for real
and imaginary parts as
R1 = R2(1 + Q2) (2.30)
X1 = X2(1 + Q–2) (2.31)
where Q = R1/ X1  =  X2 /R2 is the circuit quality factor, which is
equal for both the series and parallel RX circuits.
Figure 2.8 Impedance parallel and series equivalent circuits.
Consequently, if the reactive impedance X1 = −X2( 1 + Q–2) is
connected in parallel to the series circuit R2X2, it allows the reactive
impedance (or reactance) of the series circuit to be compensated. In this
case, the input impedance of such a two-port network shown in Figure 2.9
will be resistive only and equal to R1. Consequently, to transform the
resistance R1 into the other resistance R2 at the given frequency, it is
sufficient to connect between them a two-port L-transformer with the
opposite signs of the reactances X1 and X2, the parameters of which can
be easily calculated from the following simple equations:
 (2.32)
 (2.33)

where
 (2.34)
is the circuit (loaded) quality factor expressed through the resistances to
be matched. Thus, to design a matching circuit with fixed resistances to
be matched, first we need to calculate the circuit quality factor Q
according to (2.34) and then define the reactive elements according to
(2.32) and (2.33).
Figure 2.9 Input impedance of loaded two-port network.
Due to the opposite signs of the reactances X1 and X2, two possible
circuit configurations (one in the form of a lowpass filter section and the
other in the form of a highpass filter section) with the same transforming
properties can be realized, as shown in Figure 2.10 together with the
design equations.
The matching circuits in the form of a π-transformer [Figure 2.10(a)]
and a T-transformer [Figure 2.10(a)] can be realized by appropriate
connection of two L-transformers, as shown in Figure 2.11. For each L-
transformer, the resistances R1 
and R2 are transformed to some
intermediate resistance R0 with the value of R0 < (R1, R2) for a π-
transformer and the value of R0 > (R1, R2) for a T-transformer. The value
o f R0 is not fixed and can be chosen arbitrarily depending on the
frequency bandwidth. This means that, compared to the simple L-
transformer with fixed parameters for the same ratio of R2/R1, the
parameters of a π-transformer or a T-transformer can be different.
However, they provide narrower frequency bandwidths due to higher
quality factors because the intermediate resistance R0 is either greater or
smaller than each of the resistances R1 and R2. By taking into account

the two possible circuit configurations of the L-transformer shown in
Figure 2.10, there is the possibility that different circuit configurations can
be designed for the two-port impedance transformers shown in Figure
2.11(a), where X3 = X′3 + X″3, and in Figure 2.11(b), where X3 =
X′3X″3/(X′3 + X″3).
Figure 2.10 L-type matching circuits and relevant equations.
Figure 2.11 Matching circuits developed by connecting two L-transformers.
Some of the most widely used two-port LC-type π- and T-transformers,
together with the design formulas, are discussed in [12, 13]. The π-
transformers are usually used as output matching circuits of high-power

amplifiers in the Class B operation mode when it is necessary to achieve a
sinusoidal drain (or collector) voltage waveform by appropriate harmonic
suppression. For the π-transformer with shunt capacitors used as an
interstage matching circuit, the input and output capacitances of the
transistors can be easily included in the matching circuit elements.
Besides, a π-transformer can be directly used as the load network for a
high-efficiency Class E mode with proper calculation of its design
parameters [14]. The T-transformers are usually used in high-power
amplifiers as input, interstage, and output matching circuits, especially
the matching network with series inductor and shunt and series
capacitors. By using such a T-transformer for output matching of a power
amplifier, it is easy to realize a high-efficiency Class F operating mode,
because the series inductor connected to the drain (or collector) of the
active device creates open-circuit harmonic impedance conditions [14].
Now let us demonstrate a lumped matching network technique for the
design of a 150W MOSFET power amplifier with a supply voltage of 50V,
operating in a frequency bandwidth of 132 to 174 MHz and providing a
power gain greater than 10 dB. These requirements can be satisfied using
a silicon n-channel enhancement-mode vertical-double diffused metal
oxide semiconductor FET (VDMOSFET) device designed for power
amplification in the VHF range. In this case, the center bandwidth
frequency is equal to fc = 
 = 152 MHz. For this frequency, the
manufacturer states the following values of the input and output
impedances: Zin = (0.9 − j1.2)Ω and Zout = (1.8 + j2.1)Ω. Both Zin and
Zout represent the series combination of an input or output resistance
with a capacitive or inductive reactance, respectively. To cover the
required frequency bandwidth, the low-Q matching circuits chosen should
be such that they allow reduction of the in-band amplitude ripple and
improvement of the input VSWR. The value of a quality factor for a 3-dB
bandwidth level must be less than Q = 152/(174 − 132) = 3.6. As a
result, it is very convenient to design input and output matching circuits
using simple L-transformers in the form of lowpass and highpass filter
sections with a constant value of Q [15].
To match the input series capacitive impedance to the standard 50Ω
source impedance in a sufficiently wide frequency bandwidth, it is
preferable to use three filter sections, as shown in Figure 2.12. From the
negative reactive part of the input impedance Zin, it follows that the input
capacitance at the operating frequency of 152 MHz is equal to

approximately 873 pF. To compensate at the center bandwidth frequency
for this capacitive reactance, it is sufficient to connect an inductance of
1.3 nH in series to it. Now, when the device input capacitive reactance is
compensated, in order to simplify the matching design procedure, it is
best to cascade L-transformers with equal values for Q. Although equal Q
values are not absolutely necessary, this provides a convenient guide for
both analytical calculation of the matching circuit parameters and the
Smith chart graphical design.
Figure 2.12 Complete broadband input matching circuit.
In this case, the following ratio can be written for the input matching
circuit:
 (2.35)
resulting in R2 = 13Ω and R3 = 3.5Ω for Rsource = R1 = 50Ω and Rin =
0.9Ω. Consequently, a quality factor of each L-transformer is equal to Q =
1.7 according to (2.34). The elements of the input matching circuit using
the formulas given in Figure 2.10 can be calculated as L1 = 31 nH, C1 =
47 pF, L2 = 6.2 nH, C2 = 137 pF, L3 = 1.6 nH, and C3 = 509 pF.
This equal-Q approach significantly simplifies the matching circuit
design using the Smith chart [16]. When calculating a Q value, it is
necessary to plot a circle of equal Q values on the Smith chart. Then,
each element of the input matching circuit can be readily determined, as
shown in Figure 2.13. Each trace for the series inductance must be plotted
until the intersection point with the Q-circle, whereas each trace for the
parallel capacitance should be plotted until it intersects with a horizontal
real axis.
In practice, to simplify

Figure 2.13 Smith chart with elements from Figure 2.12.
power amplifier designs at microwave frequencies, simple matching
circuits are very often used, including an L-transformer with a series
transmission line as the basic matching section. It is convenient to
analyze the transforming properties of this matching circuit by substituting
the equivalent transformation of the parallel RX circuit into the series one.
For example, R1 is the resistance and X1 = −1/ωC is the reactance of the
impedance Z1 = jR1X1/(R1 + jX1) for a parallel RC circuit, and Rin =
ReZin is the resistance and Xin = ImZin is the reactance of the impedance
Zin = Rin + jXin for the series transmission-line circuit shown in Figure
2.14.
Figure 2.14 L-transformer with series transmission line.

For complex-conjugate matching when 
 we obtain
 (2.36)
The solution of (2.36) can be written in the form of two expressions for
real and imaginary impedance parts as
R1 = Rin(1 + Q2) (2.37)
X1 = −Xin(1 + Q–2) (2.38)
where Q = R1/ X1  = Xin/Rin is the quality factor equal for both
parallel capacitive and series transmission-line circuits.
By using (1.111) from Chapter 1, which defines the dependence
between the input impedance Zin, the transmission-line parameters
(electrical length θ and characteristic impedance Z0), and the load
impedance RL = R2, the real and imaginary parts of the input impedance
Zin can be written as
 (2.39)
 (2.40)
From (2.40) it follows that an inductive input impedance (necessary to
compensate for the capacitive parallel component) is provided when Z0 >
R2 for θ < π/2 and Z0 < R2 for π/2 < θ < π. As a result, to transform the
resistance R1 into the other resistance R2 at the given frequency, it is
necessary to connect a two-port lowpass L-transformer (including a
parallel capacitor and a series transmission line) between them. When
one parameter (usually the characteristic impedance Z0) is known, the
matching circuit parameters can be calculated from the following two
equations:
 (2.41)

 (2.42)
where
 (2.43)
is the circuit (loaded) quality factor defined as a function of the
resistances R1 and R2 and the parameters of the transmission line
(characteristic impedance Z0 and electrical length θ).
It follows from (2.42) and (2.43) that the electrical length θ can be
calculated as a result of the numerical solution of a transcendental
equation with one unknown parameter. However, it is more convenient to
combine these two equations and to rewrite them in the implicit form of
 (2.44)
2.3 Gain and Stability
In early RF vacuum-tube transmitters, it was observed that the tubes and
associated circuits may have damped or undamped oscillations depending
on the circuit losses, the feedback coupling, the grid and anode
potentials, and the reactance or tuning of the parasitic circuits [17, 18].
Various parasitic oscillator circuits such as the tuned-grid-tuned-anode
circuit with capacitive feedback or Hartley, Colpitts, or Meissner oscillators
can be realized at high frequencies, which potentially can be eliminated
by adding a small resistor close to the grid or anode connections of the
tubes for damping the circuits. Inductively coupled rather than
capacitively coupled input and output circuits should be used wherever
possible.
According to the immittance approach to the stability analysis of the
active nonreciprocal two-port network, it is necessary and sufficient for its
unconditional stability if the following system of equations can be satisfied
for the given active device:

 (2.45)
 (2.46)
or
 (2.47)
 (2.48)
where ReWS and ReWL are considered to be greater than zero [19, 20].
The active two-port network can be treated as unstable or potentially
unstable in the case of the opposite signs in (2.45) and (2.47).
According to (2.48) and (2.49), the value of ReWin depends on the load
immittance WL, whereas the variation of the source immittance WS leads
to the change of ReWout. Therefore, if ReWout has a negative value, the
active two-port network will be potentially unstable in certain limits of the
values of immittance WS. Consequently, for unconditionally stable
amplifier operation mode, it is necessary to satisfy the following
condition:
 (2.49)
Analyzing (2.49) in extremum, the minimum positive value of ReWout
for a given constant value of ReWS can be derived by solving equation
∂ReWout/∂ImWS = 0 as
 (2.50)
The second term on the right-hand side of (2.50) as a function of ReWS
can take a maximum negative value when ReWS = 0. Consequently, the
requirement of a positive minimum value of ReWout given by (2.49) can
be written as
 (2.51)
A similar result can be obtained by optimizing the immittance Win as a

function of WL. From (2.51) it follows that under such a condition the
active device is unconditionally stable at any frequencies where this
condition is fulfilled, regardless of any values of the source and load
immittances WS and WL. By normalizing (2.51), a special relationship
between the device immittance parameters called the device stability
factor can be derived as
 (2.52)
which shows a stability margin indicating how far from a zero value are
the real parts in (2.45) and (2.47) being positive [20].
Note that the applicability of (2.51) and (2.52) is restricted to the
following requirements:
 (2.53)
A comparison of (2.51) and (2.52) shows that the active device is
unconditionally stable if K > 1 and potentially unstable if K < 1. From
(2.53) and the condition
 (2.54)
it follows that the smallest possible value for the device’s stability factor
can be defined as K = −1, which means that the values of K can be
arranged only in the interval [−1, ∞).
When the active device is potentially unstable, an improvement of the
power amplifier stability can be provided with the appropriate choice of
the source and load immittances WS and WL. In this case, the circuit
stability factor KT is defined in the same way as the device stability factor
K, but by taking into account ReWS and ReWL along with the device’s W-
parameters. In this case, the circuit stability factor is given by
 (2.55)
If the circuit stability factor KT ≥ 1, the power amplifier is
unconditionally stable. However, the power amplifier becomes potentially
unstable if KT < 1. The value of KT = 1 corresponds to the border of the

circuit unconditional stability. The values of the circuit stability factor KT
and device stability factor K become equal if ReWS = ReWL = 0.
For the device stability factor K > 1, the operating power gain GP has to
be maximized [21, 22]. By analyzing (2.10) in extremum, it is possible to
derive the optimum values 
 and 
, at which the operating power
gain GP is maximal, by solving the following system of two equations:
 (2.56)
As a result, the optimum values 
 and 
 depend on the
immittance parameters of the active device and the device stability factor
according to
 (2.57)
 (2.58)
Substituting the obtained values of 
 and 
 into (2.10) yields an
expression for calculating the maximum value of GPmax written as
 (2.59)
from which it follows that GPmax can be achieved only if K > 1, whereas 
 when K = 1.
If the source is conjugately matched with the input of the active device,
the following conditions must be satisfied:
 (2.60)
Then, by substituting these expressions into (2.8), the optimum values 
 and 
 as functions of the immittance parameters of the active
device and the device stability factor can be derived as
 (2.61)

 (2.62)
A comparison of (2.61) and (2.62) with (2.57) and (2.58), respectively,
shows that these expressions are identical. Consequently, the power
amplifier with an unconditionally stable active device provides a
maximum power gain operation only if the input and output of the active
device are conjugately matched with the source and load impedances,
respectively. For the lossless input matching circuit when the power
available at the source is equal to the power delivered to the input port of
the active device (i.e., when PS = Pin), the maximum operating power
gain is equal to the maximum transducer power gain (i.e., GPmax =
GTmax).
Domains of the device’s potential instability include the operating
frequency ranges where the active device stability factor is equal to K <
1. Within the bandwidth of such a frequency domain, parasitic oscillations
can occur, defined by internal positive feedback and the operating
conditions of the active device. The instabilities may not be self-
sustaining, induced by the RF drive power but remaining on its removal.
One of the most serious cases of power amplifier instability can occur
when the load impedance varies. Under these conditions, the transistor
may be destroyed almost instantaneously. However, even it is not
destroyed, the instability can result in a tremendously increased level of
spurious emissions in the output spectrum of the power amplifier.
Generally, the following classification can be applied to linear instabilities
[23]:
Low-frequency oscillations produced by thermal feedback effects
Oscillations due to internal feedback
Negative resistance or conductance-induced instabilities due to transit-
time effects, avalanche multiplication, and so forth.
Oscillations due to external feedback as a result of insufficient decoupling
of the dc supply and so forth.
Therefore, it is very important to determine the effect of the device
feedback parameters on the origin of the parasitic self-oscillations and to
establish possible circuit configurations of the parasitic oscillators. Based
on the simplified bipolar equivalent circuit shown in Figure 2.15, the

device stability factor can be expressed through the parameters of the
transistor equivalent circuit as
 (2.63)
where ωT = 2πfT [12, 13].
Figure 2.15 Simplified bipolar π-hybrid equivalent circuit with emitter lead inductance.
At very low frequencies, the bipolar transistors are potentially stable
and the fact that K → 0 when f → 0 in (2.63) can be explained by
simplifying the bipolar equivalent circuit. In practice, at low frequencies, it
is necessary to take into account the dynamic base-emitter resistance rπ
and Early collector-emitter resistance rce, the presence of which
substantially increase the value of the device stability factor. This gives
only one unstable frequency domain with K < 1 and low-boundary
frequency fp1. However, an additional region of possible low-frequency
oscillations can occur due to thermal feedback where the collector
junction temperature becomes frequently dependent, and the common-
base configuration is especially affected by this [24].
Equating the device stability factor K with unity allows us to determine
the high-boundary frequency of a frequency domain of the bipolar
transistor potential instability as

 (2.64)
When rbgm > 1 and gm >> ωTCc, (2.64) reduces to
 (2.65)
At higher frequencies, the presence of parasitic reactive intrinsic
transistor parameters and package parasitics can be of great importance
in view of power amplifier stability. The parasitic series emitter lead
inductance Le shown in Figure 2.15 has a major effect on the stability
factor of the device. The presence of Le leads to the appearance of the
second frequency domain of potential instability at higher frequencies.
The circuit analysis shows that the second frequency domain of potential
instability can be realized only under the particular ratios between the
normalized parameters ωTLe/rb and ωTrbCc [12, 13]. For example, the
second domain does not occur for any values of Le when ωTrbCc ≥ 0.25.
An appearance of the second frequency domain of the device’s potential
instability is a result of the corresponding changes in the device feedback
phase conditions and takes place only under a simultaneous effect of the
collector capacitance Cc and emitter lead inductance Le. If the effect of
one of these factors is lacking, the active device is characterized by only
the first domain of its potential instability.
Figure 2.16 shows the potentially realizable equivalent circuits of the
parasitic oscillators. If the value of a series-emitter inductance Le is
negligible, the parasitic oscillations can occur only when the values of the
source and load reactances are positive, that is, when ImZS = jXS > 0
and ImZL = jXL > 0. In this case, the parasitic oscillator shown in Figure
2.16(a) represents the inductive three-point circuit, where the inductive
elements LS and LL in combination with the collector capacitance Cc form
a Hartley oscillator. From a practical point of view, the more the value of
the collector dc-feed inductance exceeds the value of the base-bias
inductance, the more likely it is that low-frequency parasitic oscillators
can be created. It was observed that a very low inductance, even a short
between the emitter and the base, can produce very strong and
dangerous oscillations that may easily destroy a transistor [23].

Therefore, it is recommended that the value of the base choke inductance
be increased and the value of the collector choke inductance be
decreased.
The presence of Le leads to narrowing of the first frequency domain of
the potential instability, which is limited to the high-boundary frequency
fp2, and can contribute to the appearance of the second frequency
domain of the potential instability at higher frequencies. The parasitic
oscillator that corresponds to the first frequency domain of the device
potential instability can be realized only if the source and load reactances
are inductive, that is, if ImZS = jXS > 0 and ImZL = jXL > 0, with the
equivalent circuit of such a parasitic oscillator shown in Figure 2.16(b).
The parasitic oscillator corresponding to the second frequency domain of
the device potential instability can be realized only if the source reactance
is capacitive and the load reactance is inductive, that is, if ImZS = −jXS <
0 and ImZL = jXL > 0, with the equivalent circuit shown in Figure 2.16(c).
The series emitter inductance Le is an element of fundamental
importance for the parasitic oscillator that corresponds to the second
frequency domain of the device potential instability. It changes the circuit
phase conditions so it becomes possible to establish the oscillation phase-
balance condition at high frequencies. However, if it is possible to
eliminate the parasitic oscillations at high frequencies by other means,
increasing Le will result in narrowing of the low-frequency domain of
potential instability, thus making the power amplifier potentially more
stable, although at the expense of reduced power gain.

Figure 2.16 Equivalent circuits of parasitic bipolar oscillators.
Similar analysis of the MOSFET power amplifier also shows two
frequency domains of MOSFET potential instability due to the internal
feedback gate-drain capacitance Cgd and series source inductance Ls
[13]. Because of the very high gate-leakage resistance, the value of the
low-boundary frequency fp1 is sufficiently small. For usually available
conditions for power MOSFET devices when gmRds = 10 ÷ 30 and
Cgd/Cgs = 0.1 ÷ 0.2, the high-boundary frequency fp2 can be
approximately calculated from
 (2.66)
Note that power MOSFET devices have a substantially higher value of
gmRds at small values of the drain current than at high values.
Consequently, for small drain current, MOSFET devices are characterized
by a wider domain of potential instability. This domain is significantly

wider than the same first domain of the potential instability of the bipolar
transistor. The series source inductance Ls contributes to the appearance
of the second frequency domain of the device potential instability. The
potentially realizable equivalent circuits of the MOSFET parasitic
oscillators are the same as for the bipolar transistor, as shown in Figure
2.16 [13].
Thus, to prevent the parasitic oscillations and to provide a stable
operating mode for any power amplifier, it is necessary to take into
consideration the following common requirements:
Use an active device with stability factor K > 1.
If it is impossible to choose an active device with K > 1, it is necessary to
provide the circuit stability factor KT > 1 by choosing the appropriate real
parts of the source and load immittances.
Disrupt the equivalent circuits of the possible parasitic oscillators.
Choose the proper reactive parameters of the matching circuit elements
adjacent to the input and output ports of the active device, which are
necessary to avoid the self-oscillation conditions.
Generally, the parasitic oscillations can arise at any frequency within
the potential instability domains for particular values of the source and
load immittances WS and WL. The frequency dependencies of WS and WL
are very complicated and very often cannot be predicted exactly,
especially in multistage power amplifiers. Therefore, it is very difficult to
propose a unified approach for providing a stable operating mode to
power amplifiers with different circuit configurations and operating
frequencies. In practice, the parasitic oscillations can arise close to the
operating frequencies due to the internal positive feedback inside the
transistor and at the frequencies sufficiently far from the operating
frequencies due to the external positive feedback created by the surface-
mounted elements. As a result, stability analyses of power amplifiers
must include methods for preventing parasitic oscillations in different
frequency ranges.
2.4 Basic Classes of Operation
As established at the end of the 1910s, amplifier efficiency can reach
quite high values when suitable adjustments are made to the grid and

anode voltages [25]. With a resistive load, the anode current is in phase
with the grid voltage, whereas it leads with the capacitive load and it lags
with the inductive load. On the assumption that the anode current and
anode voltage both have sinusoidal variations, the maximum possible
output of the amplifying device would be just half the dc supply power,
resulting in an anode efficiency of 50%. However, by using a pulsed-
shaped anode current, it is possible to achieve anode efficiency
considerably in excess of 50%, potentially as high as 90%, by choosing
the proper operating conditions. By applying the proper negative bias
voltage to the grid terminal to provide the pulsed anode current of
different width with the angle θ, the anode current becomes equal to
zero, where the double angle 2θ represents a conduction angle of the
amplifying device [26]. In this case, a theoretical anode efficiency
approaches 100% when the conduction angle, during which the anode
current flows, reduces to zero, with starting efficiency of 50%
corresponding to the conduction angle of 360° or 100% duty ratio.
Generally, power amplifiers can be classified in three classes according
to their mode of operation: linear mode, in which the amplifier’s operation
is confined to the substantially linear portion of the active device
characteristic curve; critical mode, in which the anode current ceases to
flow, but operation extends beyond the linear portion up to the saturation
and cutoff regions; and nonlinear mode, in which the anode current
ceases to flow during a portion of each cycle, with a duration that
depends on the grid bias [27]. When high efficiency is required, power
amplifiers of the third class are employed since the presence of harmonics
contributes to the attainment of high efficiencies. To suppress harmonics
of the fundamental frequency to deliver a sinusoidal signal to the load, a
parallel resonant circuit can be used in the load network, which bypasses
harmonics through a low-impedance path and, by virtue of its resonance
to the fundamental, receives energy at that frequency. At the very
beginning of the 1930s, power amplifiers operating in the first two classes
with a 100% duty ratio were called Class A power amplifiers, whereas
power amplifiers operating in the third class with a 50% duty ratio were
considered Class B power amplifiers [28].
To analytically determine the operating classes of a power amplifier,
consider the simple resistive stage shown in Figure 2.17, where Lch is the
ideal choke inductor with zero series resistance and infinite reactance at
the operating frequency, Cb is the dc-blocking capacitor with infinite value

having zero reactance at the operating frequency, and RL is the load
resistor. The dc supply voltage Vcc is applied to both plates of the dc-
blocking capacitor, being constant during the entire signal period. The
active device behaves as an ideal voltage- or current-controlled current
source having zero saturation resistance.
Figure 2.17 Voltage and current waveforms in Class A operation.
Let us assume the input signal to be in a cosine form of
 (2.67)
where Vb is the input dc bias voltage. The operating point must be fixed
at the middle point of the linear part of the device transfer characteristic
with Vin ≤ Vb − Vp, where Vp is the device pinch-off voltage. Usually, to
simplify an analysis of the power amplifier operation, the device transfer
characteristic is represented by a piecewise-linear approximation. As a

result, the output current is cosinusoidal:
 (2.68)
with the quiescent current Iq greater or equal to the collector current
amplitude I. In this case, the output collector current contains only two
components—dc and cosine—and the averaged current magnitude is
equal to a quiescent current or dc component Iq.
The output voltage v across the device collector represents a sum of the
dc supply voltage Vcc and cosine voltage vR across the load resistor RL.
Consequently, greater output current i results in greater voltage vR across
the load resistor RL and smaller output voltage v across the device
output. Thus, for a purely real load impedance ZL = RL, the collector
voltage v is shifted by 180° relative to the input voltage vin and can be
written as
 (2.69)
where V is the output voltage amplitude.
Substituting (2.68) into (2.69) yields
 (2.70)
where RL = V/I, and (2.70) can be rewritten as
 (2.71)
which determines a linear dependence of the collector current versus
collector voltage. Such a combination of the cosine collector voltage and
current waveforms is known as a Class A operating mode. In practice,
because of the device’s inherent nonlinearities, it is necessary to connect
a parallel LC circuit with resonant frequency equal to the operating
frequency to suppress any possible harmonic components.
Circuit theory prescribes that the collector efficiency η can be written as
 (2.72)
where P0 = IqVcc is the dc output power, P = 0.5IV is the power

delivered to the load resistance RL at the fundamental frequency f0, and ξ
= V/Vcc is the collector voltage peak factor.
Then, by assuming the ideal conditions of zero saturation voltage when
ξ = 1 and maximum output current amplitude when I/Iq = 1, from (2.72)
it follows that the maximum collector efficiency in a Class A operating
mode is equal to η = 50%. However, as also follows from (2.72),
increasing the value of I/Iq can further increase the collector efficiency.
This leads to a step-by-step nonlinear transformation of the current cosine
waveform to its pulsed waveform when the amplitude of the collector
current exceeds zero value during only a part of the entire signal period.
In this case, an active device is operated in the active region followed by
the operation in the pinch-off region when the collector current is zero, as
shown in Figure 2.18. As a result, the frequency spectrum at the device
output will generally contain the second-, third-, and higher-order
harmonics of the fundamental frequency. However, due to the high
quality factor of the parallel resonant LC circuit, only the fundamental-
frequency signal flows to the load, while the short-circuit conditions are
fulfilled for higher-order harmonic components. Therefore, ideally the
collector voltage represents a purely sinusoidal waveform with the
voltage amplitude V ≤ Vcc.

Figure 2.18 Voltage and current waveforms in Class B operation.
Analytically such an operation can be written as
 (2.73)
where the conduction angle 2θ is the angle of a current flow indicating
the part of the RF current cycle, for which device conduction occurs and
determines the moment when output current i(ωt) takes a zero value
[29]. At this moment
 (2.74)
and half the conduction angle θ can be calculated by
 (2.75)
As a result, the basic definitions for the nonlinear operating modes of a
power amplifier through half the conduction angle θ can be introduced as
follows:

When θ > 90°, then cosθ < 0 and Iq > 0, corresponding to Class AB
operation.
When θ = 90°, then cosθ = 0 and Iq = 0, corresponding to Class B
operation.
When θ < 90°, then cosθ > 0 and Iq < 0, corresponding to Class C
operation.
The periodic pulsed output current i(ωt) can be written as a Fourier-
series expansion
 (2.76)
where the dc and fundamental-frequency components can be obtained,
respectively, by
 (2.77)
 (2.78)
where
 (2.79)
 (2.80)
are the current coefficients for the dc and fundamental-frequency
components, respectively [30, 31].
From (2.77) it follows that the dc current component is a function of θ in
the operating modes where θ < 180°, in contrast to a Class A operating
mode where θ = 180° and the dc current is equal to the quiescent current
during the entire period.
The collector efficiency of a power amplifier with a shunt resonant
circuit, biased to operate in the nonlinear modes, can be obtained by
 (2.81)
which is a function of θ only, where

 (2.82)
The Class B power amplifiers had been defined as those which operate
with a negative grid bias such that the anode current is practically zero
with no excitation grid voltage, and in which the output power is
proportional to the square of the excitation voltage [32]. If ξ = 1 and θ =
90°, then from (2.81) and (2.82) it follows that the maximum collector
efficiency in the Class B operating mode is equal to
The fundamental-frequency power delivered to the load PL = P1 is
defined as
 (2.83)
showing its direct dependence on the conduction angle 2θ. This means
that reduction in θ results in lower γ1, and, to increase the fundamental-
frequency power P1, it is necessary to increase the current amplitude I.
Since the current amplitude I is determined by the input voltage
amplitude Vin, the input power Pin must be increased. The collector
efficiency also increases with a reduced value for θ and becomes
maximum when θ = 0°, where the ratio γ1/γ0 is maximal, as follows from
2.82. For example, the collector efficiency η increases from 78.5% to 92%
when θ is reduced from 90° to 60°. However, it requires the input voltage
amplitude Vin to be increased by 2.5 times, resulting in lower values of
the power-added efficiency (PAE), which is defined as
 (2.84)
where GP = P1/Pin is the operating power gain.
Class C power amplifiers had been defined as those that operate with a
negative grid bias more than sufficient to reduce the anode current to
zero with no excitation grid voltage, and in which the output power varies
as the square of the anode voltage between limits [32]. The main
distinction between Class B and Class C amplifiers is in the duration of the
output current pulses, which are shorter for Class C amplifiers when the

active device is biased beyond the pinch-off point. To achieve the
maximum anode efficiency in Class C amplifiers, the active device should
be biased (negative) considerably lower than the pinch-off point to
provide sufficiently low conduction angles [33].
To obtain an acceptable trade-off between a high power gain and a
high power-added efficiency in different situations, the conduction angle
should be chosen within the range of 120° ≤ 2θ ≤ 190°. If it is necessary
to provide high collector efficiency for the active device having a high-gain
capability, then a Class C operating mode must be chosen with θ close to
60°. However, when the input power is limited and power gain is not
sufficient, a Class AB operating mode with small quiescent current when θ
is slightly greater than 90° is recommended. In the latter case, the
linearity of the power amplifier can be significantly improved. From (2.82)
it follows that the ratio of the fundamental-frequency component of the
anode current to the dc current is a function of θ only, which means that,
if the operating angle is maintained constant, the fundamental
component of the anode current will replicate linearly to the variation of
the dc current, thus providing linear operation of Class C power amplifiers
when dc current is directly proportional to the grid voltage [34].
2.5 Nonlinear Active Device Models
Generally, for an accurate power amplifier simulation and matching circuit
design for different operating frequencies and output power levels, it is
necessary to represent an active device in the form of a nonlinear
equivalent circuit. This circuit can adequately describe the small- and
large-signal electrical behavior of the power amplifier up to the device
transition frequency fT and higher to its maximum frequency fmax that
allows a sufficient number of harmonic components to be taken into
account. Accurate device modeling is extremely important to develop
monolithic integrated circuits. Better approximations of the final design
can only be achieved if the nonlinear device behavior is described
accurately.
2.5.1 LDMOSFETs
Figure 2.19(a) shows the cross section of the physical structure of a
laterally-diffused metal oxide semiconductor FET (LDMOSFET) device
where a heavily doped p+-sinker is inserted between the top source and

p+-substrate (source grounding) for low resistivity to provide high-current
flow between the drain and source terminals [35]. The lightly doped p-
epilayer and n-drift layer are required to provide sufficient distance
between regions to prevent latch-up (forward-biased p-n diodes) and for
drain-source breakdown protection. The parasitic gate-drain capacitance
is directly related to the overlap of the gate oxide onto the heavily doped
n+-source region. To describe accurately the nonlinear properties of the
large-size MOSFET device, it is necessary to consider its two-dimensional
gate-distributed nature along both the channel length and channel width,
resulting in lower values for the intrinsic series gate and shunt gate-
source 
resistances. Figure 2.19(b) shows the nonlinear MOSFET
equivalent circuit with extrinsic parasitic elements, which can properly
describe the nonlinear behavior of both VDMOSFET and LDMOSFET
devices [36, 37].

Figure 2.19 Nonlinear LDMOSFET model and its physical structure.
The nonlinear current source i(vgs, vds, τ) as a function of the input
gate-source and output drain-source voltages incorporating a self-heating
effect can be described accurately enough using hyperbolic functions [37,
38]. A careful analytical description of the transition from the quadratic
region to the linear region of the device transfer characteristic provides
for a more accurate prediction of intermodulation distortion [39]. The
overall channel carrier transit time τ also includes the effect of the
transcapacitance required for charge conservation. The drain-source
capacitance Cds and gate-drain capacitance Cgd are considered to be the
junction capacitances and they strongly depend on the drain-source
voltage. The extrinsic parasitic elements are represented by the gate and
drain bondwire inductances Lg and Ld, source inductance Ls, source and

drain bulk and ohmic resistances Rs and Rd, and gate contact and ohmic
resistance Rg. The effect of the gate-source channel resistance Rgs
becomes significant at higher frequencies close to the transition frequency
fT = gm/2πCgs, where gm is the device transconductance. To account for
the self-heating effect and substrate losses, a special four-port thermal
circuit and a series combination of the resistance and capacitance
between the external drain and source terminals can be included [40].
An empirical nonlinear model developed for silicon LDMOS transistors,
which is single-piece and continuously differentiable, can be written as
 (2.85)
where
where
λ = drain current slope parameter
β = transconductance parameter
Vth0 = forward threshold voltage
Vst = subthreshold slope coefficient
VT = temperature voltage
Iss = forward diode leakage current
VBR = breakdown voltage
K1, K2, M1, M2, M3 = breakdown parameters

VK, VGexp, Δ, γ = gate-source voltage parameters [38].
The gate-source capacitance Cgs can be analytically described as a
function of the gate-source voltage since it is practically independent on
the drain-source voltage. It is equal to the oxide capacitance Cox in the
accumulation region, significantly reduces in the depletion region, slightly
decreases and reaches its minimum in the weak-inversion region, then
significantly increases in the moderate-inversion region, and becomes
practically constant in the strong-inversion or saturation region, as shown
i n Figure 2.20 [41]. The approximation function for the gate-source
capacitance Cgs as the dependence of Vgs can be derived by using two
components containing the hyperbolic functions as
 (2.86)
where Cgs1, Cgs2, Cgs3, Cgs4, Cgs5, and Cgs6 are the approximation
parameters [38].
Figure 2.20 Gate-source capacitance versus gate-source voltage.
The gate-source resistance Rgs is determined by the effect of the
channel inertia in responding to rapid changes of the time varying gate-
source voltage, and varies in such a manner that the charging time τg =
RgsCgs remains approximately constant. Thus, the increase of Rgs in the

velocity saturation region, when the channel conductivity decreases, is
partially compensated for by the decrease of Cgs due to nonuniform
channel charge distribution [42]. The effect of Rgs becomes significant at
higher frequencies close to the transition frequency fT of the MOSFET and
can be neglected when designing RF circuits that operate below 2 GHz, as
used for commercial wireless applications [43, 44].
2.5.2 GaAs MESFETs and GaN HEMTs
Adequate representation for metal-semiconductor field effect transistors
(MESFETs) and high electron mobility transfers (HEMTs) in a frequency
range up to at least 25 GHz can be provided using the nonlinear model
shown in Figure 2.21(a), which is very similar to a nonlinear MOSFET
model [45, 46]. The intrinsic model is described by the channel charging
resistance Rgs, which represents the resistive path for the charging of the
gate-source capacitance Cgs, feedback gate-drain capacitance Cgd, and
drain-source capacitance Cds with the gate-source diode to model the
forward conduction current igs(vgs) and gate-drain diode to account for
the gate-drain avalanche current igd(vgs, vds), which can occur at large-
signal operating conditions. The gate-source capacitance Cgs and gate-
drain capacitance Cgd represent the charge depletion region and can be
treated as the voltage-dependent Schottky-barrier diode capacitances,
being the nonlinear functions of the gate-source voltage vgs and drain-
source voltage vds. For negative gate-source voltage and small drain-
source voltage, these capacitances are practically equal.

Figure 2.21 Nonlinear MESFET and HEMT model with HEMT physical structures.
However, when the drain-source voltage is increased beyond the
current saturation point, the gate-drain capacitance Cgd is much more
heavily back-biased than the gate-source capacitance Cgs. Therefore, the
gate-source capacitance Cgs is significantly more important and usually
dominates the input impedance of the MESFET or HEMT device. The
influence of the drain-source capacitance Cds on the device behavior is
insignificant and its value is bias independent. The capacitance Cdsd and
resistance Rdsd model the dispersion of the MESFET or HEMT current-
voltage characteristics due to a trapping effect in the device channel,
which leads to discrepancies between the dc and S-parameter
measurements at higher frequencies [47, 48]. A large-signal model for
monolithic power amplifier design must be accurate for all operating
conditions. In addition, the model parameters should be easily extractable
and the model must be as simple as possible.
Various nonlinear MESFET and HEMT models with different complexity

are available, and each one can be considered sufficiently accurate for a
particular application. For example, although the Materka model does not
fulfill charge conservation, it seems to be an acceptable compromise
between accuracy and model simplicity for MESFETs, but not for HEMTs,
where it is preferable to use the Angelov model [49, 50]. For example, it
can be used to predict the large-signal behavior of pHEMT devices using
high-power, high-efficiency 60-GHz monolithic microwave integrated
circuits (MMICs) [51]. By using three additional terms of the gate power-
series function in the Angelov model, better accuracy can be achieved for
large-signal modeling of AlGaN/GaN HEMT devices on a SiC substrate
[52]. This model can also be improved by incorporating two additional
analytical expressions to model device behavior in the saturation region
[53].
Figure 2.21(b) shows the cross section of the physical structure of an
InGaAs/AlGaAs HEMT device, in which an undoped InGaAs n-epilayer is
used as a channel and two heavily n-doped AlGaAs layers with a high
energetic barrier for holes are necessary to maximize high electron
mobility in the channel. In this case, spacing between the AlGaAs layer
and InGaAs channel is optimized to achieve high breakdown voltage. An
example of the physical structure of a AlGaN/GaN HEMT device is shown
i n Figure 2.21(c), where an undoped AlGaN n-epilayer is used as a
channel, an n-type doped GaN layer can suppress dispersion in the device
current-voltage characteristics, and a SiN passivation layer with optimized
parameters contributes to a lower-trap device structure [54]. The thermal
conductivity of GaN HEMT devices is improved by using a SiC substrate.
Note that use of GaN-based technology results in a higher breakdown
voltage, wider bandwidth, and higher efficiency for power amplifiers due
to the high charge density and the ability to operate at higher voltages for
GaN HEMT devices, which are characterized by lower output capacitance
and on-resistance [55, 56].
The basic electrical properties of a MESFET or HEMT device can be
characterized by the admittance Y-parameters expressed through the
device intrinsic small-signal equivalent circuit as
 (2.87)

where gm is the device transconductance and Rds is the differential drain-
source resistance [37]. In this case, the dispersion effect, which is
important at higher frequencies and modeled by Cdsd and Rdsd, cannot
be taken into account.
By separating the Y-parameters given in (2.87) into their real and
imaginary parts, the elements of the small-signal equivalent circuit can be
analytically determined as
 (2.88)
 (2.89)
 (2.90)
 (2.91)
 (2.92)
 (2.93)
 (2.94)
which are valid for a wide frequency range up to the transition frequency
fT [57]. Assuming that all extrinsic parasitic elements are known, the only
problem is then to determine the admittance Y-parameters of the intrinsic
two-port network from on-bias experimental data [58]. Consecutive steps
shown in Figure 2.22 can represent such a determination procedure [59]:
Measure the S-parameters of the extrinsic device.
Transform 
the S-parameters to the impedance Z-parameters with
subtraction of the series inductances Lg and Ld.
Transform the impedance Z-parameters to the admittance Y-parameters

with subtraction of parallel capacitances Cgp and Cdp.
Transform the admittance Y-parameters to the impedance Z-parameters
with subtraction of series resistances Rg, Rs, Rd, and inductance Ls.
Transform the impedance Z-parameters to the admittance Y-parameters
of the intrinsic device two-port network.
A simple and accurate nonlinear Angelov model is capable of modeling
the drain current-voltage characteristics and its derivatives, as well as the
gate-source and gate-drain capacitances, for different submicron gate-
length HEMT devices and commercially available MESFETs. The drain
current source is described by using the hyperbolic functions as
 (2.95)
where Ipk is the drain current at maximum transconductance with the
contribution from the output conductance subtracted, λ is the channel-
length modulation parameter, and α = α0 + α1 tanhψ is the saturation
voltage parameter, where α0 is the saturation voltage parameter at
pinch-off and α1 is the saturation voltage parameter at Vgs > 0. The
parameter ψ is a power-series function centered at Vpk with the bias
voltage Vgs as a variable,
 (2.96)
where Vpk is the gate voltage for maximum transconductance gmpk. The
model parameters as a first approximation can be easily obtained from
the experimental Ids(Vgs, Vds) curves at a saturated channel condition
when all higher terms in ψ are assumed to be zero and λ is the slope of
the Ids-Vds characteristic.

Figure 2.22 Method for extracting device intrinsic Z-parameters.
The same hyperbolic functions can be used to model the intrinsic device
capacitances Cgs and Cds. When an accuracy of 5% to 10% is sufficient,

the gate-source capacitance Cgs and gate-drain capacitance Cgd can be
described by
 (2.97)
 (2.98)
where the product P1ccVgsVds reflects the cross-coupling of Vgs and Vds
o n Cgd and the coefficients P1gsg, P1gsd, P1gdg, and P1gdd are the
fitting parameters.
2.5.3 Low-Voltage and High-Voltage HBTs
Figure 2.23(a) shows the modified Gummel-Poon nonlinear model of the
bipolar transistor with extrinsic parasitic elements [60, 61]. Such a
hybrid-π equivalent circuit can model the nonlinear electrical behavior of
bipolar junction transistors (BJTs), in particularly heterojunction bipolar
transistor (HBT) devices, with sufficient accuracy up to about 20 GHz. The
intrinsic model is described by the dynamic diode resistance rπ, the total
base-emitter junction capacitance and base charging diffusion capacitance
Cπ, the base-collector diode required to account for the nonlinear effects
at the saturation, the internal collector-base junction capacitance Cci, the
external distributed collector-base capacitance Cco, the collector-emitter
capacitance Cce, and the nonlinear current source i(vbe, vce). The lateral
and base semiconductor resistances underneath the base contact and the
base semiconductor resistance underneath the emitter are combined into
a base-spreading resistance rb. The extrinsic parasitic elements are
represented by the base bondwire inductance Lb, emitter ohmic
resistance re, emitter inductance Le, collector ohmic resistance rc, and
collector bondwire inductance Lc. To increase the usable operating
frequency range of the device up to 50 GHz, it is necessary to include the
collector current delay time τ in the collector current source as gm
exp(−jωτ). The more complicated models, such as VBIC, HICUM, or
MEXTRAM, include the effects of self-heating of a bipolar transistor; take
into account the parasitic p-n-p transistor formed by the base, collector,
and substrate regions; provide an improved description of depletion
capacitances at large forward bias; and take into account avalanche and

tunneling currents and other nonlinear effects corresponding to distributed
high-frequency effects [62].
Figure 2.23(b) shows the modified version of a bipolar transistor
equivalent circuit, where Cc = Cco + Cci, rb1 = rbCci/Cc, and rb2 =
rbCco/Cc [63]. Such an equivalent circuit becomes possible due to an
equivalent π- to T-transformation of the elements rb, Cco, and Cci and a
condition rb << (Cci + Cco)/ωCciCco, which is usually fulfilled over a
frequency range close to the device maximum frequency fmax. Then,
from a comparison of the transistor nonlinear models, for a bipolar
transistor in Figure 4.13(b), for a MOSFET device in Figure 4.9(b), and for
a MESFET device in Figure 4.11(a), it is easy to detect the circuit similarity
of all these equivalent circuits, which means that the basic circuit design
procedure is very similar for any type of bipolar or field-effect transistor.
The main difference is in the device physics and values of the model
parameters. However, techniques for representation of the input and
output impedances, stability analysis based on feedback effect, derivation
of power gain, and efficiency are very similar.

Figure 2.23 Nonlinear BJT and HBT models and HBT physical structure.
The cross section of a physical structure of an AlGaAs/GaAs HBT device
is shown in Figure 2.23(c), with a heavily p-doped base to reduce base
resistance and a lightly n-doped emitter to minimize emitter capacitance
[64]. The lightly n-doped collector region allows the collector-base

junction to sustain relatively high voltages without breaking down. The
forward-bias emitter-injection efficiency is very high since the wider-
bandgap AlGaAs emitter injects electrons into the GaAs p-base at lower
energy level, but the holes are prevented from flowing into the emitter by
a high energy barrier, thus resulting in the ability to decrease base length
and base-width modulation, and increase frequency response. By using a
wide bandgap InGaP layer instead of an AlGaAs one, the device
performance over temperature can be improved [65]. The high-linearity
power performance in a Class AB condition at the backoff power level, the
ruggedness under mismatch and overdrive conditions, and the long
lifetime of InGaP/GaAs HBT technology makes it very attractive for 28V
power amplifier applications [66].
The growth process used for a high-voltage HBT device is identical to
the process used for the conventional low-voltage HBT device, which is
widely used in handset power amplifiers, except for changes to the
collector because of the higher voltage operating requirements. The
epitaxial growth process starts with a highly doped n-type collector layer
and a lightly n-doped collector drift region, then followed by a heavily
doped p-type base layer and an InGaP emitter layer, and finishes with an
InGaAs cap layer [67]. As a result, the high-voltage HBT devices exhibit
collector-base breakdown voltages higher than 70V.
The bipolar transistor intrinsic Y-parameters can be written as
 (2.99)
where rce is the output Early resistance that models the effect of the
base-width modulation on the transistor characteristics due to variations
in the collector-base depletion region.
After separating the Y-parameters given in (2.99) into their real and
imaginary parts, the elements of the intrinsic small-signal equivalent
circuit can be determined analytically as [68]
 (2.100)
 (2.101)

 (2.102)
 (2.103)
 (2.104)
 (2.105)
A simple nonlinear HBT model for computer-aided simulations can be
based on representation of the collector current source through the power
series and diffusion capacitances through the hyperbolic functions [69].
To equivalently represent the input impedance of a bipolar transistor, we
need to take into account that Cce is usually much smaller than Cc. As a
result, the equivalent output capacitance can be defined as Cout ≅ Cc.
The input equivalent resistance Rin can approximately be represented by
the base resistance rb, while the input equivalent capacitance can be
defined as Cin ≅ Cπ + Cc. The feedback effect of the collector capacitance
Cc through Cco and Cci is sufficiently high when load variations are
directly transferred to the device input with a significant extent.
2.6 DC Biasing
The simplest way to provide a proper dc biasing condition for a power
MOSFET device in Class A or Class AB operation is to use the
potentiometer-type voltage divider for the gate bias and choke inductor in
the drain circuit, as shown in Figure 2.24(a). However, in this case, any
variations of the ambient temperature or bias voltage will lead to
variations of quiescent current and, as a result, to appropriate variations
of the output power, linearity, drain efficiency, and gain of the power
amplifier. The threshold voltage Vth of the MOSFET transistor varies with
temperature T linearly with the approximate velocity of ΔVt h /ΔT ≅ −2
mV/°C. But simply adding a diode (or diode-connected MOSFET) in series
to the variable resistor allows the quiescent current variation to be
reduced substantially over temperature. A bias circuit corresponding to
this stabilizing condition is shown in Figure 2.24(b). For a high value of

Vth, several diodes can be connected in series. The reason to use such a
simple bias circuit for power MOSFET biasing is that its dc gate current is
equal to the gate leakage current only.
Figure 2.24 MOSFETs with simple bias circuits.
In contrast to MOSFET devices, where it may be possible to choose the
optimum operating point with a practically zero temperature coefficient or
to be limited to just an additional diode only, bipolar transistors require
the more complicated approach of dc biasing depending on a class of
operation. For example, in Class AB operation, the bias circuit has to
deliver a dc voltage, which is slightly adjustable approximately within
limits of 0.7V to 0.8V using a wide range of current values to stabilize the
base current of the RF bipolar transistor. In addition, it is necessary to
provide an operating mode for the power amplifier with temperature
compensation (collector current stabilization over temperature) and
minimum possible reference current (dc current from the reference dc
voltage supply). One of the simplest versions of such a bias circuit with
silicon diode temperature compensation is shown in Figure 2.25(a). In this
bias circuit, each silicon diode can be replaced by the n-p-n diode-
connected transistor, the collector and the base of which are directly
connected between each other.

Figure 2.25 Typical bipolar Class AB bias circuits.
A better temperature-compensating result can be achieved using the
same transistors for RF and dc paths, only with reduced area sizes for bias
circuit devices. Such an approach is usually used in monolithic integrated
circuit design when transistor cells with different area sizes are used for
both RF power device and bias circuit transistors. Figure 2.25(b) shows
the temperature and supply independent bias circuit, which is composed
of the current driving transistor Q4 and the compensation circuit including
the diode-connected transistors Q1 and Q2, compensating transistor Q3,
and resistors R1 and R2 [70]. By providing the same values for R1 and R2,
the InGaP/GaAs MMIC power amplifier for wideband code division multiple
access (WCDMA) applications provides the quiescent current variations of
only 6% for the temperature range of −30°C to 90°C and 8.5% for the
supply voltage range of 2.9V to 3.1V, with variations in the power gain of
less than ±0.8 dB at the output power of 28 dBm.
Figure 2.26 shows the emitter-follower bias circuit that provides
temperature 
compensation 
and 
minimizing 
reference 
current
requirements [71]. The emitter follower bias circuit requires only several
tens of microamperes of reference current, whereas the current-mirror
bias circuit requires a few milliamperes of reference current. Both the
current-mirror and emitter-follower bias circuits have similar current-
voltage behavior but, for the same circuit parameters (R0, R1, and R2)
and device areas for Q0, Q1, and Q2, the emitter follower bias circuit is

less sensitive to the reference voltage variations compared with a current-
mirror bias circuit. Variations in the collector supply voltage Vcc for limits
of 3.0V to 5.0V have no effect on the quiescent current set by the
reference voltage Vref.
Figure 2.26 Bipolar power amplifier stage with emitter-follower bias circuit.
2.7 Impedance Transformers and Power Combiners
The transmission-line transformers and combiners can provide very wide
operating bandwidths and operate up to frequencies of 3 GHz and higher
[72, 73]. They are widely used in matching networks for antennas and
power amplifiers in the HF and VHF bands, as well as in mixer circuits,
and their low losses make them especially useful in high-power circuits
[74, 75]. Typical structures for transmission-line transformers consist of
parallel wires, coaxial cables, or bifilar twisted wire pairs. In the latter
case, the characteristic impedance can easily be determined by the wire
diameter, the insulation thickness, and, to some extent, by the twisting
pitch [76, 77]. For coaxial cable transformers with correctly chosen
characteristic impedance, the theoretical high-frequency bandwidth limit
is reached when the cable length comes on the order of a half
wavelength, with the overall achievable bandwidth being about a decade.
By introducing low-loss high-permeability ferrites alongside a good-quality

semirigid coaxial or symmetrical strip cable, the low frequency limit can
be significantly improved, providing bandwidths of several or more
decades.
The concept of a broadband impedance transformer consisting of a pair
of interconnected transmission lines was first disclosed and described by
Guanella [78, 79]. Figure 2.27(a) shows the Guanella transformer system
with a transmission-line character achieved by an arrangement
comprising one pair of cylindrical coils that is wound in the same sense
and spaced a certain distance apart by an intervening dielectric. In this
case, one cylindrical coil is located inside the insulating cylinder and the
other coil is located on the outside of this cylinder.
Figure 2.27 Schematic configurations of Guanella (a) 1:1 and (b) 4:1 transformers.
For the currents flowing through both windings in opposite directions,
the corresponding flux in the coil axis is negligibly small. However, for the
currents flowing in the same direction through both coils, the latter may
be assumed to be connected in parallel, and a coil pair represents a
considerable inductance for such currents and acts like a choke coil. With

terminal 4 being grounded, such a 1:1 transformer provides matching of a
balanced source to an unbalanced load and is called a balun (balanced-
to-unbalanced transformer). In this case, if terminal 2 is grounded, it
simply represents a delay line. In a particular case, when terminals 2 and
3 are grounded, the transformer performs as a phase inverter. The series-
parallel connection of a plurality of coil pairs can produce a match
between unequal source and load resistances. Figure 2.27(b) shows a 4:1
impedance (2:1 voltage) transmission-line transformer where the two
pairs of cylindrical transmission-line coils are connected in series at the
input and in parallel at the output. For the characteristic impedance Z0 of
each transmission line, this results in two times higher impedance 2Z0 at
the input and two times lower impedance Z0/2 at the output. By
grounding terminal 4, such a 4:1 impedance transformer provides
impedance matching of the balanced source to the unbalanced load. In
this case, when terminal 2 is grounded, it performs as a 4:1 unun
(unbalanced-to-unbalanced 
transformer). 
With 
a 
series-parallel
connection of n coil pairs with the characteristic impedance Z0 each, the
input impedance is equal to nZ0 and the output impedance is equal to
Z0/n. Because a Guanella transformer adds voltages that have equal
delays through the transmission lines, such a technique results in the so
called equal-delay transmission-line transformers.
The simplest transmission-line transformer represents a quarterwave
transmission line whose characteristic impedance is chosen to give the
correct impedance transformation. However, this transformer provides a
narrowband performance valid only around frequencies for which the
transmission line is odd multiples of a quarter-wavelength. If a ferrite
sleeve is added to the transmission line, common-mode currents flowing
in both transmission-line inner and outer conductors in phase and in the
same direction are suppressed and the load may be balanced and floating
above ground [80, 81]. If the characteristic impedance of the transmission
line is equal to the terminating impedances, the transmission is inherently
broadband. If not, there will be a dip in the response at the frequency, at
which the transmission line is a quarter-wavelength long.
A coaxial cable transformer, the physical configuration and equivalent
circuit representation of which are shown in Figures 2.28(a) and (b),
respectively, consists of the coaxial line arranged inside the ferrite core or
wound around the ferrite core. Due to its practical configuration, the

coaxial cable transformer takes a position between the lumped and
distributed systems. Therefore, at lower frequencies its equivalent circuit
represents a conventional low-frequency transformer [Figure 2.28(c)],
whereas at higher frequencies it is a transmission line with the
characteristic impedance Z0 [Figure 2.28(d)]. The advantage of such a
transformer is that the parasitic interturn capacitance determines its
characteristic impedance, whereas in the conventional wire-wound
transformer with discrete windings, this parasitic capacitance negatively
contributes to the transformer frequency performance.
Figure 2.28 Schematic configurations of coaxial cable transformer.
When RS = RL = Z0, the transmission line can be considered a
transformer with a 1:1 impedance transformation. To avoid any resonant
phenomena, especially for complex loads, which can contribute to
significant output power variations, as a general rule, the length l of the
transmission line is kept to no more than an eighth of a wavelength λmin
at the highest operating frequency, that is, l ≤ λmin/8, where λmin is the
minimum wavelength in the transmission line corresponding to the high
operating frequency fmax.
The low-frequency bandwidth limit of a coaxial cable transformer is

determined by the effect of the magnetizing inductance Lm of the outer
surface of the outer conductor according to the equivalent low-frequency
transformer model shown in Figure 2.29(a), where the transmission line is
represented by the ideal 1:1 transformer [75]. The resistance R0
represents the losses of the transmission line. An approximation to the
magnetizing inductance can be made by considering the outer surface of
the coaxial cable to be the same as that of a straight wire (or linear
conductor) that, at higher frequencies where the skin effect causes the
current to be concentrated on the outer surface, would have the self-
inductance defined by
 (2.106)
where l is the length of the coaxial cable in centimeters and r is the radius
of the outer surface of the outer conductor in centimeters [75].
High permeability of core materials results in shorter transmission lines.
If a toroid is used for the core, the magnetizing inductance Lm is obtained
by
 (2.107)
where
n = number of turns
μ = core permeability
Ae = effective cross-sectional area of the core (cm2)
Le = average magnetic path length (cm) [82].
By considering the transformer equivalent circuit shown in Figure
2.29(a), the ratio between the power delivered to the load PL and power
available at the source 
 when RS = RL, can be obtained from
 (2.108)
which gives the minimum operating frequency fmin for a given
magnetizing inductance Lm as

 (2.109)
when taking into account the maximum decrease of the output power by
3 dB.
Figure 2.29 Low-frequency models of 1:1 coaxial cable transformer.
A similar low-frequency model for a coaxial cable transformer using
twisted or parallel wires is shown in Figure 2.29(b) [75]. Here, the model
is symmetrical because both conductors are exposed to any magnetic
material and therefore contribute identically to the losses and low-
frequency performance of the transformer.
An approach using the transmission line based on a single bifilar wound
coil to realize a broadband 1:4 impedance transformation was introduced
by Ruthroff [83, 84]. In this case, by using a core material of sufficiently
high permeability, the number of turns can be significantly reduced.
Figure 2.30(a) shows the circuit schematic of an unbalanced-to-
unbalanced 1:4 transmission-line transformer, where terminal 4 is
connected to input terminal 1. As a result, for V = V1 = V2, the output
voltage is twice the input voltage, and the transformer has a 1:2 voltage
step-up ratio. Because the ratio of input voltage to input current is one-
fourth the load voltage to load current, the transformer is fully matched
for maximum power transfer when RL = 4RS, and the transmission-line

characteristic impedance Z0 is equal to the geometric mean of the source
and load impedances,
 (2.110)
where RS is the source resistance and RL is the load resistance. Figure
2.30(b) shows the impedance transformer acting as a phase inverter,
where the load resistance is included between terminals 1 and 4 to
become a 1:4 balun. This technique is called the bootstrap effect, which
does not have the same high-frequency response as the Guanella equal-
delay approach because it adds a delayed voltage to a direct one [85].
The delay becomes excessive when the transmission line reaches a
significant fraction of a wavelength.
Figure 2.30 Schematic configurations of Ruthroff 1:4 impedance transformer.
Figure 2.31(a) shows the physical implementation of a 4:1 impedance
Ruthroff transformer using a coaxial cable arranged inside the ferrite core.
At lower frequencies, such a transformer can be considered an ordinary

2:1 voltage autotransformer. The insertion loss for a broadband 4:1
impedance transformer, as a function of the transmission-line electrical
length θ, can be calculated from
 (2.111)
where PS is the maximum available power from the source with internal
resistance RS and PL is the power delivered to load RL [83, 86]. For a
matched transformer when RL = 4RS and Z0 = 2RS, (2.111) reduces to
 (2.112)
To improve the performance at higher frequencies, it is necessary to
add an additional phase-compensating line of the same length, as shown
i n Figure 2.31(b), resulting in a Guanella ferrite-based 4:1 impedance
transformer. In this case, a ferrite core is necessary only for the upper line
because the outer conductor of the lower line is grounded at both ends,
and no current is flowing through it. A current I driven into the inner
conductor of the upper line produces a current I that flows in the outer
conductor of the upper line, resulting in a current 2I flowing into load RL.
Because the voltage 2V from the transformer input is divided in two equal
parts between the coaxial line and the load, such a transformer provides
an impedance transformation from RS = 2Z0 into RL = Z0/2, where Z0 is
the characteristic impedance of each coaxial line. The bandwidth
extension for the Ruthroff transformers can also be achieved by using the
transmission lines with a step function and exponential changes in their
characteristic impedances [87, 88]. To adopt this transmission-line
transformer for microwave planar applications, the coaxial line can be
replaced by a pair of stacked strip conductors or coupled microstrip lines
[89, 90].

Figure 2.31 Schematic configurations of 4:1 coaxial cable transformer.
2.8 Directional Couplers
The four-port networks are used for directional power coupling when, for
a given input signal at port 1, the output signals are delivered to ports 2
and 3, and no power is delivered to port 4 (ideal case), as shown in
Figure 2.32.
Figure 2.32 Schematic diagram of directional coupler.
The scattering S-matrix of a reciprocal four-port network matched at all
its ports is given by

 (2.113)
whe re Sij = Sji for the symmetric scattering S-matrix when all
components are passive and reciprocal [91]. In this case, the power
supplied to input port 1 is coupled to the coupled port, port 3, with a
coupling factor 
 whereas the remainder of the input power is
delivered to the through port, port 2, with a coupling factor 
For a lossless four-port network, the unitary condition of the fully
matched S-matrix given by (2.113) results in
which implies a full isolation between ports 2 and 3 and ports 1 and 4,
respectively, when
and
The scattering S-matrix of such a directional coupler, matched at all its
ports with two decoupled two-port networks, reduces to
 (2.114)
The directional coupler can be classified according to the phase shift ϕ
between its two output ports 2 and 3 as the in-phase coupler with ϕ = 0,
quadrature coupler with ϕ = 90° or π/2, and out-of-phase coupler with ϕ
= 180° or π. The following important quantities are used to characterize
the directional coupler [91]:
The power-split ratio or power division ratio K2, which is calculated as
the ratio of powers at the output ports when all ports are nominally
(reflectionless) terminated:

The insertion loss C12, which is calculated as the ratio of powers at input
port 1 relative to output port 2:
The coupling C13, which is calculated as the ratio of powers at input port
1 relative to output port 3:
The directivity C34, which is calculated as the ratio of powers at output
port 3 relative to isolated port 4:
The isolation C14 and C23, which are calculated as the ratios of powers
at input port 1 relative to isolated port 4 and between the two output
ports (output port 2 is considered an input port), respectively:
The voltage standing wave ratio at each port or VSWRi, where i = 1, 2,
3, 4, which is calculated as
In an ideal case, the directional coupler would have an VSWRi = 1 at

each port, an insertion loss C12 = 3 dB, a coupling C13 = 3 dB, an infinite
isolation, and a directivity C14 = C23 = C34 = ∞.
The first directional couplers were composed of either a two-wire
balanced line coupled to a second balanced line along a distance of a
quarter-wavelength, or a pair of rods a quarter-wavelength long between
the ground planes [92]. Although the propagation of waves on systems of
parallel conductors was investigated many decades ago in connection
with the problem of crosstalk between open wire lines or cable pairs in
order to eliminate the natural coupling rather than use it, the first exact
design theory for transverse electromagnetic (TEM) transmission-line
couplers was introduced by Oliver [93]. In terms of the even and odd
electric-field modes describing a system of coupled conductors, it can be
stated that the coupling is backward with a coupled wave on the
secondary line propagating in the direction opposite to the direction of the
wave on the primary line; the directivity will be perfect with VSWR equal
to unity if 
 at all cross sections along the directional coupler;
and the midband voltage coupling coefficient C of the directional coupler
is defined as
 (2.115)
where C = 0 for zero coupling and C = 1 for completely superposed
transmission lines.
A coupled-line directional coupler, the stripline single-section topology
of which is shown in Figure 2.33(a), can be used for broadband power
dividing or combining. Its electrical properties are described using a
concept of two types of excitations for the coupled lines in TEM
approximation. In this case, for the even mode, the currents flowing in
the strip conductors are equal in amplitude and flow in the same
direction. The electric field has even symmetry about the center line, and
no current flows between the two strip conductors. For the odd mode, the
currents flowing in the strip conductors are equal in amplitude, but flow in
opposite directions. The electric field lines have an odd symmetry about
the center line, and a voltage null exists between these two strip
conductors. An arbitrary excitation of the coupled lines can always be
treated as a superposition of appropriate amplitudes of even and odd
modes. Therefore, the characteristic impedance for even excitation mode

Z0e and the characteristic impedance for the odd excitation mode Z0o
characterize the coupled lines.
Figure 2.33 Coupled-line directional couplers.
When the two coupled equal-striplines are used in a standard system
with characteristic impedance 
 then
 (2.116)
 (2.117)
An analysis in terms of the scattering S-parameters gives S11 = S14 =
0 for any electrical lengths of the coupled lines and output port 4 is
isolated from the matched input port, port 1. Changing the coupling

between the lines and their widths can change the characteristic
impedances Z0e and Z0o. In this case,
 (2.118)
 (2.119)
where θ is the electrical length of the coupled-line section.
The voltage-split ratio K is defined as the ratio between voltages at port
2 and port 3 as
 (2.120)
where K can be controlled by changing the coupling coefficient C and
electrical length θ.
For a quarter-wavelength-long coupler when θ = 90°, (2.118) and
(2.119) reduce to
 (2.121)
from which it follows that an equal voltage split between output ports 2
and 3 can be provided with C = 
If it is necessary to provide output ports 2 and 3 at one side, it is best
to use the construction of a microstrip directional coupler with crossed
bondwires, as shown in Figure 2.33(b). The strip crossover for a stripline
directional coupler can be easily achieved with the three-layer sandwich.
The microstrip 3-dB directional coupler fabricated on alumina substrate
for idealized zero strip thickness should have the calculated strip spacing
of less than 10 μm. Such a narrow value easily explains the great interest
in the construction of directional couplers with larger spacing.
One of the effective solutions is to use a tandem connection for the two
identical directional couplers, which alleviates the physical problem of
tight coupling, since two individual couplers need only 8.34-dB coupling to
achieve a 3-dB directional coupler [94, 95]. The tandem coupler shown in
Figure 2.33(c) has the electrical properties of the individual coupler when
output ports 1, 4 and 2, 3 are isolated in pairs, and the phase difference
between output ports 2 and 3 is 90°.
From an analysis of the signal propagation from input port 1 to output

ports 2 and 3 of the tandem coupler, when the signal from input port 1
propagates to output port 2 through traces 1-2′-1′-2 and 1-3′-4′-2, and
the signal flowing through traces 1-2′-1′-3 and 1-3′-4′-3 is delivered to
output port 3, the ratio of the scattering parameters 
 and 
 of a
tandem coupler can be expressed through the corresponding scattering
parameters S12 and S13 of the individual coupler as
 (2.122)
As a result, the signal at output port 2 overtakes the signal at output
port 3 by 90°. In this case, for a 3-dB tandem coupler with θ = 90°, the
magnitude of (2.122) must be equal to unity. Consequently, the required
voltage coupling coefficient is calculated as
or
As an example, a tandem 8.34-dB directional coupler has the
dimensions of W/h = 0.77 and S/h = 0.18 for alumina substrate with εr =
9.6, where W is the strip width, S is the strip spacing, and h is the
substrate thickness [96].
Another way to increase the coupling between the two edge-coupled
microstrip lines is to use several parallel narrow microstrip lines
interconnected with each other by the bondwires, as shown in Figure
2.34. For a Lange coupler like that shown in Figure 2.34(a), four coupled
microstrip lines are used, achieving 3-dB coupling over an octave or more
bandwidth [97]. In this case, the signal flowing to input port 1 is
distributed between output ports 2 and 3 with a phase difference of 90°.
However, this structure is quite complicated for practical implementation
when, for alumina substrate with εr = 9.6, the dimensions of a 3-dB
Lange coupler are W/h = 0.107 and S/h = 0.071, where W is the width of
each strip and S is the spacing between adjacent strips.

Figure 2.34 Lange directional couplers.
Figure 2.34(b) shows the unfolded Lange coupler with four strips of
equal length, which offers the same electrical performance but is easier
for circuit modeling [98]. The even-mode characteristic impedance Ze4
and odd-mode characteristic impedance Zo4 of the Lange coupler with 
 in terms of the characteristic impedances of a two-conductor
line (which is identical to any pair of adjacent lines in the coupler) can be
obtained by
 (2.123)
 (2.124)
whe re Z0e 
and Z0o are the even- and odd-mode characteristic
impedances of the two-conductor pair [99].
The midband voltage coupling coefficient C is given by
 (2.125)
The even- and odd-mode characteristic impedances Z0e and Z0o, as
functions of the characteristic impedance Z0 and coupling coefficient C,
are determined by

 (2.126)
 (2.127)
For alumina substrate with εr = 9.6, the dimensions of such a 3-dB
unfolded Lange coupler are W/h = 0.112 and S/h = 0.08, where W is the
width of each strip and S is the spacing between the strips.
The design theory for TEM transmission-line couplers is based on an
assumption of the same phase velocities of the even and odd propagation
mode. However, this is not the case for coupled microstrip lines, since
they have unequal even- and odd-mode phase velocities. In this case, the
odd mode has more fringing electric field in the air region rather than the
even mode with the electrical field concentrated mostly in the substrate
underneath the microstrip lines. As a result, the effective dielectric
permittivity in the latter case is higher, thus indicating a smaller phase
velocity for the even mode. Consequently, phase velocity compensation
techniques must be applied to improve coupler directivity, which
decreases with increasing frequency.
Figure 2.35(a) shows the topology of a typical wiggly-line coupler (with
a sawtooth shape for the coupled lines), where wiggling the adjacent
edges of the microstrip lines, which makes their physical lengths longer,
slows the odd-mode wave without much affecting the even-mode wave
[100]. High directivity can also be achieved by using a capacitive
compensation. Figure 2.35(b) shows the capacitively compensated
microstrip directional coupler, where the two identical lumped capacitors
are connected between coupled lines at their edges. Physically, these
edge capacitors affect the odd mode by equivalent extension of the
transmission-line electrical lengths, with almost no effect for the even
mode. For an ideal lossless operating condition at 12 GHz using standard
alumina substrate, the compensated coupled-line microstrip directional
coupler can improve directivity from 13.25 dB to infinity [101]. Capacitive
compensation can be performed by gap coupling of the open-circuit stub
formed in a subcoupled line [102]. In this case, the coupler directivity can
be improved by 23 dB in a frequency range from 1 to 2.5 GHz, compared
to the directivity of the conventional uncompensated microstrip coupler.

Figure 2.35 Coupled-line directional couplers.
References
[1] W. L. Everitt, “Output Networks for Radio-Frequency Power Amplifiers,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 19, pp.
725–737, May 1931.
[2] H. T. Friis, “Noise Figure of Radio Receivers,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 32, pp. 419–422, July 1944.
[3] S. Roberts, “Conjugate-Image Impedances,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 34, pp. 198–204, Apr. 1946.
[4] S. J. Haefner, “Amplifier-Gain Formulas and Measurements,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 34, pp. 500–505,
July 1946.
[5] R. L. Pritchard, “High-Frequency Power Gain of Junction Transistors,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 43, pp.
1075–1085, Sep. 1955.
[6] A. R. Stern, “Stability and Power Gain of Tuned Power Amplifiers,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 45, pp. 335–
343, Mar. 1957.
[7] L. S. Houselander, H. Y. Chow, and R. Spense, “Transistor Characterization by Effective Large-
Signal Two-Port Parameters,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-5, pp. 77–79, Apr. 1970.
[8] B. T. Vincent, “Large Signal Operation of Microwave Transistors,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory
Tech., Vol. MTT-49, pp. 865–866, Nov. 1965.
[9] H. W. Bode, “A Method of Impedance Correction,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., Vol. 9, pp. 794–838, Oct.
1930.
[10] S. A. Schelkunoff, “The Impedance Concept and Its Application to Problems of Reflection,
Refraction, Shielding and Power Absorption,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., Vol. 17, pp. 17–48, Jan. 1938.
[11] H. W. Bode, Network Analysis and Feedback Amplifier Design, New York: Van Nostrand, 1945.
[12] V. M. Bogachev and V. V. Nikiforov, Transistor Power Amplifiers (in Russian), Moskva: Energiya,
1978.
[13] A. Grebennikov, RF and Microwave Power Amplifier Design, New York: McGraw-Hill, 2014.
[14] A. Grebennikov, N. O. Sokal, and M. J. Franco, Switchmode RF and Microwave Power Amplifiers,
New York: Academic Press, 2012.
[15] A. Tam, “Network Building Blocks Balance Power Amp Parameters,” Microwaves & RF, Vol. 23,
pp. 81–87, July 1984.
[16] P. H. Smith, Electronic Applications of the Smith Chart, New York: Noble Publishing, 2000.

[17] B. J. Thompson, “Oscillations in Tuned Radio-Frequency Amplifiers,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 19, pp.
421–437, Mar. 1931.
[18] G. W. Fyler, “Parasites and Instability in Radio Transmitters,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 23, pp. 985–1012,
Sep. 1935.
[19] F. B. Llewellyn, “Some Fundamental Properties of Transmission Systems,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 40,
pp. 271–283, Mar. 1952.
[20] D. F. Page and A. R. Boothroyd, “Instability in Two-Port Active Networks,” IRE Trans. Circuit
Theory, Vol. CT-5, pp. 133–139, June 1958.
[21] J. M. Rollett, “Stability and Power Gain Invariants of Linear Two-Ports,” IRE Trans. Circuit
Theory Appl., Vol. CT-9, pp. 29–32, Jan. 1962.
[22] J. G. Linvill and L. G. Schimpf, “The Design of Tetrode Transistor Amplifiers,” Bell Syst. Tech. J. ,
Vol. 35, pp. 813–840, Apr. 1956.
[23] O. Muller and W. G. Figel, “Stability Problems in Transistor Power Amplifiers,” Proc. IEEE, Vol.
55, pp. 1458–1466, Aug. 1967.
[24] O. Muller, “Internal Thermal Feedback in Fourpoles, Especially in Transistors,” Proc. IEEE, Vol.
52, pp. 924–930, Aug. 1964.
[25] J. H. Morecroft and H. T. Friis, “The Vacuum Tubes as a Generator of Alternating-Current
Power,” Trans. AIEE, Vol. 38, pp. 1415–1444, Oct. 1919.
[26] D. C. Prince, “Vacuum Tubes as Power Oscillators, Part I,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 11, pp. 275–313,
June 1923.
[27] A. A. Oswald, “Power Amplifiers in Trans-Atlantic Radio Telephony,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 13, pp. 313–
324, June 1925.
[28] L. E. Barton, “High Audio Power from Relatively Small Tubes,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 19, pp. 1131–
1149, July 1931.
[29] F. E. Terman and J. H. Ferns, “The Calculation of Class C Amplifier and Harmonic Generator
Performance of Screen-Grid and Similar Tubes,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 22, pp. 359–373, Mar. 1934.
[30] A. I. Berg, Theory and Design of Vacuum-Tube Generators (in Russian), Moskva: GEI, 1932.
[31] P. H. Osborn, “A Study of Class B and C Amplifier Tank Circuits,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 20, pp. 813–
834, May 1932.
[32] C. E. Fay, “The Operation of Vacuum Tubes as Class B and Class C Amplifiers,” Proc. IRE, Vol.
20, pp. 548–568, Mar. 1932.
[33] L. B. Hallman, “A Fourier Analysis of Radio-Frequency Power Amplifier Wave Forms,” Proc. IRE,
Vol. 20, pp. 1640–1659, Oct. 1932.
[34] W. L. Everitt, “Optimum Operating Conditions for Class C Amplifiers,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 22, pp.
152–176, Feb. 1934.
[35] N. Chevaux and M. M. De Souza, “Comparative Analysis of VDMOS/LDMOS Power Transistors
for RF Amplifiers,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol. MTT-57, pp. 2643–2651, Nov.
2009.
[36] G. A. Holle and H. C. Reader, “Nonlinear MOSFET Model for the Design of RF Power Amplifiers,”
IEE Proc. Circuits Devices Syst., Vol. 139, pp. 574–580, Oct. 1992.
[37] A. Grebennikov, RF and Microwave Power Amplifier Design, New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004.
[38] W. R. Curtice et al., “A New Dynamic Electro-Thermal Nonlinear Model for Silicon RF LDMOS
FETs,” 1999 IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., Vol. 2, pp. 419–422.
[39] C. Fager et al., “Prediction of IMD in LDMOS Transistor Amplifiers Using a New Large-Signal
Model,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-50, pp. 2834–2842, Dec. 2002.
[40] W. R. Curtice et al., “New LDMOS Model Delivers Powerful Transistor Library: The CMC Model,”
High Frequency Electronics, Vol. 3, pp. 18–25, Oct. 2004.
[41] Y. P. Tsividis, Operation and Modeling of the MOS Transistor, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1987.

[42] R. Sung, P. Bendix, and M. B. Das, “Extraction of High-Frequency Equivalent Circuit Parameters
of Submicron Gate-Length MOSFET’s,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. ED-45, pp. 1769–1775,
Aug. 1998.
[43] M. C. Ho et al., “A Physical Large Signal Si MOSFET Model for RF Circuit Design,” 1997 IEEE
MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 391–394.
[44] B. J. Cheu and P. K. Ko, “Measurement and Modeling of Short-Channel MOS Transistor Gate
Capacitances,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-22, pp. 464–472, June 1987.
[45] J.-M. Dortu et al., “Accurate Large-Signal GaAs MESFET and HEMT Modeling for Power MMIC
Amplifier Design,” Int. J. Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Computer-Aided Eng., Vol. 5, pp. 195–
208, Sept. 1995.
[46] L.-S. Liu, J.-G. Ma, and G.-I. Ng, “Electrothermal Large-Signal Model for III-V FETs Including
Frequency Dispersion and Charge Conservation,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol.
MTT-38, pp. 822–824, June 1990.
[47] C.-J. Wei, Y. Tkachenko, and D. Bartle, “An Accurate Large-Signal Model of GaAs MESFET
Which Accounts for Charge Conservation, Dispersion, and Self-Heating,” IEEE Trans. Microwave
Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-46, pp. 1638–1644, Nov. 1998.
[48] A. Jarndal and G. Kompa, “Large-Signal Model for AlGaN/GaN HEMTs Accurately Predicts
Trapping- and Self-Heating-Induced Dispersion and Intermodulation Distortion,” IEEE Trans.
Electron Devices, Vol. ED-54, pp. 2830–2836, Nov. 2007.
[49] T. Kacprzak and A. Materka, “Compact DC Model of GaAs FET’s for Large-Signal Computer
Calculation,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-18, pp. 211–213, Apr. 1983.
[50] I. Angelov, H. Zirath, and N. Rorsman, “A New Empirical Nonlinear Model for HEMT and
MESFET Devices,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol. MTT-40, pp. 2258–2266, Dec.
1992.
[51] O. S. A. Tang et al., “Design of High-Power, High-Efficiency 60-GHz MMIC’s Using an Improved
Nonlinear PHEMT Model,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-32, pp. 1326–1333, Sep. 1997.
[52] I. Angelov et al., “On the Large-Signal Modelling of AlGaN/GaN HEMTs and SiC MESFETs,” 13th
Europ. GAAS Symp. Dig., pp. 309–312, 2005.
[53] A. Garcia-Osorio et al., “An Empirical I-V Nonlinear Model Suitable for GaN FET Class F PA
Design,” Microwave and Optical Technology Lett., Vol. 53, pp. 1256–1259, June 2011.
[54] K. Joshin and T. Kikkawa, “High-Power and High-Efficiency GaN HEMT Amplifiers,” 2008 IEEE
Radio and Wireless Symp. Dig., pp. 65–68.
[55] T. Ishida, “GaN HEMT Technologies for Space and Radio Applications,” Microwave J., Vol. 54,
pp. 56–66, Aug. 2011.
[56] U. K. Mishra et al., “GaN-Based RF Power Devices and Amplifiers,” Proc. IEEE, Vol. 96, pp.
287–305, Feb. 2008.
[57] M. Berroth and R. Bosch, “Broad-Band Determination of the FET Small-Signal Equivalent Circuit,”
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-38, pp. 891–895, July 1990.
[58] Q. Fan, J. H. Leach, and H. Morkoc, “Small Signal Equivalent Circuit Modeling for AlGaN/GaN
HFET: Hybrid Extraction Method for Determining Circuit Elements of AlGaN/GaN HFET,” Proc.
IEEE, Vol. 98, pp. 1140–1150, July 2010.
[59] G. Dambrine et al., “A New Method for Determining the FET Small-Signal Equivalent Circuit,”
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-36, pp. 1151–1159, July 1988.
[60] N. M. Rohringer and P. Kreuzgruber, “Parameter Extraction for Large-Signal Modeling of Bipolar
Junction Transistors,” Int. J. Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Computer-Aided Eng., Vol. 5, pp.
161–272, Sep. 1995.
[61] J. P. Fraysee et al., “A Non-Quasi-Static Model of GaInP/AlGaAs HBT for Power Applications,”
1997 IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., Vol. 2, pp. 377–382.
[62] M. Reisch, High-Frequency Bipolar Transistors, Berlin: Springer, 2003.

[63] V. M. Bogachev and V. V. Nikiforov, Transistor Power Amplifiers (in Russian), Moskva: Energiya,
1978.
[64] P. M. Asbeck et al., “Heterojunction Bipolar Transistors for Microwave and Millimeter-Wave
Integrated Circuits,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol. MTT-35, pp. 1462–1468, Dec.
1987.
[65] Y.-S. Lin and J.-J. Jiang, “Temperature Dependence of Current Gain, Ideality Factor, and Offset
Voltage of AlGaAs/GaAs and InGaP/GaAs HBTs,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices , Vol. ED-56, pp.
2945–2951, Dec. 2009.
[66] N. L. Wang et al., “28-V High-Linearity and Rugged InGaP/GaAs HBT,” 2006 IEEE MTT-S Int.
Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 881–884.
[67] C. Steinberger et al., “250 W HVHBT Doherty with 57% WCDMA Efficiency Linearized to -55 dBc
for 2c11 6.5 dB PAR,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-43, pp. 2218–2228, Oct. 2008.
[68] D. Costa, W. U. Liu, and J. S. Harris, “Direct Extraction of the AlGaAs/GaAs Heterojunction
Bipolar Transistor Small-Signal Equivalent Circuit,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices , Vol. ED-38, pp.
2018–2024, Sep. 1991.
[69] I. Angelov, K. Choumei, and A. Inoue, “An Empirical HBT Large-Signal Model for CAD,” Int. J.
RF and Microwave Computer-Aided Eng., Vol. 13, pp. 518–533, Nov. 2003.
[70] Y. S. Noh, J. H. Park, and C. S. Park, “A Temperature and Supply Independent Bias Circuit and
MMIC Power Amplifier Implementation for W-CDMA Applications,” IEICE Trans. Electron. , Vol.
E88-C, pp. 725–728, Apr. 2005.
[71] T. Sato and C. Grigorean, “Design Advantages of CDMA Power Amplifiers Built with MOSFET
Technology,” Microwave J., Vol. 45, pp. 64–78, Oct. 2002.
[72] H. L. Krauss, C. W. Bostian, and F. H. Raab, Solid State Radio Engineering, New York: John
Wiley & Sons, 1980.
[73] Z. I. Model, Networks for Combining and Distribution of High Frequency Power Sources (in
Russian), Moskva: Sov. Radio, 1980.
[74] J. Sevick, Transmission Line Transformers, Norcross, GA: Noble Publishing, 2001.
[75] C. Trask, “Transmission Line Transformers: Theory, Design and Applications,” High Frequency
Electronics, Vol. 5, pp. 26–33, Jan. 2006.
[76] E. Rotholz, “Transmission-Line Transformers,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol. MTT-
29, pp. 148–154, Apr. 1981.
[77] J. Horn and G. Boeck, “Design and Modeling of Transmission Line Transformers,” Proc. 2003
IEEE SBMO/MTT-S Int. Microwave and Optoelectronics Conf., Vol. 1, pp. 421–424.
[78] G. Guanella, “New Method of Impedance Matching in Radio-Frequency Circuits,” The Brown
Boveri Rev., Vol. 31, pp. 327–329, Sept. 1944.
[79] G. Guanella, “High-Frequency Matching Transformer,” U.S. Patent 2,470,307, May 1949 (filed
Apr. 1945).
[80] R. K. Blocksome, “Practical Wideband RF Power Transformers, Combiners, and Splitters,” Proc.
RF Technology Expo 86, pp. 207–227, 1986.
[81] J. L. B. Walker et al., Classic Works in RF Engineering: Combiners, Couplers, Transformers, and
Magnetic Materials, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 2005.
[82] J. Sevick, “Magnetic Materials for Broadband Transmission Line Transformers,” High Frequency
Electronics, Vol. 4, pp. 46–52, Jan. 2005.
[83] C. L. Ruthroff, “Some Broad-Band Transformers,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 47, pp. 1337–1342, Aug.
1959.
[84] C. L. Ruthroff, “Broadband Transformers,” U.S. Patent 3,037,175, May 1962 (filed May 1958).
[85] J. Sevick, “A Simplified Analysis of the Broadband Transmission Line Transformer,” High
Frequency Electronics, Vol. 3, pp. 48–53, Feb. 2004.
[86] O. Pitzalis and T. P. M. Couse, “Practical Design Information for Broadband Transmission Line

Transformer,” Proc. IEEE, Vol. 56, pp. 738–739, Apr. 1968.
[87] R. T. Irish, “Method of Bandwidth Extension for the Ruthroff Transformer,” Electronics Lett.,
Vol. 15, pp. 790–791, Nov. 1979.
[88] S. C. Dutta Roy, “Optimum Design of an Exponential Line Transformer for Wide-Band Matching
at Low Frequencies,” Proc. IEEE, Vol. 67, pp. 1563–1564, Nov. 1979.
[89] M. Engels et al., “Design Methodology, Measurement and Application of MMIC Transmission
Line Transformers,” 1995 IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., Vol. 3, pp. 1635–1638.
[90] S. P. Liu, “Planar Transmission Line Transformer Using Coupled Microstrip Lines,” 1998 IEEE
MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., Vol. 2, pp. 789–792.
[91] D. M. Pozar, Microwave Engineering, New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2004.
[92] S. B. Cohn and R. Levy, “History of Microwave Passive Components with Particular Attention to
Directional Couplers,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol. MTT-32, pp. 1046–1054, Sep.
1984.
[93] B. M. Oliver, “Directional Electromagnetic Couplers,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 42, pp. 1686–1692, Nov.
1954.
[94] G. D. Monteath, “Coupled Transmission Lines as Symmetrical Directional Couplers,” IEE Proc.,
Vol. 102, part B, pp. 383–392, May 1955.
[95] T. P. Shelton and J. A. Mosko, “Synthesis and Design of Wide-Band Equal-Ripple TEM Directional
Couplers and Fixed Phase Shifters,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol. MTT-14, pp.
462–473, Oct. 1966.
[96] O. A. Chelnokov, Radio Transmitters (in Russian), Moskva: Radio i Svyaz, 1982.
[97] J. Lange, “Interdigitated Stripline Quadrature Hybrid,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. ,
Vol. MTT-17, pp. 1150–1151, Dec. 1969.
[98] R. Waugh and D. LaCombe, “Unfolding the Lange Coupler,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory
Tech., Vol. MTT-20, pp. 777–779, Nov. 1972.
[99] W. P. Ou, “Design Equations for an Interdigitated Directional Coupler,” IEEE Trans. Microwave
Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-23, pp. 253–255, Feb. 1975.
[100] A. Podell, “A High Directivity Microstrip Coupler Technique,” 1970 G-MTT Int. Microwave Symp.
Dig., pp. 33–36.
[101] M. Dydyk, “Accurate Design of Microstrip Directional Couplers with Capacitive Compensation,”
1990 IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., Vol. 1, pp. 581–584.
[102] C.-S. Kim, J.-S. Lim, D.-J. Kim, and D. Ahn, “A Design of Single and Multi-Section Microstrip
Directional Coupler with the High Directivity,” 2004 IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig. , pp.
1895–1898.

CHAPTER 3
Overview of Broadband Power Amplifiers
In many telecommunication, radar, or testing systems, the transmitters
operate in a very wide frequency range, for example, 1.5 to 30 MHz in
high-frequency (HF) transceivers, 225 to 400 MHz in military frequency-
agility systems, 470 to 860 MHz in ultrahigh-frequency (UHF) TV
transmitters, or 2 to 8 GHz and 6 to 18 GHz in microwave applications.
The power amplifier design based on a broadband concept provides some
advantages when there is no need to tune resonant circuits, and it is
possible to realize fast frequency agility or to transmit a wide multimode
signal spectrum. However, many factors restrict the frequency bandwidth
depending on the active device parameters. For example, it is quite easy
to provide multiple-octave amplification from very low frequencies up to
UHF band using the power MOSFET devices when lossy gain
compensation is easily provided. This is possible due to the existence of
some margin of power gain at lower frequencies for these devices, since
its power gain value decreases with frequency by approximately 6 dB per
octave. In addition, lossy gain-compensating networks can provide lower
input reflection coefficients, smaller gain ripple, more predictable
amplifier design, and can contribute to the amplifier stability factors that
are superior to those of lossless matching networks. At higher frequencies
when the device input impedance is significantly smaller and the influence
of its internal feedback and parasitic parameters is substantially higher, it
is necessary to use multisection matching networks with lumped and
distributed elements.
Generally, the matching design procedure is based on the methods of
circuit analysis, optimization, and synthesis. In the first method, the
circuit parameters are calculated at one frequency chosen in advance
(usually the center or high bandwidth frequency), and then power
amplifier performance is analyzed across the entire frequency bandwidth.
To synthesize the broadband matching/compensation network, it is
necessary to choose the maximum attenuation level or reflection
coefficient magnitude inside the operating frequency bandwidth and then
to obtain the parameters of matching networks by using special tables
and formulas to convert the lumped element into distributed ones. For

push-pull power amplifiers, it is very convenient to use both lumped and
distributed parameters when the lumped capacitors are connected in
parallel to the microstrip lines due to the effect of a virtual ground.
3.1 Bode-Fano Criterion
Generally, the design for a broadband matching circuit should solve a
problem with contradictory requirements when a wider matching
bandwidth is required with minimum reflection coefficient; it is a matter of
minimizing the number of matching network sections for a given
wideband specification. The necessary requirements are determined by
the Bode-Fano criterion, which gives (for certain canonical types of load
impedances) a theoretical limit on the maximum reflection coefficient
magnitude that can be obtained with an arbitrary matching network [1,
2].
For the lossless matching networks with a parallel RC load shown in
Figure 3.1(a) and with a series LR load shown in Figure 3.1(b), the Bode-
Fano criterion states that
 (3.1)
where Γ(ω) is the input reflection coefficient seen looking into the
arbitrary lossless matching network and τ = RC = L/R.
Figure 3.1 Loaded lossless matching circuits.

For the lossless matching networks with a series RC load shown in
Figure 3.1(c) and with a parallel LR load shown in Figure 3.1(d), the
Bode-Fano integral is written as
 (3.2)
The mathematical relationships expressed by (3.1) and (3.2) reflect the
flat responses of an ideal filter over the required frequency bandwidth, as
shown in Figure 3.2 for two different cases. For the same load, both plots
illustrate an important trade-off: The wider the matching network
bandwidth, the worse the reflection coefficient magnitude. From (3.1) it
follows that, when  Γ(ω)  is constant and equal to  Γ max over a
frequency band of width Δω and  Γ(ω)  = 1 otherwise,
 (3.3)
As a result,
 (3.4)
where Δω = ω2 - ω1.
Figure 3.2 Ideal filter flat responses.
Similarly, for the lossless network with a series RC load and with a
parallel LR load,
 (3.5)

where 
 is the center bandwidth frequency. Note that the
theoretical bandwidth limits can be realized only with an infinite number
of matching network sections. The frequency bandwidth with a maximum
reflection coefficient magnitude is determined by a loaded quality factor
QL = ω0τ for the series RL or parallel RC circuit and by QL = 1/(ω0τ) for
the parallel RL or series RC circuit, respectively. The Chebyshev matching
transformer with a finite number of sections can be considered as a close
approximation to the ideal passband network when the ripple of the
Chebyshev response is made equal to  Γ max. By combining matching
theory with the closed formulas for the element values of a Chebyshev
lowpass filter, explicit formulas for optimum matching networks can be
obtained in certain simple but common cases [3]. For example, analytic
closed-form solutions for the design of optimum matching networks up
through order n = 4 can be derived [4].
Generally, (3.4) and (3.5) can be rewritten in a simplified form:
 (3.6)
where Q0 = ω0/Δω.
3.2 Matching Networks with Lumped Elements
To design correctly the broadband matching circuits for transistor power
amplifiers, it is necessary to transform and match the device complex
impedances with the source and load impedances, which are usually
resistive and equal to 50Ω. For high-power or low-supply voltage cases,
the device impedances may be small enough, and an ideal transformer
(IT) needs to be included along with a matching circuit, as shown in
Figure 3.3. In this case, such an ideal transformer provides only a required
transformation between the source resistance RS and the input
impedance of the matching circuit and does not have any effect on the
circuit frequency characteristics.

Figure 3.3 Matching circuit with ideal transformer.
To implement such an ideal transformer for an impedance-transforming
circuit, it is useful to operate with the Norton transform. As a result, an
ideal transformer with two capacitors C1 and C2, which is shown in Figure
3.4(a), can be equivalently replaced by three capacitors CI, CII, and CIII
connected in the form of a π-transformer, as shown in Figure 3.4(b).
Figure 3.4 Capacitive impedance-transforming circuits.
Their values are determined as follows:
 (3.7)
 (3.8)
 (3.9)
where nT is the transformation coefficient. In this case, all of the
parameters of these two-port networks are assumed identical at any
frequency. However, such a replacement is possible only if the
capacitance CIII obtained by (3.9) is positive and, consequently,
physically realizable.

Similarly, an ideal transformer with two inductors L1 and L2, as shown
i n Figure 3.5(a), can be replaced by three inductors LI, LII, and LIII
connected in the form of a T-transformer, as shown in Figure 3.5(b), with
values determined by
 (3.10)
 (3.11)
 (3.12)
Again, this replacement is possible only if the inductance LIII defined by
(3.12) is positive and, consequently, physically realizable.
Figure 3.5 Inductive impedance-transforming circuits.
The broadband impedance-transforming circuits generally represent the
transforming bandpass filters when the in-band matching requirements
with specified ripple must be satisfied. In this case, the out-of-band
mismatching can be very significant. One of the design methods of such
matching circuits is based on the theory of transforming the lowpass
filters of a ladder configuration of series inductors alternating with shunt
capacitors, whose two-section equivalent representation is shown in
Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6 Two-section impedance-transforming circuit.

For a large ratio of R0/R5, mismatching at zero frequency is sufficiently
high, and such a matching circuit can be treated as a bandpass
impedance-transforming filter.
Table 3.1 gives the maximum passband ripples and coefficients g1 and
g2 required to calculate the parameters of a two-section lowpass
Chebyshev filter for different transformation ratios r = R0/R5 and
frequency bandwidths w = 2(f2 − f1)/(f2 + f1), where f2 and f1 are the
high- and low-bandwidth frequencies, respectively [5]. The coefficients g3
and g4 are calculated as g3 = rg2 and g4 = g1/r, respectively, and the
circuit elements can be obtained by
 (3.13)
 (3.14)
where 
 is the center bandwidth frequency.
Table 3.1 Two-Section Lowpass Chebyshev Filter Parameters
r
w
ripple, dB g1
g2
5
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.000087
0.001389
0.007023
0.022109
1.26113
1.27034
1.28561
1.30687
0.709217
0.704050
0.695548
0.638849
10
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.000220
0.003516
0.017754
0.055746
1.60350
1.62135
1.65115
1.69304
0.591627
0.585091
0.574412
0.559894
25
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.000625
0.009993
0.050312
0.156725
2.11734
2.15623
2.22189
2.311517
0.462747
0.454380
0.440863
0.422868
50
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.001303
0.020801
0.104210
0.320490
2.57580
2.64380
2.75961
2.92539
0.384325
0.374422
0.358638
0.338129
As an example, consider the design of a broadband input matching
circuit in the form of a two-section lowpass transforming filter shown in
Figure 3.6, with a center bandwidth frequency f0 = 3 GHz, to match the
source impedance RS = R0 = 50Ω with device input impedance Zin = Rin

+ jω0Lin, where Rin = R5 = 2Ω, Lin = L4 = 0.223 nH, and ω0 = 2πf0.
The value of the series input device inductance Lin = L4 is chosen to
satisfy the requirements of Table 3.1 for r = 25 and w = 0.4 with
maximum ripple of 0.156725 when g1 = 2.31517 and g2 = 0.422868.
From (3.14), it follows that
As a result, the circuit parameters shown in Figure 3.7(a) are calculated
from (3.13) and (3.14), resulting in the corresponding circuit frequency
response shown in Figure 3.7(b) with the required passband from 2.6 to
3.4 GHz. The particular value of the inductance Lin is chosen for design
convenience. If this value differs from the required value, then the
maximum frequency bandwidth, the power ripple, or the number of ladder
sections must be changed.
Figure 3.7 Two-section broadband lowpass matching circuit and its frequency response.

Another approach is based on the transformation from the lowpass
impedance-transforming prototype filters, the simple L- , T-, and π-type
equivalent circuits of which are shown in Figure 3.8, to the bandpass
impedance-transforming filters. Table 3.2 gives the parameters for the
lowpass impedance-transforming Chebyshev filter prototypes for different
maximum in-band ripples and number of elements n [6]. This
transformation can be obtained using the frequency substitution as
 (3.15)
where 
 is the center bandwidth frequency, Δω = ω2 − ω1 is the
passband, and ω1 and ω2 are the low and high edges of the passband,
respectively.
Figure 3.8 Lumped L-, π-, and T-type impedance-transforming circuits.
As a result, a series inductor Lk is transformed into a series LC circuit
according to
 (3.16)
where

 (3.17)
Similarly, a shunt capacitor Ck is transformed into a shunt LC-circuit as
 (3.18)
where
 (3.19)
The 
lowpass 
impedance-transforming 
prototype 
filter 
will 
be
transformed to the bandpass impedance-transforming filter when all of its
series elements are replaced by the series resonant circuits and all of its
parallel elements are replaced by the parallel resonant circuits, each of
which is tuned to the center bandwidth radian frequency ω0. The
bandpass filter elements can be calculated from
 (3.20)
 (3.21)
where k is an element serial number for the lowpass prototype filter, and
the gk’s are the appropriate coefficients given by Table 3.2.
Table 3.2 Parameters of Lowpass Chebyshev Filter Prototypes
ripple, dB n g1
g2
g3
g4
0.01
1
2
3
0.0960
0.4488
0.6291
1.0000
0.4077
0.9702
1.1007
0.6291 1.0000
0.1
1
2
3
0.3052
0.8430
1.0315
1.0000
0.6220
1.1474
1.3554
1.0315 1.0000
0.2
1
2
3
0.4342
1.0378
1.2275
1.0000
0.6745
1.1525
1.5386
1.2275 1.0000
0.5
1
2
3
0.6986
1.4029
1.5963
1.0000
0.7071
1.0967
1.9841
1.5963 1.0000
Consider the design of a lowpass prototype filter for a given maximum

ripple level in a frequency range up to ω2(2) for a two-element filter and
up to ω2(3) for three elements, as shown in Figure 3.9(a). Then, for a
selected arbitrary frequency ω0, a series capacitance is added to each
inductance and a parallel inductance is added to each capacitance on the
assumption that all of these resonant circuits are tuned to the selected
frequency ω0. As a result, a new bandpass filter will be realized with the
same ripple, as shown in Figure 3.9(b) for n = 2 and n = 3 with the
passbands Δω(2) and Δω(3), respectively.
Figure 3.9 Maximum ripple level versus frequency bandwidth.
Their elements are calculated according to (3.20) and (3.21).
The maximum ripple level shown in Figure 3.9 determines the insertion
loss IL (or power loss ratio PLR) through the magnitude of the reflection
coefficient Γ as
 (3.22)
Generally, the lowpass prototype filters and the bandpass filters
obtained on their basis do not perform an impedance transformation. The
input and output resistances are either equal for the symmetric T- or π-
type filters shown in Figures 3.8(a) and (b) where g4 = 1 or their ratio is
too small for L-type filters, such as those shown in Figures 3.8(c) and (d),
where g3 < 2. Therefore, in this case, it is necessary to use an ideal
transformer concept. This approach is based on using the existing data
tables, from which the parameters of such impedance-transforming
networks can be easily calculated for a given quality factor of the device

input or output circuit. However, they can also be very easily verified or
optimized by using a computer-aided design (CAD) optimization
procedure that incorporates any comprehensive circuit simulator.
Consider the design example of a broadband interstage impedance-
transforming filter with a center bandwidth frequency of 1 GHz to match
the output driver-stage circuit with the input final-stage circuit of the
power amplifier, as shown in Figure 3.10(a) [7]. In this case, it is
convenient initially to convert the parallel connection of the device output
resistance Rout and capacitance Cout into the corresponding series
connection at the center bandwidth frequency ω0, as shown in Figure
3.10(b).
For the three-element lowpass impedance-transforming prototype filter
shown in Figure 3.8(a) with a maximum in-band ripple of 0.1 dB, we can
obtain g1 = g3 = 1.0315, g2 = 1.1474, and g4 = 1 for n = 3 from Table
3.2. According to (3.21), the relative frequency bandwidth in this case is
defined as
based on a value of which the shunt capacitance C2 can be calculated
using (3.20), resulting in a capacitive reactance equal to 0.215Ω. The
inductive reactance corresponding to a series inductance Lin is equal to
9.42Ω.
To convert the lowpass filter to its bandpass prototype, it is necessary
to connect the capacitor in series to the input inductor and the inductor in
parallel to the shunt capacitor and calculate with the same reactances to
resonate at the center bandwidth frequency ω0, as shown in Figure
3.10(c), where an ideal transformer IT with the transformation coefficient
nT = 
 = 2.556 is included. Here, the reactances for each series
element are equal to 9.42Ω, whereas the reactances for each parallel
element are equal to 0.215Ω, respectively. Then, moving the
corresponding elements with transformed parameters (each inductive and
capacitive reactance is multiplied by 
) to the left-hand side of IT in
order to apply a Norton transform gives the circuit shown in Figure
3.10(d), where the required series elements with reactances of 
are realized by the inductance Lout, converted device output capacitance

C′out, and additional elements L′ and C′. Finally, by using a Norton
transform (see Figure 3.4) with ideal transformer IT and two capacitors,
the impedance matching bandpass filter shown in Figure 3.11(a) is
obtained.
Figure 3.10 Impedance-transformer design procedure using a lowpass filter prototype.
The frequency response of the filter with minimum in-band ripple and
significant out-of-band suppression is shown in Figure 3.11(b). In the case
of serious difficulties with practical implementation of a very small

inductance of 0.22 nH or a very large capacitance of 109 pF, it is possible
to design a multisection lowpass impedance-transforming circuit.
Figure 3.12(a) shows the circuit schematic for a microwave broadband
amplifier using a 1-μm GaAs FET packaged transistor, where the input
multisection matching circuit is designed to provide the required gain
taper and both input and output matching circuits are optimized to
provide broadband impedance transformation [8]. As a result, a nominal
power gain of 8 dB with a maximum deviation of ±0.07% in the
frequency range of 7 to 14 GHz was achieved. In the first monolithic
broadband GaAs FET amplifier, the input and output matching circuits
were based on lumped elements fabricated together with the FET device
on a semi-insulating high-resistivity gallium-arsenide substrate with a
total size of 1.8 × 1.2 mm2, providing a power gain of 4.5±0.9 dB with an
output power of 11 dBm at 1-dB gain compression from 7.0 to 11.7 GHz
[9].
Figure 3.11 (a) Impedance-transforming bandpass filter and (b) its frequency response.
The circuit diagram of a two-stage pHEMT MMIC power amplifier for Ku-
band applications is shown in Figure 3.12(b), where the lumped
components were used in the input, interstage, and output matching

circuits to minimize the overall chip size [10]. Here, the topology of each
matching network represents a double-resonant circuit to form a
broadband impedance transformer, which includes a shunt inductor in
series with a bypass capacitor to provide a dc path, a series blocking
capacitor, and a lowpass L-section transformer. In this case, for an 8.4-
mm driver-stage pHEMT and a 16.8-mm power-stage pHEMT, a saturated
output power of 38.1 dBm (6.5W), a small-signal gain of 10.5 dB, and a
peak PAE of 24.6% from 13.6 to 14.2 GHz were achieved with an MMIC
chip size of as small as 3.64 × 2.35 mm2. Based on the T-shape
combining transformers with three individual inductors implemented in a
0.15-μm pHEMT technology, a broadband MMIC power amplifier
combining two pHEMT devices with an overall 400-μm gate-width size
achieved a saturated output power of 22 to 23.5 dBm and a power gain of
over 10 dB from 17 to 35 GHz [11]. In a 90-nm standard CMOS process, a
canonical doubly terminated third-order bandpass network was converted
to the output matching topology, which provides both impedance
transformation and differential-to-single-ended power combining [12].
The power amplifier achieved a 3-dB bandwidth from 5.2 to 13 GHz with a
25.2-dBm peak saturated output power and a peak PAE of 21.6%.
Figure 3.12 Schematics of broadband lumped-element microwave FET amplifiers.
3.3 Matching Networks with Mixed Lumped and Distributed
Elements
The matching circuits, which incorporate mixed lumped and transmission-

line elements, are widely used in both hybrid and monolithic design
techniques. Such matching circuits are very convenient when designing
push-pull power amplifiers with the effect of virtual grounding, where the
shunt capacitors are connected between two series microstrip lines.
According to the quasilinear transformation technique, the basic four-step
design procedure consists of an appropriate choice of the lumped
prototype schematic resulting in near-maximum gain across the required
frequency 
bandwidth, 
its 
decomposition 
into 
subsections, 
their
replacement by almost equivalent distributed circuits, and then the
application of an optimization technique to minimize power variation over
the operating frequency bandwidth [13].
A periodic lumped LC structure in the form of a lowpass ladder π-
network is used as a basis for the lumped matching prototype. Then, the
lumped prototype should be split up into individual π-type sections with
equal capacitances by a consecutive step-by-step process and replaced by
their equivalent distributed network counterparts. Finally, the complete
mixed matching structure is optimized to improve the overall performance
by employing a standard nonlinear optimization routine on the element
values. Note that generally the lumped prototype structure can be
decomposed into different subnetworks including L-type matching
sections and individual capacitors or inductors.
For a single frequency equivalence between lumped and distributed
elements, the lowpass lumped π-type ladder section can be made
equivalent to a symmetrically loaded transmission line at a certain
frequency, as shown in Figure 3.13(a). The transmission ABCD-matrices of
these lumped and distributed ladder sections can be written, respectively,
as
 (3.23)
 (3.24)
where θ0 is the electrical length of a transmission line at the center

bandwidth frequency ω0.
Figure 3.13 Transforming design procedure for lumped and distributed matching circuits.
Consequently, since these two circuits are equivalent, equal matrix
elements AL = AT and BL = BT can be rewritten as
 (3.25)
 (3.26)
After solving (3.25) and (3.26), the characteristic impedance Z0 and
shunt capacitance CT can be explicitly calculated by
 (3.27)

 (3.28)
To provide the design method using a single frequency equivalent
technique, the following consecutive design steps can be performed:
1. Designate the lumped π-type C1-L1-C2 section to be replaced.
2. From a chosen π-type C1-L1-C2 section, form the symmetrical C-L-C
ladder section with equal capacitances C, as shown in Figure 3.13(b).
The choice of capacitances is arbitrary but their values cannot exceed the
minimum of (C1, C2).
3. Calculate the parameters of the symmetrical CT-TL-CT section using the
parameters of the lumped equivalent π-section by setting the electrical
length θ0 of the transmission line according to (3.27) and (3.28). Here, it
is assumed that the minimum of the capacitances C1 and C2 should be
greater than or equal to CT so that CT can be readily embedded in the
new CT-TL-CT section.
4. Finally, replace the π-type C1-L1-C2 ladder section by the equivalent
symmetrical CT-TL-CT section and combine adjacent shunt capacitances,
as shown in Figure 3.13(b), where the loaded shunt capacitances CA and
CB are given as CA = C′1 + CT and CB = C′2 + CT.
Figure 3.14(a) shows the circuit schematic of a simulated broadband
28V LDMOSFET power amplifier. To provide an output power of about
15W with a power gain of more than 10 dB in the frequency range of 225
to 400 MHz, an LDMOSFET device with a gate geometry of 1.25 μm × 40
mm was chosen. In this case, the matching design technique is based on
using multisection lowpass networks, with two π-type sections for the
input matching circuit and one π-type section for the output matching
circuit. The sections adjacent to the device input and output terminals
incorporate the corresponding internal input gate-source and output
drain-source device capacitances. Because a ratio between the device
equivalent output resistance at the fundamental for several tens of watts
of output power and the load resistance of 50Ω is not significant, it is
sufficient to be limited to only one matching section for the output
matching network.

Once a matching network structure is chosen, based on the
requirements for the electrical performance and frequency bandwidth, the
simplest and fastest way to optimize electrical performance using CAD
simulators to satisfy certain criteria. For such a broadband power
amplifier, these criteria can be the minimum output power ripple and
input return loss with maximum power gain and efficiency. To minimize
the overall dimensions of the power amplifier board, the shunt microstrip
line in the drain circuit can be treated as an element of the output
matching circuit, and its electrical length can be considered as a variable
to be optimized. Applying a nonlinear broadband CAD optimization
technique implemented in any high-level circuit simulator and setting the
ranges of electrical length of the transmission lines between 0° and 90°
and parallel capacitances from 0 to 100 pF, we can potentially obtain the
parameters of the input and output matching circuits. The characteristic
impedances of all transmission lines can be set to 50Ω for simplicity and
convenience of the circuit implementation. However, to speed up this
procedure, it is best to optimize circuit parameters separately for input
and output matching circuits with the device equivalent input and output
impedances: a series RC circuit for the device input and a parallel RC
circuit for the device output. It is sufficient to use a fast linear
optimization process, which will take only a few minutes to complete the
matching circuit design. Then, the resulting optimized values are
incorporated into the overall power amplifier circuit for each element and
final optimization is performed using a large-signal active device model.
In this case, the optimization process is finalized by choosing the nominal
level of input power with optimizing elements in much narrower ranges of
their values of about 10% to 20% for most critical elements. Figure
3.14(b) shows the simulated broadband power amplifier performance,
with an output power of 43.5±1.0 dBm and a power gain of 13.5±1.0 dB
in a frequency bandwidth from 225 to 400 MHz.

Figure 3.14 (a) Circuit schematic and (b) performance of broadband LDMOSFET power amplifier.
3.4 Matching Networks with Transmission Lines
The lumped or mixed matching networks generally work well at
sufficiently low frequencies (up to one or several gigahertz). However, the
lumped elements such as inductors and capacitors are difficult to
implement at microwave frequencies where they can be treated as
distributed elements. In addition, the quality factors for inductors are
sufficiently small that they contribute to additional losses.
Generally, the design of a practical distributed filter circuit is based on
some approximate equivalence between lumped and distributed

elements, which can be established by applying a Richards transformation
[14]. This implies that the distributed circuits composed of equal-length
open- and short-circuited transmission lines can be treated as lumped
elements under the transformation
 (3.29)
where s = jω/ωc is the conventional normalized complex frequency
variable, and ω0 is the radian frequency for which the transmission lines
are a quarter wavelength [15].
As a result, the one-port impedance of a short-circuited transmission
line corresponds to the reactive impedance of a lumped inductor ZL as
 (3.30)
Similarly, the one-port admittance of an open-circuited transmission line
corresponds to the reactive admittance of a lumped capacitor YC as
 (3.31)
The results given by (3.30) and (3.31) show that an inductor can be
replaced with a short-circuited stub of electrical length θ = πω/(2ω0) and
characteristic impedance Z0 = L, while a capacitor can be replaced with
an open-circuited stub of electrical length θ = πω/(2ω0) and characteristic
impedance Z0 = 1/C when a unity-filter characteristic impedance is
assumed.
From (3.29), it follows that, for a lowpass filter prototype, the cutoff
occurs when ω = ωc, resulting in
 (3.32)
which gives a stub length of θ = 45° (or π/4) with ωc = ω0/2. Hence, the
inductors and capacitors of a lumped-element filter can be replaced with
the short-circuited and open-circuited stubs, as shown in Figure 3.15.
Since the lengths of all stubs are the same and equal to λ/8 at the cutoff
frequency ωc, these lines are called the commensurate lines. At the

frequency ω = ω0, the transmission lines will be a quarter-wavelength
long, resulting in an attenuation pole. However, at any frequency away
from ωc, the impedance of each stub will no longer match the original
lumped-element impedances, and the filter response will differ from the
desired filter prototype response. Note that the response will be periodic
in frequency, repeating every 4ωc.
Figure 3.15 Equivalence between lumped elements and transmission lines.
Since the transmission line generally represents a four-port network, it
is very convenient to use a matrix technique for filter design. In the case
of a cascade of several networks, the rule is that the overall matrix of the
new network is simply the matrix product of the matrices for the
individual networks taken in the order of connection [16]. In terms of a
Richards 
variable, 
an ABCD matrix for a transmission line with
characteristic impedance Z0 can be written as
 (3.33)
which represents a unit element that has a half-order transmission zero at
s = ±1. The matrix of the unit element is the same as that of a
transmission line of electrical length θ and characteristic impedance Z0.
Unit elements are usually introduced to separate the circuit elements in
transmission-line filters, which are otherwise located at the same physical
point.
The application of a Richards transformation provides a sequence of

short-circuited and open-circuited stubs, which are then converted to a
more practical circuit implementation. This can be done based on a series
of equivalent circuits known as Kuroda identities, which allows these
stubs to be physically separated, transforming the series stub into the
shunt and changing impractical characteristic impedances into more
realizable impedances [17]. The Kuroda identities use the unit elements,
and these unit elements are thus commensurate with the stubs used to
implement inductors and the capacitors of the prototype design.
Connecting the unit element with the characteristic impedance Z0 to the
same load impedance Z0 does not change the input impedance. The four
Kuroda identities are illustrated in Figure 3.16, where the combinations of
unit elements with the characteristic impedance Z0 and electrical length θ
= 45°, the reactive elements, and the relationships between them are
given.

Figure 3.16 Four Kuroda identities.
To prove the equivalence, consider two circuits of identity at the first
row in Figure 3.16 where the ABCD-matrix for the entire left-hand circuit
can be written as

 (3.34)
where Z1 is the characteristic impedance of the left-hand unit element.
Similarly, for the right-hand circuit,
 (3.35)
where Z2 is the characteristic impedance of the right-hand unit element.
The results in (3.34) and (3.35) are identical if
or
 (3.36)
where n = 1 + Z1C.
As an example, consider the design of the broadband input
transmission-line matching circuit based on a lumped two-section lowpass
transforming filter shown in Figure 3.6, with a center bandwidth frequency
f0 = 3 GHz to match a 50Ω source impedance with the device input
impedance Zin = Rin + jω0Lin, where Rin = 2Ω and Lin = 0.223 nH. The
value of the series input device inductance is chosen to satisfy Table 3.1
when, for n = 4, r = 25, w = 0.4, maximum ripple of 0.156725, and g1 =
2.31517, from (3.14) it follows that

From Table 3.1, we obtain g2 = 0.422868, which, from (3.13) and
(3.14), gives the circuit parameters shown in Figure 3.17. The inductance
value is chosen for design convenience. If this value differs from the
required value, then the maximum frequency bandwidth, the power
ripple, or the number of ladder sections must be changed.
Figure 3.17 Two-section broadband matching circuit.
Figure 3.18 shows the design transformation of a lumped lowpass
transforming filter to a microstrip one using the Kuroda identities. The
first step, which is shown in Figure 3.18(a), is to add a 50Ω unit element
at the end of the circuit and convert a shunt capacitor to a series inductor
using the second Kuroda identity, as shown in Figure 3.18(b). Then,
adding another unit element and applying the first Kuroda identity, as
shown in Figure 3.18(c), result in the circuit with two unit elements and
three shunt capacitors shown in Figure 3.18(d). To keep the same
physical dimensions during the calculation of the circuit parameters, the
inductance should be taken in nanohenries, and the capacitance
measured in nanofarads if the operating frequency is measured in
gigahertz. Finally, a Richards transformation is used to convert the shunt
capacitors to the corresponding transmission-line stubs. According to
(3.31), the normalized characteristic impedance of a shunt stub is 1/C,
which is necessary to multiply by 50Ω.

Figure 3.18 Design transformation from lumped lowpass to microstrip transforming filter.

Figure 3.18(e) shows the microstrip layout of the final lowpass
transforming circuit, where the lengths of the shunt stubs are λ/8 at the
cutoff 
frequency fc, as well as the lengths of each unit element
representing the series stubs. If the normalized frequency bandwidth and
center bandwidth frequency are chosen to be w = 0.4 and f0 = 3GHz,
respectively, the cutoff frequency becomes equal to
In practical design of a microwave bipolar or GaAs FET amplifier, it is
necessary to take into account that the intrinsic device generally exhibits
a small-signal gain roll-off with increasing frequency at approximately 6
dB per octave [18, 19]. Therefore, to maintain a constant gain across the
design frequency band, the matching network must be designed for
maximum gain at the highest frequency of interest [20]. In this case,
reflective mismatching conditions are provided to compensate for the
increase in the intrinsic gain of a FET when the frequency is decreased. As
a result, it is necessary to selectively mismatch the input of the transistor
by employing the gain-tapered input matching circuit so that the overall
gain of the amplifier will be flat [21]. Alternatively, the gain tapering
could be done in the output network with input flat matching conditions.
In a simplified practical implementation when two impedance-
transforming L-sections with series microstrip lines and shunt microstrip
stubs in the input matching circuit and a single impedance-transforming
T-section with two series microstrip lines and one shunt microstrip stub in
the output matching network are used, a flat gain of about 6 dB was
achieved across the octave band of 4 to 8 GHz for a single-cell GaAs FET
amplifier with the device transconductance gm = 55 mS [22].
Figure 3.19 shows the matching circuit design steps and the circuit
schematic of a broadband microwave GaN HEMT power amplifier [23]. In
this case, the first step to design the octave-band power amplifier
intended to operate across a frequency bandwidth of 2 to 4 GHz was to
find the optimum source and load impedances that maximize the
performance of the device in terms of efficiency in the required
bandwidth. In view of a GaN HEMT Cree CGH60015DE device, since the
optimum impedances were relatively close to each other across the band
and the acceptable level of degradation in PAE was estimated to be less
than 8%, the task was simplified to provide the optimum impedances

seen by the device input and output at the center bandwidth frequency
across the entire bandwidth. The bandpass matching network shown in
Figure 3.19(a) was derived from a lowpass prototype matching circuit,
assuming that the transistor output can be approximated by an ideal
current source with a parallel RC network, where R0 is the source
resistance corresponding to device equivalent output resistance at the
fundamental (or load-line resistance) and the capacitance C0 is the total
drain-source capacitance. To scale the obtained terminating resistor RL
upward to 50Ω, a Norton transformation of an ideal transformer (nT =
1.173) with two series-shunt capacitors to an arrangement of three
capacitors, as shown earlier in Figure 3.4, was used. Then, based on the
transforms between lumped and distributed elements, the two resonant
parallel LC circuits were approximated by the corresponding grounded
shunt quarterwave transmission lines TL1 and TL3 with the characteristic
impedance of each line equal to the reactance of the inductor or capacitor
multiplied by π/4, whereas the lumped π-network with a series inductor
and two shunt capacitors was approximated by the series transmission
line TL2, as shown in Figure 3.19(b). A similar approach can be applied to
the design of the input matching circuit, which also includes lossy
elements for better input return loss and stability. The entire circuit
schematic of the designed broadband GaN HEMT power amplifier is shown
i n Figure 3.19(c), where the two series tapered transmission lines TL1
and TL5 are added at the input and output of the device. As a result, an
output power of 41±1 dBm with a power gain of 10±1 dB and a drain
efficiency of 52% to 72% was achieved across the frequency bandwidth
of 1.9 to 4.3 GHz.

Figure 3.19 Schematics of broadband microwave GaN HEMT power amplifier.
An alternative impedance matching technique is based on the
multisection 
matching 
transformers 
consisting 
of 
the 
stepped
transmission-line sections with different characteristic impedances and
electrical lengths [24]. These transformers, in contrast to the continuously
tapered transmission-line transformers, are significantly shorter and
provide broader performance. The schematic structure of a stepped
transmission-line transformer, which consists of a cascaded connection of
n uniform sections of equal quarterwave lengths l = λ0/4, where λ0 is the
wavelength corresponding to the center bandwidth frequency, represents
an antimetric structure, for which the ratio between the characteristic
impedances of its transmission-line sections can be written in the general
form as
 (3.37)
where i = 1, 2, …, n and n is the number of sections, ZS is the source

impedance, and ZL is the load impedance [25]. In Figure 3.20, as a
practical example, the minimum possible VSWR is plotted for a five-step
transmission-line impedance transformer with a total characteristic-
impedance variation of 8:1, which was designed for a maximum VSWR of
1.021 in an octave frequency bandwidth and where each section is of a
quarterwave electrical length [26].
Figure 3.20 Theoretical frequency bandwidth of a five-step transformer.
The main drawback of the stepped quarterwave transformers is their
significant total length of L = nλ0/4. However, it is possible to reduce the
overall transformer length by applying other profiles of its structure. The
stepped transformers using n cascaded uniform transmission-line sections
of various lengths with alternating impedances are shorter by 1.5 to 2
times. In this case, the number of sections n is always an even number
and the section impedances can be equal to the source and load
impedances to be matched. For example, the input and output matching
circuits of a microwave GaAs MESFET power amplifier, which was
designed to operate in a frequency bandwidth of 4 to 8 GHz, were
composed of the stepped microstrip lines where all the high-impedance
sections were made 50Ω and all low-impedance sections were made 10Ω
[22].
The total length of a stepped transmission-line transformer can be
further reduced by using the structure representing the cascade
connection of n transmission-line sections of the same length l < λ0/4
with
 (3.38)

where n is an even number and Z1 > Zn when ZS < ZL [27]. An example
of the stepped transmission-line transformer to match a source
impedance of 25Ω with a load impedance of 50Ω is shown in Figure
3.21(a), where the electrical length of each section is equal to λ0/12. In
this case, the total transformer length is shorter by three times compared
to the basic structure with the quarterwave sections, and an octave
passband from 2 to 4 GHz for the lossless ideal transmission-line sections
is provided with an input return loss of better than 25 dB, as shown in
Figure 3.21(b). However, it requires the use of a high impedance ratio for
its sections reaching 30 to 50 when the source and load impedances differ
significantly.
Figure 3.21 Stepped transmission-line transformer with equal-length sections.
To reduce a high impedance ratio of the stepped transformers with a
short total length, their generalized structure representing cascaded even
n sections of different lengths li and impedances Zi can be used. The

optimum Chebyshev characteristics for this structure can be provided with
the ratios between the lengths and characteristic impedances of its
sections according to
 (3.39)
where i = 1, 2, …, n/2, and
 (3.40)
where the impedances of both even and odd sections decrease in the
direction from higher impedance ZL to lower impedance ZS and the
impedance of any odd section is always larger than that of any even
section [28]. The lengths of even sections decrease in the direction from
the transmission line of a smaller impedance, whereas the lengths of odd
sections increase in the same direction.
3.5 Lossy Matching Circuits
In many practical cases, to provide broadband matching with a minimum
gain flatness and input reflection coefficient, it is sufficient to use the
resistive shunt element at the transistor input. An additional matching
improvement with reference to upper frequencies can be achieved by
employing inductive reactive elements in series to the resistor. The
resistive nature of this type of network may also improve amplifier
stability and distortion. To provide a broadband performance for
microwave GaAs MESFET power amplifiers, a resistively loaded shunt
network, where the resistor is connected in series with a short-circuited
quarterwave microstrip line to decrease the loaded quality factor without
greatly reducing the maximum available gain, was used in the load
network to provide a flat gain over 8 to 12 GHz, or in the input matching
circuit to cover a frequency bandwidth of 2 to 6.2 GHz [29, 30]. For
ultrabroadband high-gain multistage amplifiers, using a simple lossy
compensation shunt circuit with a resistor in series with an inductor
placed at the input and output of each transistor in parallel with the
second-order LC circuits allows for a gain of 12±1.5 dB with a VSWR of
less than 2.5 from 150 MHz to 16 GHz to be achieved for a three-stage
GaAs MESFET amplifier [31]. A 14-dB gain was obtained over the 3-dB
bandwidth from 700 kHz to 6 GHz for a two-stage microstrip GaAs

MESFET power amplifier, where a flat gain performance was achieved by
using a shunt lossy gain-compensation circuit with a resistor in series with
a short-circuited microstrip line placed at the input and output of the first-
stage transistor in parallel to the input and interstage LC matching circuits
[32].
A bandstop/bandpass diplexing RLC network is more useful than a
simple lossy RL gain-compensation circuit because it provides an exact
match at one frequency and an arbitrary amount of attenuation at any
other frequency. Diplexing networks can be used in either input or output
networks of the amplifier depending on noise figure, power output, and
other amplifier constraints. Figure 3.22(a) shows the resonant diplexer LC
network for lossy gain compensation, where the series LsCs and parallel
LpCp resonant circuits are tuned to high bandwidth frequency and RL =
R0 [33]. Here, the series capacitance Cs and shunt inductance Lp are
obtained as Cs = BW/ωhRL and Lp = BW(RL/ωh), where BW is the
normalized frequency bandwidth and ωh = 2πfh is the high-bandwidth
radian frequency. The distributed form of a lossy gain-compensation
network with additional input lowpass matching section is shown in Figure
3.22(b), where Zp = 4ωhLp/π, Zs = ωhLs/tanθs, and θs is the electrical
length of the series transmission line.

Figure 3.22 Circuit schematics of lossy gain-compensation circuits.
Figure 3.23(a) shows the basic block of a microwave lossy match GaAs
MESFET amplifier, where an input matching circuit and an open-circuit
shunt stub cascaded with a series transmission line at the device drain
terminal are included to provide the amplifier desired frequency response
[34]. For frequencies up to 1 GHz, the reactive elements of the transistor
equivalent model have relatively little influence on the gain magnitude
and reflection coefficients. As a result, the transistor described by S-
parameters can be represented by its low-frequency model and the
amplifier circuit can be significantly reduced to a simple network, where
S12 = 0 and both S11 and S22 have negligible imaginary components.
Then, the amplifier gain can be derived as
 (3.41)

which clearly expresses the trade-offs between the gain and the reflection
coefficients, where gm is the device transconductance and Z0 is the
characteristic impedance [34, 35]. The schematic of a multistage lossy
match amplifier can be divided into three basic circuit functions: input
matching, amplification, and interstage matching. Figure 3.23(b) shows
the lossy match two-stage GaAs MESFET amplifier with optimum values of
the gate and drain shunt resistances to achieve flat gain performance
over the frequency bandwidth of 2 to 8 GHz.
Figure 3.23 Circuit topologies of microstrip lossy match MESFET amplifiers.
For a broadband lossy match silicon MOSFET high-power amplifier, it is
sufficient to use a simple gain-compensation network with a resistor
connected in series with a lumped inductor when operating frequencies

are low enough compared to the device transition frequency fT [36]. In
this case, it is very important to optimize the elements of a lossy
matching circuit to achieve minimum gain flatness over maximum
frequency bandwidth. Let us consider the small-signal silicon MOSFET
equivalent circuit, which is shown in Figure 3.24.
Figure 3.24 Small-signal silicon MOSFET equivalent circuit.
When the load resistor RL is connected between the drain and source
terminals, an analytical expression for the input device impedance Zin can
be obtained as
 (3.42)
where RL0 = (RL + Rd)/[1 + (RL + Rd)/Rds] and τg = RgsCgs.
The modified circuit shown in Figure 3.25(a) describes adequately the
frequency behavior of the input impedance of Figure 3.24. In (3.42), the
series source resistance Rs and transit time τ are not taken into account
due to their sufficiently small values for high-power MOSFETs in a
frequency range of f ≤ 0.3fT, where fT = gm/2πCgs.

Figure 3.25 Equivalent circuits characterizing device input impedance.
When ωτg ≤ 0.3 and the device output capacitive impedance is
inductively 
compensated, 
the 
input 
equivalent 
circuit 
simplifies
significantly and can represent a capacitor and a resistor connected in
series, as shown in Figure 3.25(b), where
 (3.43)
 (3.44)
To provide a constant real part of the input impedance Zin in a
frequency range up to 0.1fT, it is enough to use a simple lossy
compensation circuit consisting of an inductor Lcorr and a resistor Rcorr
connected in series, as shown in Figure 3.25(c).
The total input impedance of both a lossy match gain-compensation
circuit and device input circuit is written as

 (3.45)
Under the condition R = Rcorr = Rin, from (3.45) it follows that the
reactive part of the input impedance Zin becomes zero, that is, ImZin =
Xin = 0, when
 (3.46)
which leads to a pure active input impedance Zin obtained as
 (3.47)
At microwave frequencies, the short-circuited transmission line can be
included instead of an inductor Lcorr with the same input inductive
reactance. When the frequency increases, the voltage amplitude applied
to the input capacitance Cin decreases. This leads to the appropriate
decrease of the operating power gain GP at higher bandwidth frequencies.
Due to the small values of Rin for high-power MOSFETs, the value of GP
may not be high enough. Therefore, it is necessary to provide an
additional impedance matching with lossless matching circuits to match
with the source impedance of 50Ω or high output impedance of the active
device of the previous power amplifier stage.
Figure 3.26(a) shows the circuit schematic of a broadband LDMOSFET
power amplifier with device geometry of 1.25 μm × 40 mm. The
optimized input three-element lossy matching circuit allows a very
broadband operation to be provided with minimum power gain flatness,
and a 1:2 output transformer contributes to increases in the output power
level. The 20-pF capacitor connected in parallel with a 27Ω resistor
provides an additional increase of power gain at higher bandwidth
frequencies. The simulation results are shown in Figure 3.26(b), where an
output power of 22W to 25W with a power gain of 13.7±0.3 dB in a
frequency range from 5 to 300 MHz can be achieved (curve 1). In this
case, the input return loss is greater than 8 dB up to 225 MHz (curve 2).
However, when a 50 Ω load is directly connected to the device drain
terminal through the blocking capacitor, this results in output power levels
in the range of 6W to 7W.
For solid-state SSB and AM communication transmitters, linear

amplification must be provided across the entire frequency range of 2 to
30 MHz, which was first covered by using bipolar technology based on a
push-pull amplifier implementation with broadband toroidal transmission-
line impedance transformers and combiners and interstage RLC gain-
compensation networks. In this case, the driver stages are operated in a
Class A mode for increased power gain, while the final stages are biased
in Class AB with optimized quiescent currents for better linearity. As a
result, the overall four-stage bipolar power amplifier achieved a PAE of
more than 31% for two-tone 60W peak envelope power (PEP) signal over
the entire frequency range of 2 to 30 MHz, with IM3 equal to −30 dBc or
better at output powers of 5W to 60W [37].

Figure 3.26 (a) Schematic and (b) performance of broadband LDMOSFET power amplifier.
The circuit schematic of the input, interstage, and output networks
intended to be implemented in microwave broadband power amplifiers
are shown in Figure 3.27 [38]. A constant-resistance input network
[Figure 3.27(a)] provides an input device impedance that is pure resistive
and equal to Zin = Rin when L1 = 
 C1 = 
 and R1 = Rin, thus
making wideband transformation of the input resistance to the source
resistance much easier. In the output network shown in Figure 3.27(b), a
value of the drain inductance Ld is properly chosen to compensate for the

capacitive device output reactance at the center bandwidth frequency.
Then, a resonant frequency of the parallel L2C2 circuit is set to be equal
to the same center bandwidth frequency. In this case, for lower
frequencies where the device output impedance Zd is capacitive, the
reactance of the parallel resonant circuit is inductive. On the other hand,
for higher frequencies where the impedance Zd is inductive, reactance of
the parallel resonant circuit is capacitive. As a result, wideband reactance
compensation is realized when the reactive part of the overall output
impedance becomes very small over a wide frequency bandwidth. For
microwave applications, such a parallel resonant circuit is fabricated by
using a quarterwave short-circuit stub. The interstage network [see the
circuit schematic in Figure 3.27(c)] comprises the input and output
networks described above and a quarterwave microstrip transformer with
the characteristic impedance of 
Figure 3.27 Schematics of (a) input, (b) output, and (c) interstage broadband matching circuits.
Figure 3.28 shows the circuit schematic diagram of a two-stage lossy
match MESFET power amplifier [38]. By using a 1.05-mm device in the
driver stage and two 1.35-mm devices in the final stage, a saturated
output power of 27.7±2.7 dBm, a linear power gain of 8.3±2.8 dB, and a

drain efficiency of 15.3±8.3% were measured in a frequency range of 4 to
25 GHz. The input and interstage constant-resistance networks are
represented by the series connection of a resistor and a high-impedance
microstrip line each. Two such networks connected in parallel provide
pure resistive input impedance, where l4 and l5 are the series microstrip
lines, 
and R1 
and R2 are the series resistors. The short-circuited
microstrip lines (l7 and l8 in the interstage network, l19 and l21 in the
output network) with quarterwave electrical lengths at the center
bandwidth frequency serve as the parallel resonant circuits connected at
the device output terminals. Microstrip lines l10 and 114 in the interstage
network represent the quarterwave impedance transformers, which
provide matching between the output impedance of the driver-stage
device and the input impedance of the second-stage devices connected in
parallel. The input and output matching circuits are realized in the form of
T-transformers, where the series microstrip lines and parallel open-circuit
microstrip stubs replace the series inductors and shunt capacitors,
respectively. To further increase an output power, the number of
amplifying stages with lossy input and interstage matching circuits
connected in parallel can be increased. As a result, by optimizing the
output matching and combining circuits, for a three-stage MMIC 0.25-μm
pHEMT power amplifier with a distributed amplifier used as a driver stage
and four 1200-μm transistors in the output stage, an output power of
2.4±1.1W with a small-signal gain of 24±3.5 dB over the frequency range
of 6 to 18 GHz was measured [39].

Figure 3.28 Microstrip two-stage lossy match MESFET power amplifier.
The output matching network can also represent the series connection
of a π-type lowpass matching circuit and a lossy gain-compensation
network, as shown in Figure 3.29 [35]. For both bipolar and MESFET
broadband amplifiers, the π-type network comprises a device output
capacitance and an open-circuit microstrip stub, which are connected to
each side of a series lumped inductor, respectively. The output lossy gain-
compensation network is connected between the π-type matching circuit
and the load. This configuration is usually used for very broadband
medium-power amplifiers. For example, the two-stage cascade of an L-
band broadband bipolar amplifier [Figure 3.29(a)] was designed for a
minimum input reflection coefficient with a VSWR of 1.78, a maximum
gain variation of ±1.2 dB, and an approximately 16.5-dB power gain over
a frequency range of 1 to 2 GHz. The two-stage cascade of a microwave
MESFET amplifier [Figure 3.29(b)] was designed for maximum flat gain in
a frequency range of 4 to 6 GHz when the power gain varies within
15.4±0.5 dB. To provide minimum loss at high bandwidth frequency, the
short-circuited microstrip line in the output lossy gain-compensation
circuit was chosen to be a quarter-wavelength long for each amplifier. For

a two-stage 1-μm MESFET amplifier with the first stage designed for
minimum noise figure and the second stage designed for maximum flat
gain at higher bandwidth frequencies, a power gain of 9.5±1 dB over the
frequency range of 6.5 to 12 GHz was achieved [40].
Figure 3.29 Broadband microstrip lossy match bipolar and MESFET power amplifiers.
Figure 3.30(a) shows the circuit schematic of a broadband GaN HEMT
microwave power amplifier implemented in the form of a flip-chip
integrated circuit with a device geometry of 0.7 μm × 1 mm, transition
frequency fT = 18 GHz, and maximum frequency fmax = 35 GHz [41].
The optimized input three-element lossy LCR matching circuit provides a
power gain up to 11.5 dB and a low input reflection of less than −10 dB
over a frequency range of 3 to 9 GHz. Because the impedance at the input
of a lossy match gain-compensation circuit is only about 10Ω, this

necessitates 
an 
additional 
50Ω 
to 
10Ω 
broadband 
impedance
transformation (Tr1), which was realized using a few sections of
quarterwave coplanar transmission lines with decreasing characteristic
impedances. The output network incorporates a lowpass LC circuit to
compensate for the output device capacitance such that the intrinsic
device sees an approximately real load within the entire frequency
bandwidth. Since the optimum load for this 1-mm device with a supply
voltage of 20V is about 50Ω, no output impedance transformation is
needed. The output power was measured at about 1.6W with a PAE of
14% to 24% across the frequency bandwidth of 4 to 8 GHz. By combining
four such GaN HEMT power amplifiers connected in parallel, the highest
output power of 8W with a PAE of about 20% was obtained at 9.5 GHz,
and the lowest output power of 4.5W was measured at 4.5 GHz, with a
small-signal gain of 7 dB across the frequency bandwidth of 3 to 10 GHz
[42].

Figure 3.30 Schematics of microwave broadband GaN HEMT power amplifiers.
To provide multidecade bandwidth with very good input return loss, a
compact bridged-T all-pass input RLC matching network can be used, as
shown in Figure 3.30(b), where the resistor R1 was chosen to be 50Ω
[43]. In this case, a GaN HEMT periphery of 2.2 mm was chosen to obtain
an output power in the range of 10W. A simple two-element matching

circuit consisting of a series microstrip line and a shunt capacitor was
used at the output to provide optimum load impedance at the upper band
edge. The power amplifier was packaged in a ceramic SO8 package
including GaN on a SiC device operating at 28V and GaAs integrated
passive matching circuitry. As a result, an output power of 8W and a
power gain of 12 dB were measured over a frequency bandwidth from 50
MHz to 2 GHz with a drain efficiency of 36.7% to 65.4%.
3.6 Push-Pull and Balanced Power Amplifiers
Generally, if it is necessary to increase the overall output power of a
power amplifier, several active devices can be used in parallel or push-
pull configurations. In a parallel configuration, the active devices are not
isolated from each other, which requires very good circuit symmetry, and
the output impedance becomes too small in the case of high output
power. The latter drawback can be eliminated in a push-pull
configuration, which provides increased values for the input and output
impedances. In this case, for the same output power level, the input
impedance Zin and output impedance Zout are approximately four times
as high as that of a parallel connection of the active devices since a push-
pull arrangement is essentially a series connection. At the same time, the
loaded quality factors of the input and output matching circuits remain
unchanged because both the real and reactive parts of these impedances
are increased by a factor of four. Very good circuit symmetry can be
provided using balanced active devices with common emitters (or
sources) in a single package. The basic concept of a push-pull operation
can be analyzed by using the corresponding circuit schematic shown in
Figure 3.31 [44].
3.6.1 Basic Push-Pull Configuration
It is most convenient to consider an ideal Class B operation, which means
that each transistor conducts exactly half a cycle (equal to 180°) with
zero quiescent current. Let us also assume that the number of turns of
both primary and secondary windings of the output transformer T2 is
equal (n1 = n2) and the collector current of each transistor can be
represented in the following half-sinusoidal form:
For the First Transistor:

 (3.48)
For the Second Transistor:
 (3.49)
where Ic is the output current amplitude.
Figure 3.31 Basic concept of a push-pull operation.
Being transformed through the output transformer T2 with the
appropriate phase conditions, the total current flowing through the load
RL is obtained as
 (3.50)
The current flowing into the center tap of the primary windings of the
output transformer T2 is the sum of the collector currents, resulting in

 (3.51)
Ideally, the even-order harmonics being in phase are canceled and
should not appear at the load. In practice, a level of the second-harmonic
component of 30 to 40 dB below the fundamental is allowable. However,
it is necessary to connect a bypass capacitor to the center tap of the
primary winding to exclude power losses due to even-order harmonics.
The maximum theoretical collector efficiency that can be achieved in
push-pull Class B operation is equal to 78.5%, similar to a single-ended
Class B mode.
In a balanced circuit, identical sides carry 90° quadrature or 180° out-
of-phase signals of equal amplitude. In the latter case, if perfect balance
is maintained on both sides of the circuit, the difference between signal
amplitudes becomes equal to zero at each midpoint of the circuit, as
shown in Figure 3.32. This effect is called the virtual grounding, and this
midpoint line is referred to as the virtual ground. The virtual ground,
which is actually inside the balanced transistor package having two
identical transistor chips, reduces a common-mode inductance and results
in better stability and usually higher power gain [45].
Figure 3.32 Basic concept of balanced transistor.
When using a balanced transistor, new possibilities for both internal and
external impedance matching procedures emerge. For instance, for the
push-pull operating mode of two single-ended transistors, it is necessary
to provide reliable grounding for input and output matching circuits for
each device, as shown in Figure 3.33(a). Using balanced transistors
significantly simplifies the matching circuit topologies, with the series

inductors and shunt capacitors connected between amplifying paths, as
shown in Figure 3.33(b), where the dc-blocking capacitors are not needed
[46]. Such an approach can provide additional design flexibility when, for
example, a two-stage monolithic push-pull X-band GaAs MESFET power
amplifier can be optimized for either small-signal, high-gain operation, or
for large-signal power saturated operation by changing the lengths of the
bondwires that form the shunt inductance at the drain circuits of each
stage [47].
3.6.2 Baluns
For push-pull operation of a power amplifier with a balanced transistor, it
is also necessary to provide the unbalanced-to-balanced transformation
referenced to the ground both at the input and at the output of the power
amplifier. The most suitable approach to solve this problem in the best
possible manner at high frequencies and microwaves is to use the
transmission-line 
baluns 
(balanced-to-unbalanced 
transmission-line
transformers). The first transmission-line balun for coupling a single
coaxial line having a quarter wavelength at the center bandwidth
frequency to a push-pull coaxial line (or a pair of coaxial lines), which
maintains perfect balance over a wide frequency range, was introduced
and described by Lindenblad in 1939 [48, 49].

Figure 3.33 Matching technique for single-ended and balanced transistors.
Figure 3.34(a) shows the basic structure and equivalent circuit of a
simple coaxial balun, where port A is the unbalanced port and port B is
the balanced port. To be a perfect balun, when a balanced load is
connected to port terminals B, the shield return current I2 − I3 would
equal I1, which would ideally represent the delayed input current, and the
output terminal voltages would be equal and opposite with respect to
ground. In this case, if the characteristic impedance Z0 of the coaxial
transmission line is equal to the input impedance at the unbalanced end
of the transformer, the total impedance from both outputs at the
balanced end of the transformer will be equal to the input impedance.
Hence, such a transmission-line transformer can be used as a 1:1 balun.
The equivalent circuit for this coaxial balun demonstrates the basic
drawback of this balun, when its inner conductor is shielded from ground
having practically an infinite impedance to ground, whereas the outer
shield does have a finite impedance to ground when a balun is placed
above a printed circuit board. The presence of the lower ground plane
creates a shunt short-circuit stub with characteristic impedance Z1 across
one of the loads and this converts the highpass balun structure into a

bandpass one. As a result, this stub has a dramatic effect on balun
performance, with the bandwidth being reduced to about an octave based
on phase imbalance. One of the solutions is simply to raise the
transmission line above the printed circuit board as high as possible and
make both conductors symmetrical with respect to the lower ground
plane. The other solution is to attach a compensating stub to the other
load, as shown in Figure 3.34(b), which results in perfect amplitude and
phase balance above the low-frequency cutoff region providing less than
1-dB insertion loss achieved from 5 MHz to 2.5 GHz [50].
Figure 3.34 Push-pull power amplifier with balanced-to-unbalanced transformers.
Figure 3.35 shows the basic structure of a push-pull power amplifier
with a balanced bipolar transistor including the input and output matching
circuits. To extend the operating frequency range to lower frequencies,
the outside of the coaxial line of the balun can be loaded with a low-loss
ferrite core, which acts as a choke to force equal and opposite currents in

the inner and outer conductor and isolate the 180° output from the input
ground terminal by creating a high and lossy impedance for Z1. In this
case, the measured S-parameters of the back-to-back connected baluns
showed an insertion loss of about 0.5 to 0.6 dB and a better than 20-dB
return loss over 50 to 1000 MHz [51]. As a result, four broadband GaN
HEMT power amplifier units were combined using such a low-loss coaxial
balun that transforms an unbalanced 50Ω load into two 25Ω impedances
that are 180° out of phase and each of the 25Ω ends is driven by a pair of
power amplifier units connected in parallel. A similar balun is used at the
input to create the 180° out-of-phase input to the two pairs of power
amplifier units, resulting in a greater than 100W output power and higher
than 60% drain efficiency across the frequency bandwidth of 100 to 1000
MHz. The lower cutoff bandwidth frequency can be provided to cover
down to 10 MHz by adding lower frequency ferrites, but it may affect
performance at high bandwidth frequencies. Generally, because ferrite
has a limited bandwidth, it is possible to use several ferrite cores to
broaden the frequency bandwidth. For example, by using a low-frequency
ferrite core covering 1 to 10 MHz, a medium-frequency ferrite core
covering 10 to 200 MHz, and a high-frequency ferrite core covering high
frequencies above 200 MHz, the balun can cover 1 MHz to 2.5 GHz with a
loss of 0.25 dB at a low frequency and 1.3 dB at 2.5 GHz [52].
Figure 3.35 Push-pull bipolar power amplifier with input and output baluns.
The miniaturized compact input unbalanced-to-balanced transformer
shown in Figure 3.36 covers the frequency bandwidth up to an octave
with well-defined rejection-mode impedances [53]. To avoid the parasitic
capacitance between the outer conductor and the ground, the coaxial
semirigid transformer T1 is mounted atop microstrip shorted stub l1 and
soldered continuously along its length. The electrical length of this stub is
usually chosen from the condition of θ ≤ π/2 on the high bandwidth
frequency depending on the matching requirements. To maintain circuit

symmetry on the balanced side of the transformer network, another
semirigid coaxial section T2 with unconnected center conductor is
soldered continuously along microstrip shorted stub l2. The lengths of T2
and l2 are equal to the lengths of T1 and l1, respectively. Because the
input short-circuited microstrip stubs provide inductive impedances, the
two series capacitors C1 and C2 of the same value are used for matching
purposes, thereby forming the first highpass matching section and
providing dc blocking at the same time. The practical circuit realization of
the output matching circuit and balanced-to-unbalanced transformer can
be the same as for the input matching circuit.
Figure 3.36 Push-pull power amplifier with compact balanced-to-unbalanced transformers.
Figure 3.37 shows the circuit schematic of a broadband microstrip balun
with normalized parameters using a three-section Wilkinson divider for
power splitting followed by Lange coupled-line directional couplers for
phase shifting [54]. This planar balun structure can be easily fabricated
on alumina substrate using a conventional monolithic process, resulting in
good broadband amplitude and phase balance performance. To achieve
the required tight coupling over a 3:1 bandwidth, interdigitated Lange
couplers in an unfolded configuration to minimize bondwire connections
were employed. The balun fabricated on a 10-mil alumina substrate
achieved an amplitude imbalance of ±0.6 dB, average phase imbalance of
7° (with worst case of 11°), and maximum insertion loss of 1.2 dB from 6
to 20 GHz. With a single-section Wilkinson divider and additional short-
length correction line on the noninverting arm, an amplitude response

within ±1 dB, phase difference of 180±4°, and insertion loss on the order
of 1 dB over 6 to 18 GHz were measured [55].
Figure 3.37 Circuit schematic of broadband planar balun.
3.6.3 Balanced Power Amplifiers
The balanced amplifier technique using the quadrature 3-dB couplers for
power dividing and combining represents an alternative approach to the
push-pull operation. Figure 3.38(a) shows the basic circuit schematic of a
balanced amplifier where two power amplifier units of the same
performance are arranged between the input splitter and output
combiner, each having a 90° phase difference between coupled and
through ports. The fourth port of each quadrature coupler must be
terminated with a ballast resistor Rbal, which is equal to 50Ω for a 50Ω
system impedance. The input signal is split into two equal-amplitude
components by the first 90° hybrid coupler with 0° and 90° paths, then
amplified, and finally recombined by the second 90° hybrid coupler. Due
to proper phase shifting, both signals in the load of the isolated port of
the combiner are canceled, and the load connected at the combiner
output port sees the sum of these two signals. The theory of balanced
amplifiers has been given by Kurokawa when the operating frequency
bandwidth over 1.2 octaves can be obtained with one-section distributed
quarterwave 3-dB directional couplers [56]. For a wide frequency range,

the main advantages of the balanced design are the improved input and
output impedance matching, gain flatness, intermodulation distortion, and
potential design simultaneously for minimum noise figure and good input
match. As an example, a four-stage balanced bipolar amplifier achieved a
power gain of 20±0.5 dB and an input VSWR of less than 1.2 across the
octave frequency bandwidth from 0.8 to 1.6 GHz [57]. By extending the
wide operating frequency range to higher frequencies, an output power of
around 23 dBm with gain variations close to 1 dB over 4.5 to 6.5 GHz and
8 to 12 GHz was achieved for the balanced microstrip GaAs MESFET
amplifiers [58, 59].
Figure 3.38 Schematics of balanced power amplifiers with quadrature hybrid couplers.
If the individual amplifiers with equal performance in the balanced pair
are not perfectly matched at certain frequencies, then a signal in the 0°
path of the coupler will be reflected from the corresponding amplifier and

a signal in the 90° path of the coupler will be similarly reflected from the
other amplifier. The reflected signals will again be phased with 90° and
0°, respectively, and the total reflected power as a sum of the in-phase
reflected signals flows into the isolated port and dissipates on the ballast
resistor Rbal. As a result, the input VSWR for a quadrature coupler does
not depend on the equal load mismatch level. This gives a constant well-
defined load to the driver stage, improving amplifier stability and driver
power flatness across the operating frequency range. Generally, the
stability factor of a balanced stage can be an order of magnitude higher
than its single-ended equivalent, depending on the VSWR and isolation of
the quadrature couplers. If one of the amplifiers fails or is turned off, the
balanced configuration provides a gain reduction of −6 dB only. In
addition, the balanced structure provides ideally the cancellation in the
load of the third-order products such as 2f1 + f2, 2f2 + f1, 3f1, 3f2, …,
and attenuation by 3 dB of the second-order products such as f1 ± f2, 2f1,
2f2, …. In a microstrip implementation for octave-band power amplifiers,
one of the most popular couplers for power dividing and combining is a 3-
dB Lange hybrid coupler.
Figure 3.38(b) shows the circuit schematic of a two-way balanced
module consisting of two pairs of cascaded, balanced amplifier stages,
where the respective output powers are combined using simple two-
element power combiners, which are composed of two quarterwave
transmission lines with different characteristic impedances [60]. Based on
this architecture and GaAs MESFET devices with the gate periphery of 1 ×
1000 μm2, an output power of 1W across 7.25 to 12 GHz was achieved.
3.7 Practical Broadband RF and Microwave Power
Amplifiers
Multisection matching networks based on the lowpass and highpass L-
transformers for input and output matching circuits can provide a wide
frequency bandwidth with minimum power gain ripple and significant
harmonic suppression. Such a multisection matching circuit configuration
using lumped elements was applied to the design of a 60W power
amplifier operating in the frequency bandwidth of 140 to 180 MHz. The
complete circuit schematic of the power amplifier is shown in Figure 3.39
[61]. To realize such technical requirements, an internally matched

bipolar transistor for VHF applications, which provides a 100W output
power level at a supply voltage of 28V, was used. According to the device
data sheet, the input device impedance at the center bandwidth
frequency f0 = 
 = 159 MHz is equal to Zin = (0.9 + j1.8)Ω.
Therefore, the input matching circuit was designed as a three-section
network with two lowpass sections and one highpass section to minimize
the circuit quality factor Q. In this case, the device input lead inductance
of 1.8/(2π × 0.159) = 1.8 nH was considered as a series inductive
element of the second lowpass section with a shunt capacitor of 540 pF.
This power amplifier is operated in Class C mode due to the base bias
circuit composed of the two inductors and a 15Ω resistor, which also
provides low-frequency stability.
Figure 3.39 Circuit schematic of broadband high-power VHF bipolar amplifier.
A similar design philosophy was used to design the output matching
circuit when the three-section network maintains a value of the quality
factor close to unity or within the Q = 1 circle on a Smith chart. The
output device impedance is practically resistive of 1.65Ω because the
output device capacitive reactance is compensated by the device lead
inductance. The series inductance L2 of the first matching lowpass section
adjacent to the collector terminal according to the Smith chart can be
realized as a section of a 50Ω microstrip line with the electrical length of
0.011λ0, 
where λ0 is the wavelength corresponding to the center
bandwidth frequency f0. The physical length of this microstrip line for
1/16-in. Teflon fiberglass with a dielectric permittivity of εr = 2.55 must
be 0.51 in., whereas its width is equal to 0.4 in. The collector feed is

provided through the combination of an inductor L1, a resistor R1 = 15Ω,
and an RF choke (RFC), which behaves as a high-impedance circuit at the
operating frequencies but offers a very low resistance at dc. As a result,
the designed broadband power amplifier achieved a power gain of at
least 8 dB with a gain ripple of less than 3 dB, a collector efficiency of
more than 50%, and an input VSWR below 3:1 [61]. As an alternative,
the broadband input and output matching circuits can be composed of a
single lowpass matching section followed by a 4:1 transmission-line
transformer each. In this case, an output power of more than 25W with a
collector efficiency close to 70% was achieved across the frequency range
of 118 to 136 MHz for an input power of 2W using a 12.5V bipolar device
[62].
At microwave frequencies, an amplifier’s bandwidth performance can
also be improved by using an increased number of transmission-line
transformer sections. For example, with the use of a multisection
transformer with seven quarterwave transmission lines of different
characteristic impedances, a power gain of 9±1 dB and a PAE of
37.5±7.5% over 5 to 10 GHz were achieved for a 15W GaAs MESFET
power amplifier [63]. The simplified schematic diagram of this microwave
octave-band power amplifier is shown in Figure 3.40.
Figure 3.40 Microstrip broadband 15W GaAs MESFET power amplifier.
To achieve minimum output power flatness, the number of sections of
the output matching circuit is determined based on load-pull
measurements. At the same time, the number of sections of the input
matching circuit to compensate for the frequency-dependent power gain
is chosen based on the small-signal S-parameter measurements. For a
5.25-mm GaAs MESFET device, the values of the input and output
impedances at the fundamental derived from its large-signal model were

assumed resistive and equal to Zin = 0.075Ω 
and Zout = 1.32Ω,
respectively. To achieve minimum gain flatness, the length of each
microstrip section initially was chosen as a quarter wavelength at the
highest frequency of 10 GHz. However, because the input and output
device impedances are not purely resistive in practical implementation,
the final optimized length of each microstrip section was reduced to be a
quarter wavelength at around 15 GHz. The microstrip transformer
sections L1 … L6 and L10 … L14 were fabricated on alumina substrate
with a dielectric permittivity of εr = 9.8 and a thickness of 0.635 mm for
L1 and L2, 0.2 mm for L3 … L6 and L10 … L12, and 0.38 mm for L13 …
L14. The microstrip section L7 was realized on a high-dielectric substrate
with εr = 38 and thickness of 0.18 mm, whereas the microstrip sections
L8 and L9 were fabricated on a high-dielectric substrate with εr = 89 and
thickness of 0.15 mm. The final power amplifier represents a balanced
configuration of the two 5.25-mm GaAs MESFETs with hybrid quadrature
couplers.
The broadband power amplifier, whose circuit schematic is shown in
Figure 3.41, was intended for TV transponders with complex video and
audio TV signal amplification in the frequency bandwidth of 470 to 790
MHz. The power amplifier was implemented on a laminate substrate with
εr = 4.7 for a 1.5-mm thickness. The lengths of the microstrip lines are
given in terms of their lengths on the high-bandwidth frequency, and both
collector RF chokes represent the three-turn air-core inductors. The device
input and output impedances measured at the base and collector
terminals at 600 MHz are equal to Zin = (6 + j4)Ω and Zout = (15 +
j17.5)Ω, respectively, which allows the corresponding two-section input
matching circuit and a single-section output matching circuit to be used.
In a Class A operating mode, such a power amplifier using a balanced
TPV-595A bipolar transistor achieved a linear output power of 7W with a
power gain of about 12 dB for a quiescent collector current of 1.3A.

Figure 3.41 Circuit schematic of bipolar UHF power amplifier for TV applications.
Figure 3.42 shows the schematic diagram of a two-octave high-power
transistor amplifier covering both the civil and military airbands between
100 and 450 MHz [64]. The BLF548 device is a balanced n-channel
enhancement-mode VDMOS transistor designed for use in broadband
amplifiers with an output power of 150W and a power gain of more than
10 dB in a frequency range of up to 500 MHz. In a frequency bandwidth
from 100 to 500 MHz, the real part of its input impedance ReZin is almost
constant and equal to 0.43Ω, whereas the imaginary part of the input
impedance ImZin changes its capacitive reactance of −4.1Ω at 100 MHz
to the inductive reactance of 0.5Ω at 500 MHz. The required load
impedance seen by the device output at the fundamental is inductive and
equal to ZL = (1.1 + j0.4)Ω at the high bandwidth frequency of 500 MHz.
Coaxial semirigid baluns are used to transform the unbalanced 50Ω
source and load into two 180° out-of-phase 25Ω sections, respectively,
followed by coaxial 4:1 transformers with the characteristic impedance of
10Ω for input matching and of 25Ω for output matching. This yields the
lower impedance Rin = 
 = 3.95Ω, which is then necessary to
transform to the device input impedance of 0.43Ω, and the higher

impedance Rout = 
 = 6.25Ω, which is then necessary to
transform to the load impedance of 2.8Ω seen by the device output at the
center bandwidth frequency of 250 MHz. The final matching is provided by
simple L-transformers with series microstrip lines and parallel variable
capacitors. The microstrip lines were fabricated on a 30-mil substrate with
a dielectric permittivity εr = 2.2. In this case, the dimensions of each
microstrip line with the characteristic impedance of 20Ω are as follows: L1
and L3 are 5 × 8 mm, L2 and L4 are 2.5 × 8 mm, L5 and L7 are 11.5 × 8
mm, and L6 and L8 are 4 × 8 mm. To compensate for the 6-dB/octave
slope, conjugate matching is provided at 450 MHz, since at lower
frequencies a mismatch gives the required decrease of a power gain to
provide acceptable broadband power gain flatness. As a result, the gain
variation of an output power of 150W is smaller than 1 dB with an input
return loss better than 12 dB in a frequency range of 100 to 450 MHz.
Figure 3.42 Circuit diagram of broadband high-power VHF-UHF MOSFET amplifier.
Figure 3.43 shows the circuit schematic of a two-stage reactively
matched GaN HEMT MMIC power amplifier, which operates as a driver
amplifier for ultrawideband high-power transmitting modules for
multifunctional active electronically scanned antenna radar systems [65].
MMICs based on GaN HEMT technology can provide wider bandwidth,
higher output power density, improved reliability at high junction

temperature, better thermal properties, higher breakdown voltage, and
higher operating efficiency compared to MMICs based on GaAs
technology. For a 0.25-μm GaN HEMT technology using SiC substrate, the
breakdown voltage of 120V allows operation with a supply voltage up to
40 V; and a maximum output power density of 5.6 W/mm for device gate
periphery and capacitance sheet of 250 pF/mm2 for MIM capacitor can be
provided. In this case, the MMIC driver amplifier is based on three
identical GaN HEMT cells, each with 8 × 100-μm gate periphery (one
transistor in the first stage and two transistors in the second stage), to
achieve the maximum output power of about 36 dBm with a parallel
connection of two second-stage amplifying paths. The unconditional
stability of the MMIC driver amplifier from 100 MHz to 6 GHz is provided
by applying parallel RC networks at the gates of each transistor cell. The
integrated resistors are also used in the gate bias circuits of each device
cell to ensure stability without sacrificing gain or efficiency. The dc-feed
paths, which consist of narrow microstrip lines to provide the
corresponding inductive reactances and bypass MIM capacitors to provide
isolation between the dc and RF paths, are constituent parts of the input,
interstage, and output matching circuits, which are realized in the form of
lowpass L- and T-transformers with the series microstrip lines and shunt
MIM 
capacitors. 
The 
matching 
networks 
provide 
impedance
transformation with low Q-factors enabling an increased frequency
bandwidth.

Figure 3.43 Circuit schematic of broadband GaN HEMT MMIC power amplifier.
References
[1] H. W. Bode, Network Analysis and Feedback Amplifier Design, New York: Van Nostrand, 1945.
[2] R. M. Fano, “Theoretical Limitations on the Broad-Band Matching of Arbitrary Impedances,” J.
Franklin Institute, Vol. 249, pp. 57–83, Jan. 1950; pp. 139–154, Feb. 1950.
[3] R. Levy, “Explicit Formulas for Chebyshev Impedance-Matching Networks, Filters and
Interstages,” Proc. IEE, Vol. 111, pp. 1099–1106, June 1964.
[4] D. E. Dawson, “Closed-Form Solutions for the Design of Optimum Matching Networks,” IEEE
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-57, pp. 121–129, Jan. 2009.
[5] G. L. Matthaei, “Tables of Chebyshev Impedance-Transforming Networks of Lowpass Filter
Form,” Proc. IEEE, Vol. 52, pp. 939–963, Aug. 1964.
[6] G. L. Matthaei, L. Young, and E. M. T. Jones, Microwave Filters, Impedance-Matching Networks,
and Coupling Structures, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1980.
[7] A. Grebennikov, RF and Microwave Power Amplifier Design, New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004.
[8] W. H. Ku et al., “Microwave Octave-Band GaAs FET Amplifiers,” 1975 IEEE MTT-S Int.
Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 69–72.
[9] R. S. Pengelly and J. A. Turner, “Monolithic Broadband GaAs F.E.T. Amplifiers,” Electronics Lett.,
Vol. 12, pp. 251–252, May 1976.
[10] C. H. Lin et al., “A Compact 6.5-W PHEMT MMIC Power Amplifier for Ku-Band Applications,”
IEEE Microwave and Wireless Components Lett., Vol. 17, pp. 154–156, Feb. 2007.
[11] P. C. Huang et al., “A 17–35 GHz Broadband, High Efficiency PHEMT Power Amplifier Using
Synthesized Transformer Matching Technique,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol. MTT-
60, pp. 112–119, Jan. 2012.
[12] H. Wang, C. Sideris, and A. Hajimiri, “A CMOS Broadband Power Amplifier with a Transformer-
Based High-Order Output Matching Network,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-45, pp. 2709–
2722, Dec. 2010.
[13] B. S. Yarman and A. Aksen, “An Integrated Design Tool to Construct Lossless Matching
Networks with Mixed Lumped and Distributed Elements,” IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems—I:
Fundamental Theory Appl., Vol. CAS-I-39, pp. 713–723, Sep. 1992.
[14] P. I. Richards, “Resistor-Transmission Line Circuits,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 36, pp. 217–220, Feb. 1948.
[15] R. Saal and E. Ulbrich, “On the Design of Filters by Synthesis,” IRE Trans Circuit Theory , Vol.
CT-5, pp. 284–327, Dec. 1958.
[16] P. I. Richards, “Applications of Matrix Algebra to Filter Theory,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 34, pp. 145–150,
Mar. 1946.
[17] H. Ozaki and J. Ishii, “Synthesis of Transmission-Line Networks and the Design of UHF Filters,”
IRE Trans Circuit Theory, Vol. CT-2, pp. 325–336, Dec. 1955.
[18] H. F. Cooke, “Microwave Transistors: Theory and Design,” Proc. IEEE, Vol. 59, pp. 1163–1181,
Aug. 1971.
[19] R. S. Tucker, “Gain-Bandwidth Limitations of Microwave Transistor Amplifiers,” IEEE Trans.
Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-21, pp. 322–327, May 1973.
[20] C. A. Liechti and R. L. Tillman, “Design and Performance of Microwave Amplifiers with GaAs
Schottky-Gate Field-Effect Transistors,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol. MTT-22, pp.
510–517, May 1974.
[21] W. H. Ku and W. C. Petersen, “Optimum Gain-Bandwidth Limitations of Transistor Amplifiers as
Reactively Constrained Active Two-Port Networks,” IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems , Vol. CAS-
22, pp. 523–533, June 1975.

[22] R. E. Neidert and H. A. Willing, “Wide-Band Gallium Arsenide Power MESFET Amplifiers,” IEEE
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-24, pp. 342–350, June 1976.
[23] P. Saad et al., “Design of a Highly Efficient 2-4-GHz Octave Bandwidth GaN-HEMT Power
Amplifier,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-58, pp. 1677–1685, July 2010.
[24] H. Q. Tserng et al., “Microwave Power GaAs FET Amplifiers,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory
Tech., Vol. MTT-24, pp. 936–943, Dec. 1976.
[25] H. J. Riblet, “General Synthesis of Quarter-Wave Impedance Transformers,” IRE Trans.
Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-5, pp. 36–43, Apr. 1957.
[26] S. B. Cohn, “Optimum Design of Stepped Transmission-Line Transformers,” IRE Trans.
Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-3, pp. 16–21, Apr. 1955.
[27] G. L. Matthaei, “Short-Step Chebyshev Impedance Transformers,” IEEE Trans. Microwave
Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-14, pp. 372–383, Aug. 1966.
[28] V. P. Meschanov, I. A. Rasukova, and V. D. Tupikin, “Stepped Transformers on TEM-
Transmission Lines,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol. MTT-44, pp. 793–798, June
1996.
[29] C. A. Liechti and R. L. Tillman, “Design and Performance of Microwave Amplifiers with GaAs
Schottky-Gate Field-Effect Transistors,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol. MTT-22, pp.
510–517, May 1974.
[30] D. P. Hornbuckle and L. J. Kuhlman, Jr., “Broad-Band Medium-Power Amplification in the
2−12.4-GHz Range with GaAs MESFETs,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol. MTT-24,
pp. 338–342, June 1976.
[31] J. Obregon, R. Funck, and S. Barvet, “A 150MHz−16GHz FET Amplifier,” 1981 IEEE Int. Solid-
State Circuits Conf. Dig., pp. 66–67.
[32] K. Honjo and Y. Takayama, “GaAs FET Ultrabroad-Band Amplifiers for Gbit/s Data Rate
Systems,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-29, pp. 629–633, July 1981.
[33] N. Riddle and R. J. Trew, “A Broad-Band Amplifier Output Network Design,” IEEE Microwave
Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-30, pp. 192–196, Feb. 1982.
[34] K. B. Niclas, “On Design and Performance of Lossy Match GaAs MESFET Amplifiers,” IEEE
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-30, pp. 1900–1906, Nov. 1982.
[35] K. B. Niclas, “Multi-Octave Performance of Single-Ended Microwave Solid-State Amplifiers,” IEEE
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-32, pp. 896–908, Aug. 1984.
[36] V. V. Nikiforov, T. T. Kulish, and I. V. Shevnin, “Broadband HF-VHF MOSFET Power Amplifier
Design (in Russian),” Poluprovodnikovaya Elektronika v Tekhnike Svyazi, Vol. 23, pp. 27–36,
1983.
[37] O. Pitzalis, Jr., R. E. Horn, and R. J. Baranello, “Broadband 60-W HF Linear Amplifier,” IEEE J.
Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-6, pp. 93–103, June 1971.
[38] Y. Ito et al., “A 4 to 25 GHz 0.5W Monolithic Lossy Match Amplifier,” 1994 IEEE MTT-S Int.
Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 257–260.
[39] A. R. Barnes, M. T. Moore, and M. B. Allenson, “A 6-18 GHz Broadband High Power MMIC for
EW Applications,” 1997 IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 1429–1432.
[40] R. S. Pengelly, “Broadband Lumped-Element X Band GaAs F.E.T. Amplifier,” Electronics Lett.,
Vol. 11, pp. 58–60, Feb. 1975.
[41] Y. F. Wu et al., “3-9-GHz GaN-Based Microwave Power Amplifiers with L-C-R Broad-Band
Matching,” IEEE Microwave and Guided Wave Lett., Vol. 9, pp. 314–316, Aug. 1999.
[42] J. J. Xu et al., “A 3−10-GHz GaN-Based Flip-Chip Integrated Broad-Band Power Amplifier,” IEEE
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-48, pp. 2573–2578, Dec. 2000.
[43] K. Krishnamurthy et al., “RLC Matched GaN HEMT Power Amplifier with 2 GHz Bandwidth,” 2008
IEEE Compound Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Symp. Dig., pp. 1–4.
[44] H. L. Krauss, C. W. Bostian, and F. H. Raab, Solid State Radio Engineering, New York: John

Wiley & Sons, 1980.
[45] L. B. Max, “Balanced Transistors: A New Option for RF Design,” Microwaves, Vol. 16, pp. 42–
46, June 1977.
[46] J. Johnson, “A Look Inside Those Integrated Two-Chip Amps,” Microwaves, Vol. 19, pp. 54–59,
Feb. 1980.
[47] V. Sokolov and R. E. Williams, “Development of GaAs Monolithic Power Amplifiers in X-Band,”
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. ED-27, pp. 1164–1171, June 1980.
[48] N. E. Lindenblad, “Television Transmitting Antenna for Empire State Building,” RCA Rev., Vol. 3,
pp. 387–408, Apr. 1939.
[49] N. E. Lindenblad, “Junction Between Single and Push-Pull Lines,” U.S. Patent 2,231,839, Feb.
1941 (filed May 1939).
[50] A. Riddle, “Ferrite and Wire Baluns with Under 1dB Loss to 2.5 GHz,” 1998 IEEE MTT-S Int.
Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 617–620.
[51] K. Krishnamurthy et al., “100 W GaN HEMT Power Amplifier Module with >60% Efficiency over
100–1000 MHz Bandwidth,” 2010 IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 940–943.
[52] A. K. Ezzedine and H. C. Huang, “10W Ultra-Broadband Power Amplifier,” 2008 IEEE MTT-S Int.
Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 643–646.
[53] L. B. Max, “Apply Wideband Techniques to Balanced Amplifiers,” Microwaves, Vol. 19, pp. 83–
88, Apr. 1980.
[54] J. Rogers and R. Bhatia, “A 6 to 20 GHz Planar Balun Using a Wilkinson Divider and Lange
Couplers,” 1991 IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 865–868.
[55] B. J. Minnis and M. Healy, “New Broadband Balun Structures for Monolithic Microwave
Integrated Circuits,” 1991 IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 425–428.
[56] K. Kurokawa, “Design Theory of Balanced Transistor Amplifiers,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., Vol. 44, pp.
1675–1798, Oct. 1965.
[57] R. S. Engelbrecht and K. Kurokawa, “A Wideband Low Noise L-Band Balanced Transistor
Amplifier,” Proc. IEEE, Vol. 53, pp. 237–247, Mar. 1965.
[58] R. E. Neidert and H. A. Willing, “Wide-Band Gallium Arsenide Power MESFET Amplifiers,” IEEE
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-24, pp. 342–350, June 1976.
[59] K. B. Niklas et al., “A 12–18 GHz Medium-Power GaAs MESFET Amplifier,” IEEE J. Solid-State
Circuits, Vol. SC-13, pp. 520–527, Aug. 1978.
[60] K. B. Niklas et al., “Application of the Two-Way Balanced Amplifier Concept to Wide-Band Power
Amplification Using GaAs MESFETs,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol. MTT-28, pp.
172–179, Mar. 1980.
[61] A. Tam, “Network Building Blocks Balance Power Amp Parameters,” Microwaves & RF, Vol. 23,
pp. 81–87, July 1984.
[62] B. Becciolini, “Impedance Matching Networks Applied to RF Power Transistors,” Application Note
AN721, Freescale Semiconductor, 2005.
[63] Y. Ito et al., “A 5–10 GHz 15-W GaAs MESFET Amplifier with Flat Gain and Power Responses,”
IEEE Microwave and Guided Wave Lett., Vol. 5, pp. 454–456, Dec. 1995.
[64] “100–450 MHz 250 W Power Amplifier with the BLF548 MOSFET,” Application Note AN98021,
Philips Semiconductors, Mar. 1998.
[65] U. Schmid et al., “Ultra-Wideband GaN MMIC Chip Set and High Power Amplifier Module for
Multi-Function Defense AESA Applications,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol. MTT-61,
pp. 3043–3051, Aug. 2013.

CHAPTER 4
Distributed Amplification Concept and Its
Design Methodology
The concept of a distributed amplifier [1–21] can be traced back to the
patent specification entitled “Improvements In and Relating to Thermionic
Valve Circuits” filed by Percival in 1935 [22]. The term distributed
amplifier first appeared in 1948 [23]. Reports on the implementation and
application of distributed amplifiers, primarily for pulse amplification,
began to appear in the literature after 1945. A lucid account of the
principle of distributed amplification was given in [23] covering frequency
response, techniques for performance optimization, dissipation effects,
and noise characteristics, each supported by elegant yet forthcoming
analyses. After the publication of the Ginzton’s paper [23], activities and
discussions on the distributed amplifier immediately picked up
momentum, as is evident from the number of articles appearing in
scientific publications, with a wide range of applications including
television, distributed amplifiers, testing of networks and lines, digital
communication, oscillography, and nuclear research.
Distributed amplifiers employ a topology in which the gain stages are
connected such that their capacitances are isolated, yet the output
currents still combine in an additive fashion. Series-inductive elements are
used to separate capacitances at the input and output of adjacent gain
stages. The resulting topology, given by the interlaying series inductors
and shunt capacitances, forms a lumped-component artificial transmission
line. The additive nature of the gain dictates a relatively low gain;
however, the distributed nature of the capacitance allows the amplifier to
achieve very wide bandwidths (Figure 4.1).

Figure 4.1 Basic topology of a distributed amplifier, where Lg and Ld denote gate and drain line,
respectively; Vin is the input signal feeding; and Vout is output voltage [24].
4.1 Concept of Distributed Amplification
For gain and bandwidth products having an amplifier stage limited by
intrinsic parameters to the active device employed, expanding the
bandwidth will give rise to a reduction in the gain [1–10]. As the gain is
made close to unity, it becomes inefficient to cascade amplifier stages. On
the other hand, combining the outputs from a number of active devices in
parallel will increase the output power but will produce no improvement
in the gain bandwidth product [24]. The solution is to find an
arrangement in such a way that the output currents from a number of
devices are superimposed constructively while the effects of shunt
capacitances are not accumulated, and this is the base of distributed
amplification [24].
A transistor’s input and output capacitance as part of the lumped
elements of an artificial transmission line is formed with the series
inductance that connects adjacent drains and gates. A schematic of a
distributed amplifier is shown in Figure 4.2. The signal is coupled from the
gate line to the drain line through transistors. The transmission lines can
be of either the artificial type (i.e., made up of discrete-element
inductors) or transmissions lines (i.e., microstrip or coplanar). The
distributed amplifier concept was successfully applied to monolithic GaAs
MESFET amplifiers at microwave frequencies in the 1980s for larger gain-
bandwidth products [25]. Ayasli et al. have published design formulas for
the gain of traveling-wave amplifier based on an approach that
approximates gate and drain lines as continuous structures [25].
Similarly, Beyer et al. developed a closed-form expression for the gain
that depends on the circuit propagation constants and the gate circuit

cutoff frequency [1]. Niclas et al. have also developed a method based on
the use of the admittance matrix employing the Y-parameters of the
transistor model in an amplifier with either artificial or real transmission
lines [26]. This method allows the use of much more sophisticated
models for transistors developed from its measured S-parameters [27].
McKay et al. also proposed a formulation based on a normalized
transmission using matrix formulation [27].
The operation of the distributed amplifier can be explained referring to
Figure 4.2, where a RF signal applied to the input port of the gate line
travels down the line to the termination where it is absorbed.
Figure 4.2 The distributed amplification concept.
The traveling signal is picked up by the gates of the individual transistor
and transferred to the drain line via their transconductances gm. If the
phase velocities on the gate and the drain lines are identical, the signals
on the drain line add in the forward direction [1]. The phase velocities
between gate and drain lines can be synchronized simply by setting the
gate- and drain-line cutoff frequencies to be identical. Any signal that
travels backward and is not entirely canceled by the out-of-phase
additions will be absorbed by the drain-line termination [1].
The concept of distributed amplification is based on combining the input
and output capacitances of the actives device with inductors in such a
way that two artificial transmission lines are obtained. The input and
output capacitance of each device becomes the capacitance per unit
section for these lines (refer to Figure 4.3) and the lines are coupled by
t h e gm of the active device. As a result, it is possible to obtain
amplification over a wider bandwidth than with conventional amplifiers
[24]. Designers have concentrated mainly on increasing the gain-
bandwidth product and the gain flatness, as well as on output power

capabilities. In distributed amplifiers, the transmission structures
employed are often analyzed as a cascade of two ports, as we will see in
the following section. For the amplifiers employing transmission lines, the
voltage developed along the output line tends to increase as the cutoff
frequency is approached if the magnitudes of the current injected by
active devices along the line remain constant [24]. This is the result of
the factor of (1 − ω2/ωc2)–1/2 in Zoπ, the midshunt image impedance
distributed amplifier.
Figure 4.3 Lossless elementary section of distributed amplifier: (a) gate line and (b) drain line.
4.2 Image Impedance Method
The image parameter method can be applied to a distributed amplifier
because it consists of a cascade of identical two-port networks forming an
artificial transmission line. The analysis can be conveniently accomplished
using the ABCD-parameters, because the overall ABCD-matrix is the
product of those of the cascaded two-port networks [24], as shown in
Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4 A two-port network.
When considering signal transmission and impedance matching in
cascaded two-port networks, each two-port should operate with the

appropriate impedance terminations so that the maximum power transfer
takes place over the prescribed bandwidth. Such a condition can be met
by terminating the two-port with a pair of impedances known as image
impedances so that the impedance appears the same when one looks into
either direction of each port as shown in Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5 A two-port network terminated by its image impedance.
The impedances, Zi1 and Zi2, can be expressed as
 (4.1)
 (4.2)
where Zsc1 and Zoc1 are the impedances appearing at port 1, with port 2
short circuited and open circuited, respectively, and likewise for Zi2. If the
network 
is 
symmetrical, Zi1 
and Zi2 become identical, and the
characteristic impedance is denoted as Z0.
Figure 4.6 shows the case of an infinite number of identical networks
connected so that each junction is connected together. Due to the way
the infinite chain of networks is connected in Figure 4.6, the impedances
seen looking left and right at each junction are always equal; hence,
there is never any reflection of a wave passing through a junction. Thus,
from the wave point of view, the networks are perfectly matched [24].
The image impedance Zi for a reciprocal symmetric two-port is defined as
the impedance looking into port 1 or 2 of the two-port network when the

other terminal is also terminated in Zi [24]. To achieve an impedance
match over a broad range, the load and source impedance must be
transformed into the image impedance. Otherwise, the gain response will
not be flat as a function of frequency.
Figure 4.6 Artificial transmission line.
Having obtained expressions of the image impedance for a reciprocal
two-port network, we now apply them to a number of elementary filter
sections often found in distributed amplifiers. A simple filter can be
constructed from two circuit elements as shown in Figure 4.7, known as
an L-section or half section. The image impedances at port 1 and 2 are
referred to as Zi1 and Zi2, respectively, because they are also the
characteristic impedances of the T-network and π-network formed by
cascading two identical L-sections in a back-to-back fashion.
Figure 4.7 A lowpass L-section by means of constant-k image impedance.
From (4.1) and (4.2), we obtain
 (4.3)
 (4.4)
where
 (4.5)

with ωc being the cutoff frequency, which is the frequency where the
image impedances go from real to imaginary.
If the desired characteristic impedance Z0 of the transmission line is
fixed, the cutoff frequency fc can be expressed as
 (4.6)
This equation shows that the bandwidth of a distributed amplifier
decreases as a value of the capacitance, and C increases (in reality, C
refers to Cgs and Cds). Because this capacitance is proportional to the
dimension of the employed transistors and the gain of the distributed
amplifier, there is a trade-off between gain and bandwidth in distributed
amplifier design.
4.3 Theoretical Analysis of Distributed Amplification
Analysis of distributed amplifiers is facilitated by the assumption of
lossless transmission networks that are realized from ladder networks
based on constant-k lowpass filters and unilateral active devices [24]. A
simplified equivalent circuit of the transistor1 is shown in Figure 4.8,
where Rgs, Cgs, Rds, and Cds are the gate-to-source and drain-to-source
resistance 
and 
capacitance, 
respectively, 
and gm is the device
transconductance. The next subsections provide detailed analyses of
distributed amplifiers using different approaches.
Figure 4.8 Simplified small-signal circuit model of a transistor.
4.3.1 Analytical Approach to Two-Port Theory
As given in [1], the device is considered unilateral,that is, Cgd (the gate-

to-drain capacitance) is neglected. The equivalent gate and drain
transmission lines are shown in Figures 4.9(a) and (b).
Figure 4.9 (a) Gate transmission line and (b) drain transmission line.
The lines are assumed to be terminated by their image impedances at
both ends. With the unilateral device model employed, the two
transmission lines are nonreciprocally coupled through the action of the
transconductance gm. From Figure 4.9(b), the current delivered to the
load [1] is given as
 (4.7)
where
Vk = voltage across Cgs of the kth transistor
γd = αd + jβd = the propagation factor of the drain line
αd and βd = attenuation and phase shift per section on the drain line,
respectively
n = number of transistors in the amplifier.
The value of Vk can be expressed in terms of the voltage at the gate
terminal of the kth field-effect transistor (FET) [1] as follows:

 (4.8)
where
Vi = voltage at the input terminal of the amplifier
γg = αg + jβg = propagation factor of the gate line
αg and βg = attenuation and phase shift per section on the gate line,
respectively
ωg = 1/(RgsCgs) = gate circuit cutoff frequency
ωc = 2πfc = cutoff frequency of the lines (fc = 1/LgCgs).
For constant-k type transmission lines, the phase velocity is a well-
known function of the cutoff frequency ωc of the line. By requiring gate
and drain lines to have the same cutoff frequency, the phase velocities
are constrained to be equal. Therefore, we have βg = βd = β. Then,
output current I0 [1] can be expressed as
 (4.9)
The power delivered to the load and input power to the amplifier are
given, respectively, by
 (4.10)
 (4.11)
where ZID and ZIG are the image impedances of the drain and gate lines,
respectively. Therefore, the power gain of the amplifier is given as

 (4.12)
where 
 are the characteristic impedances of
the gate and drain line, respectively.
The most commonly used definition of power transducer gain is the so-
called transducer gain GT defined as
 (4.13)
where Pload is the power delivered to the load by the amplifier, and Pav
is the power available from the source. The latter is the same as the
power delivered to the amplifier input by the source under the condition
that the amplifier input impedance is conjugate matched to the source
impedance.
4.3.2 Analytical Approach to Admittance Theory
The elementary circuit of a lumped-element distributed amplifier can be
represented by a four-port network as shown in [26]. Replacing the
transistor by its two-port representation with the current source ik leads
to the equivalent circuit shown in Figure 4.10.
Figure 4.10 Equivalent four-port representation of a circuit with a distributed amplifier form [26].

The matrix equation that relates the voltage and current in Figure 4.10
takes the following form:
 (4.14)
where
Ak = A1kAFkA2k (4.15)
Here, [A1k] is the matrix of the input link and [A2k] is that of the
output link as shown in Figure 4.10, whereas [AFK] constitutes the
transistor admittance matrix. Cascading n elementary circuits and
terminating the idle ports with RG and RD (the gate and drain loads,
respectively) yields the following matrix equation [26]:
 (4.16)
where
 (4.17)
The insertion gain is expressed as the ratio of the signal power
delivered to the load by the circuit to the signal power delivered directly
to that load. The insertion gain can now be determined after some
algebraic steps [26] as follows:
 (4.18)
with
Y0 = 1/Z0 (4.19)
 (4.20)
 (4.21)

 (4.22)
This equation represents the exact solution for the gain of a distributed
amplifier in its most general form. In the case of the distributed amplifier
structure, the load and the input impedance are the same, typically
(50Ω). The insertion and the transducer gain define the same quantity.
4.3.3 Analytical Approach to Wave Theory
The normalized transmission matrix approach was presented by McKay et
al. [27]. This theory applies to a general class of distributed amplifiers
with discrete sampling points on the gate line that couple to discrete
excitation points on the drain line. Moussa et al. [28] extend this concept
by considering the bilateral case obtained by including the gate-drain
capacitance Cgd of the transistor. Using the scattering formalism, the
wave quantities [27] as shown in Figure 4.11 are given by
 (4.23)
 (4.24)
where Van, ian, Vbn, and ibn are the total voltages and currents at
section n and the a and b denote the complex wave amplitudes on the
gate and the drain line, respectively. The Z0g and Z0d terms represent
the characteristic impedances of the gate and drain lines, respectively. It
is the last equation that allows us to analyze the bilateral case [27].

Figure 4.11 Elementary section of bilateral distributed amplifier. The variables bn and an represent
scattering waves [27].
The transfer matrix [M], defined as [M] = [G–1/2][T]N[G1/2] [27], is
given by
 (4.25)
where
 (4.26)
and where T denotes the operator transpose and in and out are the input
and the output vectors [28], respectively.
Additionally note the following:
 (4.27)
Note that the propagation constants θg and θd of, respectively, the
gate and the drain line, are complex:
[T] = [G][H] (4.28)
where
 (4.29)

(4.30)
where
 (4.31)
ω is the pulsation, and
 (4.32)
Under the assumption of perfect matching at the input and output lines,
the transmission coefficient S21, which relates the incident gate at the
input to the incident drain signal at the output, has the following form:
 (4.33)
where b+out is the output wave of the last section on the drain line and
ain is the input wave of the first section of the gate line [28].
4.4 Gain/Power-Bandwidth Trade-Off
The transfer characteristics of an amplifier with lumped components as
the coupling elements will reveal that the gain and the bandwidth cannot
be simultaneously increased beyond a certain limit. As a result, these two
quantities are often considered trade-offs in the design of an amplifier. To
begin our understanding of the trade-offs, let’s consider a simple
bandpass amplifier consisting of an active device like that shown in Figure
4.12. The voltage transfer function [24] is given as
 (4.34)

where Q = ω0RC.The maximum gain occurs at midband and has a
magnitude of gmR. The bandwidth (BW; −3 dB is ω0/2πQ or 1/2πRC [24].
Hence, the gain-bandwidth product of the amplifier is
 (4.35)
It is clear from (4.35) that the gain-bandwidth product is proportional to
gm/C. The R that influences the maximum gain in the passband does not
appear in the gain-bandwidth product. From a device point of view, the
gain-bandwidth product can be explained (where L can be eliminated in
Figure 4.12). The amplifier has a maximum gain of −gm/R at dc, and a
bandwidth of 1/2πRC, so (4.35) is still valid in this case. Hence, the gain-
bandwidth product cannot be overcome by connecting in parallel
configuration.
Figure 4.12 A simple bandpass amplifier schematic. Feedback of the amplifier is neglected.
In a distributed amplifier, the parasitic capacitance (shunted) of the
device is well isolated from the device to form a lowpass filtering
response with the transmission line inductance, where a wide bandwidth
is promising. To explain the gain-bandwidth product in a distributed
amplifier, we review Figure 4.9. The voltage gain of the distributed
amplifier [24] can be shown to be
 (4.36)
From (4.36), we can show that the number of the devices that
maximizes gain at any given frequency is
 (4.37)

Podgorski and Wei [29] have shown that the optimum gate width of a
traveling-wave amplifier has a relation similar to that of (4.37).
Therefore, it is clear that in the presence of attenuation, the gain of a
distributed amplifier cannot be increased indefinitely by adding devices
[4]. Additional transistors not only decrease the excitation of the last
device but also increase the overall attenuation on the drain line. The
variables αg and αd are gate and drain-line attenuation [24], respectively,
and are given by
 (4.38)
 (4.39)
where ωg is the gate corner frequency, given by 1/RgsCgs, and ωd is the
drain corner frequency, given by 1/RdsCds.
Reference [1] showed that by extending the analysis of [30], (4.38) and
(4.39) can be rearranged as
 (4.40)
 (4.41)
where
At dc, (4.36), after substituting (4.40) and (4.41), can be rewritten as
 (4.42)
To explain the trade-off between the gain and bandwidth of a
distributed amplifier, voltage gain from (4.36) can be used. Normalizing
the voltage gain to dc operation is convenient to understand the gain and

bandwidth trade-off. The terms a 
and b are used to simplify the
normalized gain.
Normalized gain A/A0 can be deduced from (4.36) and (4.42), and the
expression shown as
(4.43)
The normalized gains of (4.43) over frequency response Xk for various
values of a and b are illustrated in Figure 4.13. In this figure n = 4 is
selected to understand the gain-bandwidth trade-off for a few variations
of a and b. Note that beyond n = 4, the gain response degraded for the
same a and b. Nevertheless, lower a and b values led to a broadband
frequency response, as shown in Figure 4.13. For example, the selection
o f a = 1 gives a poorer bandwidth response than that of a = 0.6.
Therefore, it is important to select a device having suitable ωg and ωd for
wideband operation.
Figure 4.13 Normalized gains over frequency response for various values for a and b, where n = 4.
Nonuniform distributed amplifier design applying drain-line impedance
tapered eliminating drain-line reverse wave and maximizing output power
combination at load termination [31]. Consider a nonuniform distributed
amplifier (Figure 4.14) with a cutoff frequency ωc, gate-line characteristic
impedance ZG, and maximum output power Pmax consisting of n sections
and having transistors with maximum power Po and gate-source

capacitance Cgs. Its output power-bandwidth product (PBW) [31] is
defined by
 (4.44)
where ZD is the load presented to its drain terminal, and Vbk and Vk are
the breakdown and knee voltages, respectively.
Figure 4.14 Maximum transistor output is given by Gp ⋅ Pin(max) for a nonuniform distributed amplifier.
For the (Vbk − Vk)/Cgs ratio, which is typically a fixed value, Po
depends on Vbk and Vk, which along with Cgs, increases with gate length.
The Po term is contributed mainly by the power transistor. However, for
moderate bandwidth operation (i.e., 2 GHz), a higher Pmax could be
achieved.
The increased single-stage gain permits a proportional Pmax increase in
those amplifiers limited by dynamic (linear) range of the input signal [31].
The maximum transistor output power Po is given by Gp ⋅ Pin(max),
which is proportional to the single-stage amplifier power gain Gp and to
the maximum limited input strength Pin(max). Therefore, connecting a
few stages of nonidentical transistors with interstage tapered impedance
can 
increase Pin(max) to the power transistor, and having high-fτ
transistor (lower Cgs) can be coupled to the gate line [32], as shown in
Figure 4.15.

Figure 4.15 Connecting a few stages of nonidentical transistors with interstage tapered impedance
(broadband matching networks, e.g., M1, … , M2) can increase Pin(max) to the power transistor,
and having high-fτ transistor (lowest Cgs) can be coupled to the gate-line input. Q1, … , QN are
high-fτ transistors.
As given in (4.44), n sections will increase the PBW products. However,
adding more n sections will not improve the products because of the
losses associated with active transistor resistances. Beyer et al. have
shown that gain in a conventional distributed amplifier cannot be
increased indefinitely by adding more sections [1]. The following
discussion will determine an optimum number of sections to maximize
output power at a given frequency associated with device input and
output corner frequencies. The output power of a distributed amplifier is
given by
 (4.45)
where αg and αd are gate and drain-line attenuation, given in (4.38) and
(4.39), respectively [1]; ωg is the gate corner frequency, given by
1/RgsCgs; and ωd is the drain corner frequency, given by 1/RdsCds. Note
that αg and αd are the critical factors controlling the frequency response.
The plots of αg and αd for a GaN power transistor are shown in Figure
4.16. The information of ωg and ωd of the power transistor can be
computed from the intrinsic elements. It is strongly evident from Figure
4.16 that the gate line is more sensitive to frequency response than drain-
line attenuation, and the drain-line attenuation does not vanish at a low
frequency limit. Therefore, the sensitivity of the distributed amplifier
frequency response can be minimized as the signal move toward ωc by
coupling a high-fτ transistor to the gate line that is having high ωg. To
improve drain-line attenuation, use of a compensation network is

necessary to introduce to the output of the power transistor. Typically, a
bigger device periphery causes the loading effect to become stronger.
Attenuation compensation with an active load to reduce drain-line losses
dominated by Rds (drain-source resistance) [33] is a common technique,
but the cost and area required are increased.
Figure 4.16 Plots of αg and αd for a GaN power transistor. The αg and αd of the transistor are
computed from the intrinsic elements of the GaN device.
The number of sections that maximizes output power is given in [34] as
 (4.46)
Referring to [34], for a larger device periphery (i.e., GaN device having
a gate width of 3.6 mm) and to deliver 30W from each device, nopt is
approximately 3 … 4. To understand the trade-off relation between output
power and bandwidth, (4.45) can be plotted for various ωg and ωd.
Additionally, from (4.44), reducing ZD would benefit the products. The
following section explains the optimum impedance that will be
synthesized when ZD is reduced. Consequently, wideband impedance
transformation is required. Bear in mind that by simply reducing ZD will
not guarantee the multiple-source current source combining to a single
load due to the fact that an optimum virtual impedance in two directions
(i.e., Zu(k) and Zr(k)) is not fulfilled, nevertheless, this can be achieved

and detailed explanations will be given in Chapter 5.
4.5 Practical Design Methodology
Distributed amplifiers are known for their flat gain, linear phase, and low
return loss over a wide frequency band [1–20]. The major challenges in
the design of a high-power distributed amplifier are related to active
input/output device losses [1–5]. In multilayer printed circuit boards
(PCBs), all RF and dc lines are often laid out together on the same PCB
using commercial layout tools. As a result, parasitic coupling between
different parts of the circuit may occur, thus degrading the device’s overall
performance. This can also lead to stability problems and undesired
oscillations. Typically, a PCB design is verified through measurements.
Modifications are then made based on experimental data, which often
lead to a long development time. Hence, it is very important to have an
accurate simulation tool that can predict undesired coupling between the
circuit elements before the fabrication of the PCB.
This section explains design methodologies for practical distributed
amplifiers, including a few steps from the design goal/specifications
process, device selection, analytical approach, and so forth. These steps
are applied in the distributed amplifier development discussions
throughout this text, and experimentally demonstrate good performance
without any tuning at the board level [8, 9, 20, 21, 32–36], which is
especially significant for high-power development (Chapter 8); the
resulting device is referred to as a distributed power amplifier (DPA).
4.5.1 Design Goal/Specifications
Understanding the design goals/specifications is the first step when
starting a distributed amplifier design. The basic design requirement is to
achieve a high-output-power (e.g., Pout >10W) distributed amplifier that
meets software defined radio (SDR) applications.2 Knowing the basic goal
is Pout >10W, breakdown voltage Vbk can be computed from
 (4.47)
where Vk and RL are knee voltage and load impedance of the distributed
amplifier, respectively.

4.5.2 Device Selection
If Vk in (4.47) is neglected (or assumed zero for simplicity), then Vbk over
Pout can be computed with condition RL = 50Ω (to eliminate impedance
transformation) and plotted in Figure 4.17. To achieve 10W or more, at
50Ω impedance, the device must have a Vbk of at least 70V (from Figure
4.17). Due to power requirements and a limited operating voltage for the
50Ω condition, LDMOS and HBT devices are not suitable. However, this
can be achieved with RL < 50Ω impedance, where an additional
impedance transformation network is required. Due to high bandgap, a
GaN HEMT device is selected as the power device. The device from CREE
Inc. (part number CGH40010F) offers a Vbk of ~70V for the 50Ω
condition, which was found to be suitable for this application. However,
many GaN devices are available from other device manufacturers, for
example, Nixtonic Inc., Fujitsu Inc., and NXP Inc.
Figure 4.17 Breakdown voltage Vbk versus output power Pout for 50Ω condition.
4.5.3 Theoretical Analysis (Zero-Order Analysis)
Various distributed amplifier topologies have been suggested, and it is
essential to understand the electrical performance of the topologies.
Therefore, the circuit analysis begins with a simplified FET model. The
intrinsic elements of the small-signal FET model (gm, Cgs, Cds, Rgs, Rds,
and so on) are extracted by means of device modeling (Figure 4.18). For
simplicity, feedback element Cgd is neglected. It is convenient to
investigate gate and drain lines independently to understand their
performance over the frequency range. Basic theoretical approaches

(superposition, Thevenin, distributed amplifier, Darlington theorem, and
so on) are employed in this thesis. As an example, in Chapter 5, the
generalized design equation for the virtual impedance of a distributed
amplifier by means of current source properties and a simplified FET
model are developed. This provides a good initial guess of the circuit
elements with which to begin the next steps.
Figure 4.18 Simplified small-signal FET model.
4.5.4 Analysis with VCCS and Cgd (First-Order Analysis)
As the next step, the voltage-controlled current source (VCCS) and Cgd
are taken into consideration to understand the electrical performance of
the proposed topologies (Figure 4.19). Due to the feedback effect,
electrical performance would be degraded and ripple may be expected
near cutoff frequency fc. Therefore, it is necessary to identify the circuitry
elements that could compensate for the electrical degradation of the
distributed amplifier. Typically, gate and drain-line impedances (including
the dummy termination impedances) are adjusted from the theoretical
analysis in many distributed amplifier applications. Reference [36]
showed that the implementation of a nonuniform gate line can be
employed in a distributed amplifier design to compensate for degradation
of electrical performance
Figure 4.19 VCCS and Cgd for a single distributed amplifier. Other intrinsic elements are included in
the VCCS section.

4.5.5 DC Biasing Circuitry Design
DC biasing circuitry needs to be designed carefully because of the
influence over the frequency response. Figure 4.20 shows a typical FET dc
bias arrangement. A dc feeding network, Ld, together with Cd selection
must 
provide 
high 
impedance 
over 
the 
frequency 
bandwidth.
Recommended values for Ld and Cd for bandwidth operation from 10 to
2000 MHz are 180 nH and 33 pF, respectively3,4 [11].
Figure 4.20 Basic FET dc bias arrangement.
As shown in [37], multiple chokes and capacitors offer broadband
response up to 3 GHz (Figure 4.21). For a dc biasing network, Lg and Cg
must provide a stable quiescent point.
In some cases Lg is replaced with a resistor [11], which provides
transient controlled and stable operation. Coupling capacitor Cb is
necessary to block dc from flowing into the RF path. With proper
selection, it offers a broadband response; for instance, 120 pF is adequate
to satisfy up to ~2 GHz. A proper dc turn-on sequence is applied: First
apply negative bias to the voltage (i.e., Vgate < 0V) and then apply the
drain voltage (Vdrain > 0V); during turn-off, Vdrain must be switched to
0V followed by Vgate.

Figure 4.21 Broadband choke implementation given in [38].
4.5.6 Device Modeling of GaN HEMTs
The enhanced equivalent circuit of a high-power GaN HEMT device can
include the delay network to describe the high-frequency delay effects,
the source spreading resistance to describe the influence of the device
channel to the increase in magnitude of S21 with frequency, and the
electrothermal elements to estimate channel temperature rise due to
power dissipation [39]. However, it is most important to evaluate
properly the main nonlinear intrinsic elements of the device equivalent
circuit; the extrinsic linear elements, however, whose effects are not so
significant especially at lower frequencies, can be included within the
distributed circuit parameters.
To characterize the intrinsic device, first consider the admittance Y-
parameters derived from the intrinsic small-signal equivalent circuit as
 (4.48)
 (4.49)
 (4.50)
 (4.51)
By dividing these equations into their real and imaginary parts, the
parameters of the device intrinsic small-signal equivalent circuit can be
determined as [40]

 (4.52)
 (4.53)
 (4.54)
 (4.55)
 (4.56)
 (4.57)
where the intrinsic admittance Y-parameters can be defined from
measurements after extraction of all extrinsic parasitic parameters [40].
4.5.7 Loading Device into Distributed Output Network
Generally in a distributed amplifier, output capacitance Cds becomes a
shunt element in a constant-k ladder network (Figure 4.22), and this
determines the cutoff frequency fc of the line. Synthesizing the inductance
required careful consideration to provide desired impedance(with
minimum flatness) over the frequency bandwidth response. Loading
properties of the line strictly rely on real part Rds, and significant loading
takes place with a larger device periphery. Throughout Chapters 5, 6, and
7, the distributed amplifier prototype boards discussed are using medium-
power devices, for which the loading effect is not significant. However, in
Chapter 8, due to the use of high-power devices, the loading effect of the
device is taken into consideration.
Figure 4.22 Circuit showing an analysis of drain line tapered with constant-k terminated with 50Ω,
where Z0i, with i = 1, 2 … n, refers to a line impedance distributed amplifier; consists of shunt

capacitance and inductance. Note that dummy termination is neglected to push all current to the load
ZL.
Due to packaged device implementation in distributed amplifier
development, keep in mind that to extract effective real and imaginary
parts of the input and output packaged device, Zin(ω) = Rin(ω) + jXin(ω)
and Zopt(ω) = Ropt(ω) + jXopt(ω), respectively. For example, Figure
4.23 shows a plot of S11 for a transistor in packaged and die form for a
medium-power device [36]. It is important to note that the resonance
frequency of a die is much higher than that of a packaged device. Figure
4.24(a) shows an example of the packaged properties of high-power GaN
device. Table 4.1 shows the extraction values of Zin(ω) and Zopt(ω) for
high-fτ and power transistors.
Figure 4.23 Plot of S11 for a common emitter medium-power device in packaged and die form
[41].
As shown in Figure 4.24(b), the optimum load impedance R′opt and
Ropt (at both reference planes, i.e., A and B) are different, since package
effects have to be taken into consideration. In practice, it is not possible
to observe the optimum RF voltage or current swing at reference A, but
the load pull impedance contours of the device can be extracted at
reference B.

Figure 4.24 (a) Properties of a high-power GaN packaged device (CGH40010F) [42] and (b)
illustration of optimum load impedance R′opt (at reference A) and Ropt (at reference B).
As a result, Rds will be replaced with Ropt(ω), and Xopt(ω) will be
absorbed into the drain line to form desired ωc, as shown in Figure 4.25.
Therefore, the line inductance Li is realized by means of (4.58).
Table 4.1 Extraction Value of Zin(ω) and Zout(ω) for High-fτ and Power Transistors*
Rin (Ω) Cin (pF) Ropt (Ω) Copt (pF)
First high-fτ transistora
600
2.4
470
1.2
Second high-fτ transistorb
378
3.3
220
2.8
Power transistor (CGH40010F) 102
5.9
40
3.7
* Note that Rin and Cin are in parallel form.
a The manufacturer part number is ATF51143, from Avago Inc. This is an enhancement mode
pHEMT device, designed with a 6,400-μm gate width and 46 gate fingers. The packaged device
information is given in [43].
b The manufacturer part number is ATF51143, from Avago Inc. This is an enhancement mode
pHEMT device, designed with an 800-μm gate width and 16 gate fingers. The packaged device
information is given in [44].
4.5.8 Synthesizing Distributed Input/Output Networks
Figure 4.25 shows when a device is loaded by artificial transmission line
(drain line). Therefore, with packaged device selection, the cutoff

frequency fc can be defined as
 (4.58)
where Copt is the element extracted from Xopt(ω), and Li is line
inductance. In most cases, Copt < Cin, where phase synchronization
between gate and drain lines is achieved using a capacitively coupled
technique [13].
Figure 4.25 Circuit showing an analysis of a drain line tapered with constant-k terminated with 50Ω.
Note that i = 1, 2 … n, and dummy termination is neglected to push all current to the load RL.
Once Zin(ω) and Zopt(ω) have been identified, we are ready to
synthesize the gate/drain-line networks by means of image impedance
characteristics. Bear in mind that selection of Copt from Xopt(ω) requires
careful analysis and is valid below a resonance frequency, and that
Ropt(ω) only plays a role in high-power distributed amplifier design, and
typically does not cause a loading effect for small- or medium-output-
power devices.
4.5.9 Layout Design
PCB selection (i.e., thickness h and dielectric constant εr) is important; for
instance, using standard routing to connect two lumped elements of size
3060, with the allowable minimum width of 30 mils. A PCB with a thicker
h has the advantage of being able to minimize line inductance, assuming
εr is identical. However, as a trade-off stray capacitance increases,
although via-hole inductance is reduced [45]. As a guideline, it is strongly
recommended to use an h of 0.762 mm and an εr of 3.66 (Rogers’
properties) to design a distributed amplifier covering bandwidths up to 2
GHz.

As far as the PCB is concerned, the self-resonance frequency of the
board should be as high as possible (as a rule of thumb). It is not easy to
measure the frequency, but some details are given in [46]. For high
current handling and to keep the frequency as high as possible, coupling
effects can be investigated with the aid of a full-wave simulator (e.g.,
CST, HFSS, or others). Figure 4.26 shows a via-hole full-wave simulation
that was designed to study optimum spacing for a selected diameter via
hole [47]. The results revealed that the spacing must be at least two
times the diameter in order to reduce the coupling at higher frequencies
(up to 4 GHz).
Figure 4.26 Differential via-hole study to understand the coupling effect for optimum grounding
potential, especially at higher frequencies.
4.5.10 Full-Wave Simulation/Layout Optimization
Typically, a PCB design goes through many prototypes to solve
unintended coupling problems through measurements and modifications
based on experience, often late in the development cycle. Hence, it is
highly desirable to have an accurate simulation tool that can predict
unwanted coupling in the layout without actually fabricating a PCB [48,
49]. A design methodology that uses full-wave electromagnetic (EM)
simulation is adopted in this work to minimize design cycle time and avoid
tedious optimization.
Irrelevant and insignificant details such as curved transmission line
bends, small holes, or gaps could cause long simulation times due to the
fine meshing requirements. Fine meshing produces more accurate results,
but requires longer computational times due to the high density of
meshing, whereas coarse meshing requires less computational time, but
may compromise the accuracy [50, 51]. Therefore, there is always a
trade-off between computational time and accuracy.
The two most common mesh types offered in available 3D EM
simulators (such as CST) are hexahedral and tetrahedral meshing (Figure

4.27).
Figure 4.27 Common mesh types offered in available 3D EM tools: (a) hexahedral and (b)
tetrahedral.
Normally for an electrically large simulation model, hexahedral mesh is
preferred. Tetrahedral mesh is preferred for electrically small models. In
this simulation, we use a tetrahedral mesh because the model is
electrically small and covers a broadband frequency. The mesh type used
is always related to the accuracy and the speed of the simulation. This is
a trade-off that needs to be taken care of before we start the simulation.
To achieve good accuracy, a curvature refinement option is used at the
via section for better meshing (Figure 4.28).

Figure 4.28 (a) Without and (b) with curvature refinement for the accuracy refinement options.
However, this will increase the meshing size from 25,000 to 111,255 as
shown in Figure 4.29.
Figure 4.29 Trade-off between meshing size and accuracy.
Radiation boundaries are used in order to terminate the field so that no
electromagnetic energy reflected back to the object that is being
simulated. The minimum distance to the radiation boundary is a quarter
wavelength (λ/4) at the lowest frequency of interest. CST has several
types of solvers. The time domain solver is a powerful algorithm that is
able to perform simulations for a broad frequency range. The frequency
domain solver is able to solve an electromagnetic problem a single
frequency at a time.
Modeling with a full-wave EM simulator including PCB layer stack-up, via
holes, indium foil, grounded heat sink, and RF connector modeling [34,

45] are considered. For a GaN power transistor, a grounded heat sink is
attached at the bottom layer via indium foil. The indium foil (part number
IN52-48SN, 0.004-in. thickness, from Indium Corporation Inc., North
Carolina, US); the thermal conductivity of the copper foil is 0.34 W/cm at
85°C. A cross section of the indium foil and its multiple screws is shown in
Figure 4.30. The board has four bigger diameter (5-mm) screws mounted
to hold the grounded chassis and two smaller diameter (1.4-mm) screws
to mount the GaN device amplifier to the chassis. The bottom layer of the
PCB has solder resist, and a bigger area of indium foil is filled in between
the bottom layer and the grounded heat sink. Note that active and
passive device models are not placed during EM simulation.
Figure 4.30 Cross-sectional diagram of a high-power GaN amplifier and PCB.
The EM simulation design flow begins by importing the ODB++ file
(PCB Gerber file, which was created to bring some order to the transfer of
board date to manufacturer) from Cadence software into the CST
environment, defining port and boundary regions, and exporting the S-
parameter to the ADS simulator until optimizing the layout in a harmonic
balance (HB) simulation before releasing the Gerber file for fabrication.
ADS cosimulation assisted by CST is performed in the ADS environment.
This simulation allows for optimization of the geometry of the layout,
while performing complete optimization in the HB simulation (assisted
CST). Each active and passive component is terminated with a discrete
lumped port in CST, and a total of 90 ports for the first DPA development
were created. Therefore, the layout information (*.s90 file) is exported to
ADS to evaluate complete power performance. All passive and active
components modeled are connected to the appropriate ports in the ADS.
References

[1] J. B. Beyer et al., “MESFET Distributed Amplifier Design Guidelines,” IEEE Trans. Microwave
Theory and Techniques, Vol. MTT-32, No. 3, pp. 268–275, Mar. 1984.
[2] B. Kim, H. Q. Tserng, and H. D. Shih, “High Power Distributed Amplifier Using MBE Synthesized
Material,” IEEE Microwave and Millimeter Monolithic Integrated Circuits Symposium, pp. 35–37,
1985.
[3] P. H. Ladbrooke, “Large Signal Criteria for the Design of GaAs FET Distributed Power Amplifier,”
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. ED-32, No. 9, pp. 1745–1748, Sep. 1985.
[4] B. Kim and H. Q. Tserng, “0.5W 2–21 GHz Monolithic GaAs Distributed Amplifier,” Electronics
Letters, Vol. 20, No. 7, pp. 288–289, Mar. 1984.
[5] M. J. Schindler et al., “A 15 to 45 GHz Distributed Amplifier Using 3 FETs of Varying Periphery,”
IEEE GaAs IC Symposium Technical Digest, pp. 67–70, 1986.
[6] L. Zhao et al., “A 6 Watt LDMOS Broadband High Efficiency Distributed Power Amplifier Fabricated
Using LTCC Technology,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 897–900, June 2002.
[7] J. Gassmann et al., “Wideband High Efficiency GaN Power Amplifiers Utilizing a Non-Uniform
Distributed Topology,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 615–618, June 2007.
[8] K. Narendra et al., “Vectorially Combined pHEMT/GaN Distributed Power Amplifier for SDR
Applications,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques , Vol. 60, No. 10, pp. 3189–3200,
Oct. 2012.
[9] K. Narendra et al., “Vectorially Combined Distributed Power Amplifier with Load Pull
Determination,” Elect. Letters, Vol. 46, No. 16, pp. 1137–1138, Aug. 2010.
[10] E.W. Strid and K. R. Gleason, “A DC-12 GHz Monolithic GaAsFET Distributed Amplifier,” IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. ED-29, No. 7, pp. 1065–1071, July 1982.
[11] K. Krishnamurthy et al., “Broadband GaAs MESFET and GaN HEMT Power Amplifiers,” IEEE
Journal Solid State Circuits, Vol. 35, No. 9, pp. 1285–1292, 2000.
[12] H. Amasuga et al., “A High Power and High Breakdown Voltage Millimeter-Wave GaAs pHEMT
with Low Nonlinear Drain Resistance,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 821–824, June
2007.
[13] Y. Ayasli et al., “Capacitively Coupled Traveling Wave Power Amplifier,” IEEE Trans. Microwave
Theory Techniques, Vol. MTT-32, No. 12, pp. 1704–1709, Dec. 1984.
[14] A. Ayasli et al., “A Monolithic GaAs 1–13 GHz Traveling Wave Amplifier,” IEEE Trans. Microwave
Theory Techniques, Vol. 30, No. 12, pp. 976–981, July 1982.
[15] K. B. Niclas, R. R. Pereira, and A. P. Chang, “On Power Distribution in Additive Amplifiers,” IEEE
Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 38, No. 3, pp. 1692–1699, Nov. 1990.
[16] J. L. B. Walker, “Some Observations on the Design and Performance of Distributed Amplifiers,”
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 38, pp. 164–1698, Jan. 1992.
[17] R. Halladay, M. Jones, and S. Nelson, “2–20 GHz Monolithic Distributed Power Amplifiers,” IEEE
Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Monolithic Integrated Circuits Symp., pp. 35–37, 1985.
[18] S. N. Prasad, J. B. Beyer, and I. S. Chang, “Power-Bandwidth Considerations in the Design of
MESFET Distributed Amplifiers,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Techniques , Vol. 36, pp. 1117–
1123, July 1988.
[19] S. N. Prasad, S. Reddy, and S. Moghe, “Cascaded Transistor Cell Distributed Amplifiers,”
Microwave and Optical Technology Lett., Vol. 12, No. 3, pp. 163–167, June 1996.
[20] K. Narendra et al., “Dual Fed Distributed Power Amplifier with Controlled Termination
Adjustment,” Progress in Electromagnetic Research, Vol. 139, pp. 761–777, May 2013.
[21] K. Narendra et al., “Discrete Component Design of a Broadband Impedance Transforming Filter
for Distributed Power Amplifier,” 10th IEEE Microwave Mediterranean Symp., pp. 292–295, Aug.
2010.
[22] W. S. Percival, “Improvements In and Relating to Thermionic Valve Circuits,” British Patent
460,562, 1937.

[23] E. L. Ginzton et al., “Distributed Amplification,” Proc. IRE, pp. 956–969, 1948.
[24] T. T. Y. Wong, Fundamentals of Distributed Amplification, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1993.
[25] Y. Ayasli et al., “2-to-20 GHz GaAs Traveling Wave Power Amplifier,” IEEE Trans. Microwave
Theory Techniques, Vol. 32, No. 3, pp. 290–295, Mar. 1984.
[26] K. B. Niclas et al., On Theory Performance of SolidState Microwave Distributed Amplifiers, IEEE
Trans. Microwave Theory Techniques, Vol. MTT-31, No. 6, pp. 447–456, June 1983.
[27] T. McKay, J. Eisenberg, and R. E. Williams, “A High Performance 2–18.5 GHz Distributed
Amplifier Theory and Experiment,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques , Vol. 12, No.
34, pp. 1559–1568, Dec. 986.
[28] M. S. Moussa, M. Trabelsi, and R. Aksas, “Analysis of a Bilateral Distributed Amplifier Using
Scattering Parameters,” Microwave Technology and Optical Lett. , Vol. 36, No. 2, pp. 120–122,
Jan. 2003.
[29] A. W. Podgorski and L. Y. Wei, “Theory of Traveling-Wave Transistors,” 
IEEE Trans. Electron
Devices, Vol. ED-29, No. 12, pp. 1845–1853, Dec. 1982.
[30] W. H. Horton, J. H. Jasberg, and J. D. Noe, “Distributed Amplifiers: Practical Considerations and
Experimental Results,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 38, pp. 748–753, July 1950.
[31] B. M. Green et al., “High-Power Broadband AlGaN/GaN HEMT MMICs on SiC Substrates,” IEEE
Trans. Microwaves Theory and Techniques, Vol. 49, No. 12, pp. 2486–2493, Dec. 2001.
[32] K. Narendra et al., “Cascaded Distributed Power Amplifier with Non-Identical Transistors and
Inter-Stage Tapered Impedance,” 40th European Microwave Conf., pp. 549–522, Sep. 2010.
[33] S. Diebele and J. B. Beyer, “Attenuation Compensation in Distributed Amplifier Design,” IEEE
Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 37, No. 9, pp.1425–1433, Sep. 1989.
[34] K. Narendra et al., “Design Methodology of High Power Distributed Amplifier Employing
Broadband Impedance Transformer,” IEEE Int. Conf. of Antenna, Systems and Propagation
2009, Sep. 2009.
[35] K. Narendra et al., “PHEMT Distributed Power Amplifier Adopting Broadband Impedance
Transformer,” Microwave Journal, Vol. 56, pp. 76–82, 2013.
[36] K. Narendra et al., “High Efficiency Applying Drain Impedance Tapering for 600mW pHEMT
Distributed Power Amplifier,” IEEE Int. Conf. on Microwave and Millimeter Wave Technology , pp.
1769–1772, Apr. 2008.
[37] L. Zhao et al., “A 6 Watt LDMOS Broadband High Efficiency Distributed Power Amplifier
Fabricated Using LTCC Technology,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig. , pp. 897–900, June
2002.
[38] A. Sayed and G. Boeck, “Two-Stage Ultrawide Band 5-W Power Amplifier Using SiC MESFET,”
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 53, No. 7, pp. 2441–2449, July 2005.
[39] I. Angelov et al., “On the Large-Signal Modeling of High Power AlGaN/GaN HEMTs,” IEEE MTT-S
Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 1–3, June 2012.
[40] M. Berroth and R. Bosch, “Broad-Band Determination of the FET Small-Signal Equivalent Circuit,”
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 38, No. 7, pp. 891–895, July 1990.
[41] G. Gonzalez, Microwave Transistor Amplifiers—Analysis and Design, Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 1997.
[42] Application Notes CGH40010P, www.cree.com.
[43] Application Notes ATF511P8, www.avagotech.com.
[44] Application Notes ATF54143, www.avagotech.com.
[45] M. I. Montrose, EMC and the Printed Circuit Board—Design, Theory, and Layout Made Simple,
New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1996.
[46] E. Laermans et al., “Modeling Differential Via Holes,” IEEE Trans. Advanced Packaging, Vol. 24,
No. 3, pp. 357–363, Aug. 2001.
[47] M. R. A. Gaffoor et al., “Simple and Efficient Full-Wave Modeling of Electromagnetic Coupling in

Realistic RF Multilayer PCB Layouts,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol. 50, No. 6, pp.
1445–1457, June 2002.
[48] M. R. A. Gaffoor, “Simple and Efficient Full-Wave Analysis of Electromagnetic Coupling In
Realistic RF Multilayer PCB Layouts,” Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Electrical Engineering,
University of Mississippi, Dec. 2000.
[49] G. Dambrine et al., “A New Method for Determining the FET Small-Signal Equivalent Circuit,”
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 36, No. 7, pp. 1151–1159, July 1988.
[50] R. A. Amy, G. S. Aglietti, and G. Richardson, “Accuracy of Simplified Printed Circuit Board Finite
Element Models,” Microelectronics Reliability, Vol. 50, pp. 86–97, 2010.
[51] I. F. Kovacevic et al., “Full PEEC Modeling of EMI Filter Inductors in the Frequency Domain,”
IEEE Trans. Magnetics, Vol. 49, No. 10, pp. 5248–5257, Oct. 2013.
1 For simplicity, a basic transistor model excludes the feedback effect Cgd, due to the fact that the
analysis becomes more complex. Furthermore, this method gives use freedom to isolate the gate and
drain to form an effective artificial transmission line by means of a constant-k ladder network.
2 Such an amplifier must meet the parameters of two-way radio requirements: output power, efficiency,
stability, transient response, and so on, over the frequency band of interest.
3 To obtain 180 nH, high-Q ceramic 0603HP series chip inductors were provided by Coilcraft, Inc., with Q
up to ~150 at 1.7 GHz.
4 To obtain 33 pF, a broadband high-Q capacitor 3060 from Murata, Inc., was used. Details can be
obtained at www.murata.com.

CHAPTER 5
Efficiency Analysis of Distributed Amplifiers
Distributed amplifiers are known for their flat gain, linear phase, and low
return losses over wide bandwidths [1–26]. They represent an attractive
candidate for software defined radio (SDR) applications [6, 27–30]. One
of the major challenges in designing a distributed amplifier is to achieve
high efficiency [26–32]. Several researchers have addressed the problems
of low efficiency and output power of distributed amplifiers and suggested
solutions to overcome these limitations [31–42]. To increase the
efficiency of a distributed amplifier, the drain current from each transistor
must be pushed to the load termination while mitigating the effect of the
drain termination [6, 8, 9, 28, 29]; this is known as a nonuniform drain
line or impedance tapering, in which backward current waves are
canceled at each junction for characteristic impedance equal to Zo/n,
where Zo is the characteristic impedance of the first section and n is the
number of sections [41]. Work by Krishnamurthy et al. [42] discussed a
distributed amplifier without an output synthesis transmission line; delay
equalization is instead provided by impedance matched line sections
between common-source (CS) and common-gate (CG) devices. A
nonuniform distributed amplifier design methodology as a function of
optimum power load of each device for maximizing power and efficiency
has been demonstrated [36, 37].
5.1 Efficiency Limitations of Distributed Amplifiers
The efficiency of conventional distributed amplifiers has never
demonstrated a PAE of more than 20% [31, 41]. This is primarily due to
the current splitting on the drain line into two branches that form waves
traveling toward the output load termination, and waves traveling toward
the dummy termination. Each device transistor injects a current of gmvgs
into each drain of the transistor, where gm and vgs are transconductance
and gate-source voltage, respectively. Because the drain of each
transistor sees an impedance of Zπ in both directions, half of this current
travels to the left and half to the right, as illustrated in Figure 5.1. The
drain impedance seen in each direction Zπ is given as

 (5.1)
where Ld and Cd are inductive and capacitance elements, respectively,
that form an artificial transmission line along the drain line, and fc is the
cutoff frequency of the transmission line.
Current flowing to the load termination IRd and dummy termination ILd
can be deduced from the network shown in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1 Impedance Zπ seen by each transistor in both directions, half right and half left.
Each lowpass network, Ld − Cd is contributing an image propagation
factor θd along the drain line. Applying the superposition theorem [42] to
the network shown in Figure 5.1, the current toward drain termination IRd
can be derived as follows:
 (5.2)
where n is the number of transistor sections. The network is assumed to
be lossless. Similarly, applying the superposition theorem [42], the
current toward dummy termination ILd is derived as follows:
 (5.3)
For the real resistive termination for load and dummy termination, the
ratio of power absorption between the load termination and dummy
termination is given by

 (5.4)
w he re ZROT 
and ZLOT are load termination and dummy drain
termination, respectively. The notation 
 refers to the real part and in
the following section, Á refers to the imaginary part.
Equation (5.4) shows that the power ratio between load termination
and dummy termination is equal if the both termination impedances have
equal characteristics. It is clear that half of the fundamental RF energy is
wasted in the dummy termination from the overall fundamental RF energy
generated by all transistor sections. The following section leads into a
discussion of the technique to improve efficiency.
5.2 Virtual Impedance Analysis Using Multicurrent Sources
Distributed amplifiers have impedance as a result of the injected signals
at each device’s output node [6]. Figure 5.2 is a simple schematic of two
ideal current sources that combine at a common node connected to a load
R. Each current source has a driving impedance (e.g., R1 and R2), as
shown in Figure 5.2. However, for simplicity, the driving impedances R1
and R2 of distributed amplifiers are neglected (as well as in the following
analysis). We also make the assumption that the loading effect for
medium-power devices is not significant when loaded into the drain line.
Thus, the impedance seen by each current source due to injected sources
can be called virtual impedance.
Figure 5.2 Two current sources are combining at a single node.
As shown in Figure 5.2, the current i(t) through the load would be the
sum of the two sources i1(t) and i2(t).The complex current source and

response may be simply represented by applying Euler’s identity [42]. The
i1(t) and i2(t) source thus becomes
 (5.5)
 (5.6)
where I1 and I2 represent the magnitude of the complex current source,
and θ1(t) and θ2(t) are independent phase values, respectively.
The impedance Z1 looking into the common node with i2(t) in parallel
wi th R is what the current source vector i1(t) is loaded with. By
simplifying Figure 5.2 and applying the Thevenin theorem, we can show
the simplified circuit in Figure 5.3.
Figure 5.3 Simplification of the circuit from Figure 5.2 to understand Z1.
Thus, impedance Z1 can be derived as follows:
 (5.7)
 (5.8)
If no phase offset or in-phase combining (θ2 = θ1) is applied in the
distributed amplifier, the amplitude of the reactive term becomes zero.
Thus, virtual impedance Z1 is positive real. Hence, impedance Z1 can be
simplified as shown below:
 (5.9)
From (5.8), the normalized virtual impedance real and imaginary part

Z1/R versus (θ2 − θ1) for a few cases of I2/I1 (from 0.1 to 2) is
illustrated in Figure 5.4. For the lower ratio of I2/I1 (i.e., 0.1), the real
Z1/R is almost 1, and it increases to 3 when I2/I1 is 2. The imaginary
Z1/R remains unchanged for any ratio of I2/I1. This is evidence that
current source properties (i.e., magnitude and phase) can be adjusted to
achieve the desired Z1/R.
Figure 5.4 The plot of real and imaginary Z1/R versus (θ2 − θ1) for a few cases of I2/I1 from
(5.8).
Consider multicurrent sources that are combined at a common node
connected to a load R. As shown in Figure 5.5, virtual impedance is seen
by the current sources in two directions, so the upper and right directions
Zu(k) and Zr(k), respectively, can be determined. Note that the Thevenin
driving impedances of the current sources are neglected for simplicity,
and k = 1, 2, 3 … n. The RF excursion swing of voltage and current for
each source depends on Zu(k), and Zr(k) will determine the impedance
that will be synthesized along the drain artificial transmission line. We
begin with Zu(1) by finding the Norton equivalent network across port aa′
(see Figure 5.5).
Figure 5.5 The virtual impedance Zi seen by the current generator in two directions, Zu(k) and

Zr(k), respectively, with k = 1, 2, 3 … n.
The Norton equivalent impedance RN can be determined by removing
all current sources except the first one (i2 = i3 … = in = 0), thus RN = R.
The Norton equivalent current iN across port aa′ can be determined by
applying the superposition theorem. When finding iN, port aa′ must be
shorted, and iN = i2 + i3 + … +in. Current generator i1 and the Norton
equivalent network of Figure 5.5 can be simplified to Figure 5.6. Thus, the
virtual impedance Zu(1) seen by current generator i1 (from Figure 5.5)
can be deduced to
 (5.10)
where I1, I2 … In represent the magnitude of the complex current source
and θ1, θ1 … θn are independent phase values, respectively.
The ratio I2/I1 is varied from 0.1 to 2, and imaginary part does not
change with I2/I1. By substituting ik = Ikej(wt+θk), where k = 1, 2 … n,
we can derive the virtual impedance:
(5.11)
In a similar manner, Zu(n–1) and Zu(n) seen by in–1 and in can be
determined as
 (5.12)
and
 (5.13)

It is clear from Figure 5.5, that Zr(1) = Zu(1) and Zr(n) = R, but Zr(n–1)
is given as
 (5.14)
and substituting ik = Ikej(wt+θk) into (5.14), it can be deduced as
(5.15)
As derived above, Zr(k) and Zu(k) must be satisfied to combine n
section current sources to a single load R, assuming a minimum loading
effect of the output transistor. Beyer et al. have shown that gain in a
conventional distributed amplifier cannot be increased indefinitely by
adding more section losses associated with active transistor resistances
[1]. Typically, n = 4 is applied in a distributed amplifier [1].
Figure 5.6 Simplified network of current generator i1 and the Norton equivalent network of Figure
5.5 to determine Zu(1).
From (5.11) through (5.15), for k = 1, 2, … 4, the following set of
equations is deduced:
(5.16)

(5.17)
(5.18)
(5.19)
 (5.20)
(5.21)
(5.22)
 (5.23)
Results of normalized real and imaginary Zu(k)/R (k = 1, 2, 3, and 4)
versus (θa − θb), are illustrated in Figure 5.7.

Figure 5.7 Real and imaginary Zu(k)/R (k = 1, 2, 3, and 4) versus (θa − θb) for identical current
sources, I1 = I2 = I3 = I4. The response Zu(1)/R = Zu(2)/R = Zu(3)/R = Zu(4)/R.
The term (θa − θb)1 refers to the phase difference, and the a and b
refer to any case as given in (5.16) through (5.19). The real and
imaginary parts Zu(k)/R and Zr(k)/R are plotted for the same magnitude
of current sources, where I1 = I2 = I3 = I4. From Figure 5.7, for in-phase
combining (θa − θb) = 0, then the real part Zu(k)/R = 4 and imaginary
part Zu(k)/R = 0. As (θa − θb) = π/2 rad/s, the real part vanishes to 0
and the imaginary part has the highest reactance. The plot of Zr(k)/R (k
= 1, 2, 3, and 4) versus (θa − θb), where I1 = I2 = I3 = I4 is shown in
Figure 5.8.
Figure 5.8 Real and imaginary Zr(k)/R (k = 1, 2, 3, and 4) versus (θa − θb) for identical current
sources, I1 = I2 = I3 = I4. For k = 4, the imaginary part is null.
The real part Zr(k)/R value is reduced and the imaginary part is null for
in-phase combining (θa − θb) = 0. Real and imaginary parts Zr(2)/R,
Zr(3)/R, and Zr(4)/R are almost constant for (θa − θb) ≤ π/2 rad/s. As

(θa − θb) increases, the real part vanishes.
An important point to notice is that, to match the standard R of 50Ω,
Zu(k) equals 200Ω (k = 1, 2, 3, and 4). However, to achieve Zu(k) <
200Ω (power matching), R has to be lower than 50Ω; therefore, an
impedance transformation from R to 50Ω is needed. To avoid impedance
transformation, one possibility is to achieve Zu(k) < 200Ω while retaining
R = 50Ω, the current source properties (e.g., I1, I2 … In and θ1, θ2 … θn
can be adjusted). Table 5.1 shows tabulated results of Zu(k)/R and
Zr(k)/R (k = 1, 2, 3, and 4) for various magnitude and phase selections.
Table 5.1 Zu(k)/R and Zr(k)/R for Various Ik and θk Selections (k = 1, 2, 3 and 4)
I1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
I2
1
1
1
0.7 1
1
1
1
1
0.7
I3
1
1
0.7 0.4 1
1
1
1
0.6
0.4
I4
1
0.1 0.1 0.1 1
1
1
0.1 0.1
0.1
θ1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
θ2
0
0
0
0
0
0
π/6 0
0
π/6
θ3
0
0
0
0
0
π/5 π/4 0
π/5
π/4
θ4
0
0
0
0
π/4 π/4 π/2 π/4 π/4
π/2
{Ζu(1)/R} 4
3.1 2.8 2.2 3.7 3.5 3.383.072.55 2.16
{Ζu(2)/R} 4
3.1 2.8 3.143.7 3.5 3.823.072.55 3.22
{Ζu(3)/R} 4
3.1 4
5.5 3.7 3.6 3.793.073.86 3.67
{Ζu(4)/R} 4
31
28
22
3.1 3.4 3.6622.221.0620.75
{Ζr(1)/R} 4
3.1 2.8 2.2 3.7 3.5 3.383.072.25 2.16
{Ζr(2)/R} 2
1.551.4 2.9 1.851.751.931.531.27 1.38
{Ζr(3)/R} 1.331.031.031.041.231.291.391.021.03 1.04
{Ζr(4)/R} 1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
From (5.16) through (5.23), the real parts of Zu(k)/R and Zr(k)/R are
given in the Table 5.1; the imaginary part is not shown; it is instead
absorbed in the input and output transmission lines. For the same
magnitude and in-phase combining current source, the 
{Zu(k)/R}’s are
equal, and 
{Zr(k)/R}is reduced from 4, 2 and to 1, for all k. Figure 5.9
shows Zr(k)/R by each current source and evaluated according to (5.20)
through (5.23). Either adjustment of magnitude or phase of the current
source will result in a reduction in 
{Zu(k)/R}.

Figure 5.9 The term Zr(k) is evaluated according to (5.20) through (5.23) for designing an artificial
transmission line. The output capacitance parallel to the current source, typically known as Cds, will be
absorbed in the artificial transmission line design.
As an example from Table 5.1, for in-phase combining, and when the
final current magnitude is reduced by a factor of 10, then {Zu(1)/R} =
{Zu(2)/R} = {Zu(3)/R} = 3.1, but {Zu(4)/R} = 31. Therefore, the fourth
(or last) section can be placed with a high-fτ transistor (having a lower
device periphery), which may not contribute power to the load and absorb
power at a certain frequency, but simply acts as active load matching. In
a similar manner, lower {Zu(k)/R} can be achieved for the case of fixed
magnitude while adjusting the phase. With adjustment of both properties
(i.e., the magnitude and phase of the current sources), {Zu(k)/R} can be
reduced to a lower value. As shown in Table 5.1, when I1 = 1, I2 = 0.7,
I2 = 0.4, and I2 = 0.1, and θ1 = 0, θ2 = π/6, θ2 = π/4, and θ2 = π/2, the
value of {Zu(1)/R} = 2.1, {Zu(2)/R} = 3.2, {Zu(3)/R} = 3.67, and
{Zu(4)/R} = 20. To achieve this, the device periphery of the transistors
can be tapered [43] while adjusting the gate-line characteristics to
provide phase conditions. Therefore, it is the designer’s choice to adjust
the Ik and θk to obtain reasonable Zu(k)/R and Zr(k)/R.
It is clear that to combine the current from each source at a single node
(at load R), the virtual impedance seen by the current sources in two
directions (Zu(k) and Zr(k)) must be presented to each current source. If
current source sees high Zu(k) (e.g., 200Ω), it is not possible to deliver
power from each current source due to the RF current swing limitation.
Certainly, it is possible to achieve Zu(k) < 200Ω while retaining R = 50Ω
as long as (5.16) through (5.23) are satisfied. In (5.1), the impedance
seen by each current source loaded with a constant-k ladder network
transmission line, typically 50Ω impedance, limits the excursion of RF
current swing. Nevertheless, to maximize the current swing, it is

necessary to match to the optimum power load of each current source (or
transistor) [45], and in a distributed amplifier reducing Zu(k) will increase
the power from each source. It is important, however, to note that there
are boundary limitations to practical realizations to achieve lower Zu(k)
while retaining R = 50Ω, such as the device periphery ratio of the
transistor, gate-line controlling, and so forth.
An unequal magnitude of the current source can be achieved by using a
capacitively coupled technique [13]. The unequal injection of current
source is due to different vgs drops along the gate line, as illustrated in
Figure 5.10. An external capacitor is coupled in series between the
lumped inductance and input parasitic device capacitance Cgs and the
external capacitor controlling the voltage drop across the Cgs. Thus, by
varying the voltage drop ratio along the gate line, the input excitation can
be tailored to individual transistors. From Figure 5.10, when ωCgsRgs ≤ 1,
the equivalent capacitance loading the gate line is
 (5.24)
where Rgs is the series gate resistance of the active device. For simplicity,
Rgs is not shown in Figure 5.10. The voltage drop across the Cgs junction
can be deduced as
 (5.25)
where Vi is voltage that appears as shown in Figure 5.10. For a lossless or
ideal gate line, the magnitude of Vi is approximately the same for any
nodal stage. Each device transistor injects a current of gmvgs into each
drain of the transistor. Notations gm and vgs are referred to as the
transconductance and gate source voltage of the transistor, respectively.

Figure 5.10 Input gate line coupled with external capacitor in series with Cgs. Note that the
elements may have different values if unequal injection is required.
However, the phase adjustment of the current source is difficult to
realize, and keep in mind that the constant-k ladder network behavior
changes with respect to frequency. Stengel et al. invented a technique to
drive the gate line with a drive generator circuit to produce modulation of
the virtual load impedance at each amplifier stage [46] and a new
distributed amplifier architecture to provide programmable constructive
vector signal combining at a fundamental frequency along with
programmable destructive at harmonic frequencies [47]. Stengel et al.
[47] have shown that harmonic components of the current sources can be
controlled with I/Q baseband signal injection to the gate line. A simple
approach, like that shown in [30], phase adjustment is achieved with
nonuniform gate-line design where gate-line impedance is adaptively
reduced to provide better phase synchronization.
5.3 Simulation Analysis of Efficiency Analysis
Validation of the preceding concept for equal magnitude and in-phase
combining where I1 = I2 = I3 = I4 = 1 and θ1 = θ2 = θ3 = θ4 = 0 have
been selected (from Table 5.1); R = 50Ω selection leads to {Zu(1)} =
{Zu(2)} = {Zu(3)} = {Zu(4)} = 200Ω, and {Zr(1)} = 200Ω, {Zr(2)} =
100Ω, {Zr(3)} = 67Ω, and {Zr(4)} = 50Ω, and an imaginary part does
not exist. This is illustrated in Figure 5.11.

Figure 5.11. Circuit showing multiple-current sources combining at a single load termination, where R
= 50Ω.
For simplicity, a hypothetical drain terminal for a transistor has been
modeled as an ideal current source with parallel resistance (high
impedance distributed amplifier, e.g., 1 M Ω) [30]. To additively combine
the currents at each junction (as in Figure 5.11), phase synchronization
between the current source and the transmission line is crucial. Because
transmission lines delays θd(k) vary linearly with frequency, making the
current source delays also vary with frequency would guarantee delay
matching between the sources and the transmission lines. Putting current
source delays as θ1 = 0°, θ2 = −1 ∗ 10° ∗ 1 GHz/freq, θ3 = 2 ∗ 10° ∗ 1
GHz/freq, and θ4 = −3 ∗ 10° ∗ 1 GHz/freq, respectively. The notation freq
is referring to frequency in an ac simulation (Advanced Design System)
and θd(k) is simply set to a fixed real value (e.g., 40°). Figure 5.12 shows
a vector diagram of magnitude and phase of the current properties for
Figure 5.11. At every junction, the resultant magnitude of the sources (ib,
id, and if) are constructive for in-phase combining between ia and i2, ic
and i3, and ie and i4.
Figure 5.12 Vector diagram of magnitude and phase of the current properties for Figure 5.11,
where the magnitude and phase of the current sources are equal and i1 is set to be a reference.
Power delivered by each current source is shown in Figure 5.13. It

indicates that the calculated power of 100W is achieved across the
frequency, where all the sources are presented with exactly the required
hypothetical optimum impedance of 200 + j ∗ 0Ω at all frequencies. Phase
coherency between the current sources and the phase of the transmission
must be well matched to achieve maximum power delivery from the
sources to the output line over the entire frequency range. Analogous
results are obtained for various selected cases of Ik and θk (k = 1, 2, 3,
and 4) from Table 5.1.
Figure 5.13 Power delivered by each current source with matched delay values connected to the
output transmission line. Note that all sources deliver maximum power and have the same energy
level over the frequency range of interest.
In reality, however, lumped inductance with parasitic capacitance (of
the transistor) will form a constant-k artificial transmission line along the
drain line, which is found to be suitable for the low microwave region [48,
49]. Again, a similar analysis is performed to understand the power
delivery behavior in the presence of lumped inductance and capacitance.
Figure 5.14 shows a circuit representation for an ideal current source with
lumped inductance and capacitance.
Figure 5.14 Circuit showing an analysis of a drain line tapered with constant-k terminated with 50Ω
load termination. All current sources are loaded with a parallel resistor of 1 MΩ.
Cutoff frequency ωc is set to 2.12 GHz. The transmission line has

nonuniform impedance, Zr(1) = 200Ω, Zr(2) = 100Ω, Zr(3) = 67Ω, and
Zr(4) = 50Ω, and an imaginary part does not exist. Careful phase
consideration of each current source must be taken into account due to
the delay of each L-C combination with respect to the frequency.
Therefore, the delay or phase velocity equation of the constant-k artificial
transmission line is defined for the current source delay θd(k) as given by
 (5.26)
The θ1 = 0°, θ2 = −1 ∗ θd(1), θ3= −2 ∗ θd(2), and θ4 = −3 ∗ θd(4),
respectively. Figure 5.15 shows the power response of the current sources
across a wide frequency range.
Figure 5.15 Power delivered by each ideal current source nonuniform drain line with lumped
elements, which consist of the first source, second source, third source, and fourth source.
At low frequencies (close to dc), maximum power is delivered by each
current source. The power response is being degraded as the frequency
increases toward ωc. Due to the fact that the phase delay changes with
frequency, it is difficult to achieve phase coherency for optimum current
combining at each junction (as in Figure 5.11). The further the location of
the current source (closer to the load termination R), the earlier the
power degraded with respect to frequency, and at a certain frequency it
absorbs power from the line (i.e., negative impedance). Keep in mind that
power delivered by each transistor follows the real part impedance. Note
that a strong peaking occurred the closer the signal got to ωc, especially
at the first and last section. In the following section, a technique to
compensate phase delay by designing a nonuniform gate line to improve
power delivery from each transistor is discussed [30].

5.4 Design Example of High-Efficiency Distributed Amplifier
The design methodology (device selection, synthesizing gate/drain-line
elements from device packaged values, until full-wave simulation/layout
optimizations) discussed in Section 4.5 is applied in this section. The basic
design goal of the work is to achieve high efficiency for SDR driver power
amplifier applications, with a power operation of ~27 dBm. Therefore, a
medium-power device, for example, a pHEMT device (ATF511P8) [50], is
suitable. Low dc supply operation is required for the device, which is
typically about 4.5V. Breakdown voltage Vbk of the device is ~16V, which
is slightly lower than the computation value obtained from (4.47). The
drain loading effect of the device is not significant, but Xopt(ω) is
important because it determines the drain-line cutoff frequency ωc. A
value of 4 pF for Copt is extracted by means of device modeling (with
inclusion of package properties). Therefore, effective drain-line elements
Li are synthesized according to (4.58) to obtain the desired ωc (~1.9
GHz). Dummy drain termination is eliminated to improve the efficiency
performance [30].
A simplified design schematic for a four-section pHEMT distributed
amplifier applying a nonuniform drain line is shown in Figure 5.16. The m-
derived section is implemented at both terminations of the gate line. Each
device is fed with a 5V drain supply voltage. A bias voltage of 0.44V is
applied to each gate, resulting in Class AB operation, with quiescent
current Idq of ~90 mA (~10% of Idss). A series gate resistor Rg(k) of 5Ω
is used at each section for stability purposes. Power performance due to
load termination R for n = 4 is investigated. The virtual impedance seen
by the transistor in both directions depends on selection as illustrated in
Section 5.2 and can be computed using (5.16) through (5.23). Thus,
computation of the virtual impedance must be repeated for the different
cases of load termination R. All the passive elements are slightly tuned at
the simulation level for optimum results, and the summary elements are
tabulated in Table 5.2. As given in Table 5.2, Cd(k) refers to the external
capacitance required to form the desired ωc with combination of Copt.
The gate-line impedance network remains unchanged for the analysis.
The supply voltage and gate bias voltage are fixed as previous values.

Figure 5.16 Simplified four-section distributed amplifier applying nonuniform drain-line impedance.
The m-derived section is implemented close to the termination point of the gate line.
Simulated results input return loss S11 and output return loss S22, and
power performances (PAE and gain) for various load terminations R are
shown in Figures 5.17 and Figure 5.18, respectively.
Figure 5.17 Simulated analysis of S11 and S22 for various load terminations R (R = 5Ω; R = 8Ω; R
= 12.5Ω; R = 25Ω; R = 50Ω) for the circuit shown in Figure 5.16.
Figure 5.17 shows that the output return loss (S22) is dependent on R.
Right selection of load termination R is important for optimum matching
and power performance across a wide frequency range. For example, the
R’s within the range of 8Ω and 12.5Ω are the optimum case. For the best
efficiency result (PAE >40%) across the frequency range, R of 12.5Ω is
the optimum case. A constant-k nonuniform drain-line network with lower
R (e.g., 5Ω) is not effective. For the gate-line termination Rgt is 50Ω;
optimum R is within range of 8Ω to 12.5Ω for the case n = 4. For an R of
50Ω, the power performance is degraded beyond 1400 MHz.This analysis
indicated 
that R is important to provide better phase equalization
between gate and drain line.

Figure 5.18 Simulated analysis of PAE and gain for various load terminations R (R = 5Ω; R = 8Ω; R
= 12.5Ω; R = 25Ω; R = 50Ω) for the circuit shown in Figure 5.16.
Phase velocity synchronization between gate and drain line is achieved
with a nonuniform gate-line design as well [30]. A simple adjustment of
Cga(k) and Lg(k) (for k = 4, as shown in Figure 5.10) offers a power and
efficiency improvement. The gate-line impedance and dummy termination
Rgt are adaptively reduced at the simulation level. When R of 50Ω and
Rgt of 41Ω are selected, the magnitude current of load termination is
improved by ~15 mA at the simulation level compared with uniform gate-
line impedance across a frequency range. Figure 5.19 shows current for a
load termination comparison for the cases of with and without nonuniform
gate-line impedance. In a similar manner, for R of 12.5Ω, the gate-line
impedance and dummy termination are optimized in at the simulation
level. It is important to note that the gate-line properties are dependent
on the termination R value. Detailed analysis of a nonuniform gate-line
network for phase synchronization with a nonuniform drain line is not
presented but it is recommended for future work.
Figure 5.19 Magnitude of load current for nonuniform and uniform gate-line design across the
frequency range of 10 to 1800 MHz.

A n R of 12.5Ω would be the optimum selection due to the resulting
good power performance and lower transformation impedance ratio to
50Ω compared with an R of 8Ω. Wideband impedance transformer design
to match an impedance of 12.5Ω to 50Ω will be discussed in the following
section. A high-efficiency distributed amplifier having nonuniform drain
and gate-line networks terminated with an R of 12.5Ω and 50Ω,
respectively, is chosen to proof the concept at the measurement level
(see discussion at the end of this chapter). A wideband impedance
transformer ratio of 1:4 based on asymmetric parallel coupled line [52,
53] is used in this design to achieve impedance transformation from
12.5Ω to 50Ω, covering a frequency range of 10 to 1800 MHz. The
detailed design of the transformer is covered in the following section.
5.5 Broadband Impedance Transformer Design
Recent works [51, 54–58] have demonstrated an impedance transformer
for microwave applications. Coupled transmission lines have been
suggested as a matching element due to greater flexibility and
compactness in comparison to quarter-wave transmission lines [55, 56].
The quarter-wave transformer is simple and easy to use, but it has no
flexibility beyond the ability to provide a perfect match at the center
frequency for a real valued load. The coupled line section provides a
number of variables that can be utilized for matching purposes and these
variables are the even- and odd-mode impedance distributed amplifier
and loading of the through and coupled ports [52]. Recent work [52]
demonstrated a fractional bandwidth of more than 100% for a −20-dB
reflection 
with 
asymmetric 
coupled 
lines 
implemented 
in 
a
nonhomogenous medium. A microstrip is one of the most commonly used
classes of transmission lines in nonhomogenous media. Figure 5.20 shows
general coupled line configuration, and coupled and through ports can be
loaded with an external impedance termination to extend the bandwidth
[52].

Figure 5.20 General coupled line configuration. The four-port section is reduced to a two-port with
coupled and through ports that can be loaded with an external impedance termination [52]. In this
figure, the through port is terminated with termination impedance Z4.
Figure 5.20 can be represented as a two-port network, as shown in Figure
5.21. The magnitude of the reflection coefficient at port 2 [53] is equal to
 (5.27)
where ZIN is the input impedance of the transformer, which is a function
of the load ZL, impedance matrix elements of coupled lines Zij, and
arbitrary load Z″ij (i and j are the indexes of the matrix elements). Design
equations for the asymmetric coupled ports in nonhomogenous medium
can be obtained from [52].
When loaded the coupled and through ports with stepped impedance
transmission line the operating bandwidth of the transformer has
increased by three times in comparison to the traditional quarter-wave
transformer [52]. However, in this work, bandwidth is further increased by
creating an impedance transformer using more coupled line sections
connected in series [28, 51]. It consists of two coupled transmission line
sections, as illustrated in Figure 5.21. Each section is a quarter-
wavelength long at the center frequency of operation. The impedance
transformation of 12.5Ω to 50Ω is achieved between two diagonal ports of
the section. The remaining ports are interconnected by a stepped
impedance transmission line. This interconnection widens the operating
frequency band and compensates for the differences in electrical lengths

of the coupled lines for the c and π modes [59] in a nonhomogeneous
medium (assuming microstrip realization).
Figure 5.21 Two-port network representation for a coupled line transformer [52].
From Figure 5.22, an analysis of the series stepped impedance of port
1″2″ is carried out based on [52].
Figure 5.22 Proposal circuit of the compact impedance transformer, and the impedance transformation
from 12.5Ω to 50Ω.
Thus, the impedance matrix elements are found to be
(5.28)

(5.29)
(5.30)
where transmission lines with characteristic impedances Z01, Z02, length
l1, l2, and propagation constants γ1, γ2 [58] are given by
 (5.31)
and
 (5.32)
The compensation allows for uniform distribution of the reflection zeros
in the frequency domain. Each stepped impedance transmission line
consists of two λg/8 length transmission lines. The total electrical length
of the transformer is equal to half a wavelength at the center frequency.
The return loss response S22, from (5.27) of the transformer is shown in
Figure 5.23. For comparison, the transformer discussed in [52] is included.
The transformer exhibits six minima (zero reflection) in the spectrum of
the reflection coefficient across the frequency range. The achieved
fractional matching bandwidth is beyond a decade at the −20-dB
reflection coefficient level with the new approach. In addition, the
distance between the minima location Δσ (as shown in Figure 5.23) can
be widened to improve low-frequency matching by adjusting the
parameters of the structure, that is, the step impedance sections (width
and length).

Figure 5.23 Analysis results of the output return loss S22 response of the 12.5Ω to 50Ω impedance
transformer shown in Figure 5.22. A six zero (minimum) reflections exist across the frequency range.
For comparison, the transformer shown in [51] is included.
Performance of the broadband impedance transformer is verified with a
3D-EM full-wave simulator (CST). The layout is imported from Cadence (in
ODB++ format) as shown in Figure 5.24(a). Port 1 is terminated with
waveguide port (12.5Ω), and port 2 is connected with a 50Ω SMA
connector. A prototype board is fabricated using Rogers three-layer PCB
material, which has a dielectric constant εr of 3.6 and a thickness h of
0.762 mm [see Figure 5.24(b)]. Since port 1 will be connected to a 50Ω
SMA connector for real measurements, the two-port S-parameter data of
the connector must be de-embedded for accurate results [60].
Figure 5.24 (a) Layout structure of the transformer imported from Cadence with the simulation
performed in CST and (b) an actual prototype board.

Figure 5.25 (a) Connector modeling in CST, where waveguide and lumped ports are used, and (b)
simulated (line with triangle) and measured (line with circle) results of the connector across the
bandwidth.
Simulated (line with triangle) and measured results (line with circle) are
given for the connector across the bandwidth). Figures 5.26 and Figure
5.27 present simulated and measured results for the complete broadband
transformer. Insertion loss S21 is acceptable from 10 to 1800 MHz, which
is less than 1.5 dB at the simulation level. From the analytical (as shown
i n Figure 5.23), there is a six-zero reflection; however, only three- and
four-zero reflections (S22) exist in the simulation response of CST and
measured data, respectively, within the passband (10 to 1800 MHz). As
predicted in CST, there is no zero reflection occurrence at the center
frequency (1000 MHz). The measured result is acceptable below 1700
MHz (i.e., insertion loss lower about 2 dB), and four-zero reflection
occurred. The results demonstrated are adequate to prove the high-
efficiency distributed amplifier concept although the insertion loss above

1500 MHz is more than 1.5 dB.
Figure 5.26 Simulated versus measured results of insertion loss S21 of the transformer. The
simulation response of the broadband impedance transformer is performed with CST (line with
triangle) and the measured result (line with circle).
To experimentally validate the concept of a high-efficiency distributed
amplifier, a prototype board is fabricated using a Rogers three-layer PCB
material that has a permittivity εr of 3.66 and a thickness h of 0.762 mm.
The first layer is used for RF and dc line routing, where all the component
placement takes place on top of layer 1. General layout guidelines (e.g.,
component placements, RF and dc routing, and general layout rules) are
still applied in this work.
Figure 5.27 Simulated versus measured results of output return loss S22 of the transformer. The
simulation response of the broadband impedance transformer is performed with CST (line with circle)
and the measured result (line with triangle).
In addition to a series gate resistor, a ferrite bead is implemented at

the drain line together with a 33-μF tantalum capacitor2 and 1.8-nF
ceramic capacitor3 as a precaution of low frequency oscillation. The dc
gate biasing terminals are bypassed to ground with multiple chip and
tantalum capacitors (e.g., 100 pF, 33 nF, 10 μF). The dc feeding lines for
the final stage are connected to a high-Q air-wound coil (from Taito
Yuden, Inc.) and high-Q chip inductors (value of 220 nH) from Coilcraft,
Inc. The photograph of the high-efficiency distributed amplifier board is
shown in Figure 5.28. The effective distributed amplifier size area is 27
mm × 24 mm. Two measurements, R of 12.5Ω and 50Ω, are performed in
the same board outline without repeating another layout work in
Cadence, therefore, point a (in Figure 5.28) will be used to tap the RF
output directly and the transformer section is bypassed when R of 50Ω is
selected. The full transformer section is utilized when R of 12.5Ω is
selected. In other words, two different board designs are used but both
boards have the same outline. The drain and gate-line elements value for
both cases of R are different and optimized for best performance.
Figure 5.28 Photograph of the high-efficiency distributed amplifier prototype board. The terminal a
will be tap when R = 50Ω output or the transformer will be used if R = 12.5Ω. The effective
distributed amplifier size area is 27 mm × 24 mm.
Measured results of small-signal S-parameters and PAE for a four-
section high-efficiency distributed amplifier when terminated at R = 50Ω
are given in Figures 5.29 and Figure 5.30.

Figure 5.29 Measured versus simulated results for small-signal S-parameters across a frequency
range of 10 to 1800 MHz when terminated R = 50Ω. Legend: solid line: simulated results; dashed
line: measured results.
Each device is fed with a 5V drain supply voltage. Bias voltage of 0.44V
is applied to each gate, resulting in Class AB operation, with quiescent
current Idq of ~90 mA (10% of Imax). Input return loss S11 is below −10
dB, but output return loss S22 is approximately −5 dB across the 10- to
1800-MHz frequency range (see Figure 5.29). For power performance (see
Figure 5.30), the output power of ~500 mW, gain of 8 dB, and PAE of
30% are achieved throughout the 10- to 1800-MHz frequency range.
Figure 5.30 Measured versus simulated results of PAE, output power (or Pout), and gain across a

frequency range of 10 to 1800 MHz when terminated R = 50Ω. Legend: solid line: simulated results;
dashed-dotted line: measured results.
Good agreement between simulations and measurement results is
obtained. The measured PAE result and gain for a few cases of bias and
supply voltage Vg and Vd, respectively, are recorded in Figure 5.31. With
a high supply voltage (5.4V) and applied bias close to pinch-off (Vg =
0.4V where Idq ~5% of Imax), PAE at a low frequency is increased by
10% with minimum changes in gain with comparison to the result shown
in Figure 5.31. There is no improvement in PAE with a supply adjustment.
The performance of ωc has limitations on gate-line characteristics.
Figure 5.31 Measured results of PAE and gain for three different cases when terminated R = 50Ω.
Legend: solid line: Vg = 0.44V and Vd = 5V; dashed line: Vg = 0.4V and Vd = 4.6V; solid line with
triangles: Vg = 0.44V and Vd = 5.4V.
Due to the high insertion loss of the transformer beyond 1.5 GHz, the
measured results of a four-section high-efficiency distributed amplifier
when terminated at R = 12.5Ω are degraded as the frequency increases.
The same supply voltage and bias voltage are applied to each gate of the
transistor (as applied for the case of R = 50Ω). Measured results of the
power performance of a four-section high-efficiency distributed amplifier
when R = 12.5Ω are shown in Figure 5.32. At a low-frequency output
power of ~700 mW, a gain of 10 dB and PAE of ~38% is achieved. At
higher frequencies (e.g., beyond 1.4 GHz), the performance degraded.

Figure 5.32 Measured versus simulated results of PAE, output power (or Pout), and gain across the
frequency range of 10 to 1800 MHz when terminated R = 12.5Ω. Legend: solid line: simulated
results; dashed-dotted line: measured results.
It is necessary to achieve good performance from the broadband
impedance transformer at the measurement level in order to demonstrate
the best efficiency results (as shown in Figure 5.32, where PAE > 40% at
the simulation level). This proves that the PAE > 38% at low frequencies
with R = 12.5Ω at the measurement level. Efficiency of more than 30% is
recorded across the bandwidth operation. It is strongly evident from the
measurement results that the concept to achieve high efficiency is well
demonstrated. Nevertheless, the distributed amplifier performance at
higher frequency operation can be improved further with transformer
optimization.
References
[1] J. B. Beyer et al., “MESFET Distributed Amplifier Design Guidelines,” IEEE Trans. Microwave
Theory and Techniques, Vol. MTT-32, No. 3, pp. 268–275, Mar. 1984.
[2] B. Kim, H. Q. Tserng, and H. D. Shih, “High Power Distributed Amplifier Using MBE Synthesized
Material,” IEEE Microwave and Millimeter Monolithic Integrated Circuits Symposium, pp. 35–37,
1985.
[3] P. H. Ladbrooke, “Large Signal Criteria for the Design of GaAs FET Distributed Power Amplifier,”
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. ED-32, No. 9, pp. 1745–1748, Sep. 1985.
[4] B. Kim and H. Q. Tserng, “0.5W 2–21 GHz Monolithic GaAs Distributed Amplifier,” Electronics
Letters, Vol. 20, No. 7, pp. 288–289, Mar. 1984.
[5] M. J. Schindler et al., “A 15 to 45 GHz Distributed Amplifier Using 3 FETs of Varying Periphery,”
IEEE GaAs IC Symposium Technical Digest, pp. 67–70, 1986.
[6] L. Zhao et al., “A 6 Watt LDMOS Broadband High Efficiency Distributed Power Amplifier Fabricated
Using LTCC Technology,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 897–900, June 2002.
[7] J. Gassmann et al., “Wideband High Efficiency GaN Power Amplifiers Utilizing a Non-Uniform

Distributed Topology,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 615–618, June 2007.
[8] K. Narendra et al., “Vectorially Combined pHEMT/GaN Distributed Power Amplifier for SDR
Applications,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques , Vol. 60, No. 10, pp. 3189–3200,
Oct. 2012.
[9] K. Narendra et al., “Vectorially Combined Distributed Power Amplifier with Load Pull
Determination,” Elect. Letters, Vol. 46, No. 16, pp. 1137–1138, Aug. 2010.
[10] E.W. Strid and K. R. Gleason, “A DC-12 GHz Monolithic GaAsFET Distributed Amplifier,” IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. ED-29, No. 7, pp. 1065–1071, July 1982.
[11] K. Krishnamurthy et al., “Broadband GaAs MESFET and GaN HEMT Power Amplifiers,” IEEE
Journal Solid State Circuits, Vol. 35, No. 9, pp. 1285–1292, 2000.
[12] H. Amasuga et al., “A High Power and High Breakdown Voltage Millimeter-Wave GaAs pHEMT
with Low Nonlinear Drain Resistance,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 821–824, June
2007.
[13] Y. Ayasli et al., “Capacitively Coupled Traveling Wave Power Amplifier,” IEEE Trans. Microwave
Theory Techniques, Vol. MTT-32, No. 12, pp. 1704–1709, Dec. 1984.
[14] A. Ayasli et al., “A Monolithic GaAs 1–13 GHz Traveling Wave Amplifier,” IEEE Trans. Microwave
Theory Techniques, Vol. 30, No. 12, pp. 976–981, July 1982.
[15] K. B. Niclas, R. R. Pereira, and A. P. Chang, “On Power Distribution in Additive Amplifiers,” IEEE
Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 38, No. 3, pp. 1692–1699, Nov. 1990.
[16] J. L. B. Walker, “Some Observations on the Design and Performance of Distributed Amplifiers,”
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 38, pp. 164–1698, Jan. 1992.
[17] R. Halladay, M. Jones, and S. Nelson, “2–20 GHz Monolithic Distributed Power Amplifiers,” IEEE
Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Monolithic Integrated Circuits Symp., pp. 35–37, 1985.
[18] S. N. Prasad, J. B. Beyer, and I. S. Chang, “Power-Bandwidth Considerations in the Design of
MESFET Distributed Amplifiers,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Techniques , Vol. 36, pp. 1117–
1123, July 1988.
[19] S. N. Prasad, S. Reddy, and S. Moghe, “Cascaded Transistor Cell Distributed Amplifiers,”
Microwave and Optical Technology Lett., Vol. 12, No. 3, pp. 163–167, June 1996.
[20] K. Narendra et al., “Dual Fed Distributed Power Amplifier with Controlled Termination
Adjustment,” Progress in Electromagnetic Research, Vol. 139, pp. 761–777, May 2013.
[21] K. Narendra et al., “Discrete Component Design of a Broadband Impedance Transforming Filter
for Distributed Power Amplifier,” 10th IEEE Microwave Mediterranean Symp., pp. 292–295, Aug.
2010.
[22] W. S. Percival, “Improvements In and Relating to Thermionic Valve Circuits,” British Patent
460,562, 1937.
[23] E. L. Ginzton et al., “Distributed Amplification,” Proc. IRE, pp. 956–969, 1948.
[24] T. T. Y. Wong, Fundamentals of Distributed Amplification, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1993.
[25] Y. Ayasli et al., “2-to-20 GHz GaAs Traveling Wave Power Amplifier,” IEEE Trans. Microwave
Theory Techniques, Vol. 32, No. 3, pp. 290–295, Mar. 1984.
[26] A. W. Podgorski and L. Y. Wei, “Theory of Traveling-Wave Transistors,” 
IEEE Trans. Electron
Devices, Vol. ED-29, No. 12, pp. 1845–1853, Dec. 1982.
[27] K. Narendra et al., “Cascaded Distributed Power Amplifier with Non-Identical Transistors and
Inter-Stage Tapered Impedance,” 40th European Microwave Conf., pp. 549–522, Sep. 2010.
[28] K. Narendra et al., “Design Methodology of High Power Distributed Amplifier Employing
Broadband Impedance Transformer,” IEEE Int. Conf. of Antenna, Systems and Propagation
2009, Sep. 2009.
[29] K. Narendra et al., “PHEMT Distributed Power Amplifier Adopting Broadband Impedance
Transformer,” Microwave Journal, Vol. 56, pp. 76–82, 2013.
[30] K. Narendra et al., “High Efficiency Applying Drain Impedance Tapering for 600mW pHEMT

Distributed Power Amplifier,” IEEE Int. Conf. on Microwave and Millimeter Wave Technology , pp.
1769–1772, Apr. 2008.
[31] P. H. Ladbrooke, “Large Signal Criteria for the Design of GaAs FET Distributed Power Amplifier,”
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. ED-32, No. 9, pp. 1745–1748, Sep. 1985.
[32] R. Halladay, M. Jones, and S. Nelson, “2–20 GHz Monolithic Distributed Power Amplifiers,” IEEE
Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Monolithic Integrated Circuits Symp., pp. 35–37, 1985.
[33] S. N. Prasad, S. Reddy, and S. Moghe, “Cascaded Transistor Cell Distributed Amplifiers,”
Microwave and Optical Technology Lett., Vol. 12, No. 3, pp. 163–167, June 1996.
[34] R. W. Chick, “Non-Uniformly Distributed Power Amplifier,” U.S. Patent 5,485,118, Jan. 1996.
[35] M. Campovecchio et al., “Optimum Design of Distributed Power FET Amplifiers: Application to 2–
18 GHz MMIC Module Exhibiting Improved Power Performances,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microw.
Symp. Dig., San Diego, pp. 125–128, June 1994.
[36] C. Duperrier et al., “New Design Method of Uniform and Nonuniform Distributed Power
Amplifiers,” IEEE Microwave Theory Techniques, Vol. 49, No. 12, pp. 2494–2499, Dec. 2001.
[37] C. Xie and A. Pavio, “Development of GaN HEMT Based High Power High Efficiency Distributed
Power Amplifier for Military Applications,” IEE MILCOM 2007, pp. 1–4, Oct. 2007.
[38] A. Martin et al., “Balanced AlGaN/GaN Cascode Cells: Design Method for Wideband Distributed
Amplifiers,” Electronics Letters, Vol. 44, No. 2, pp. 116–117, Jan. 2008.
[39] P. Heydari, “Design and Analysis of a Performance-Optimized CMOS UWB Distributed LNA,”
IEEE Journal Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 42, No. 9, pp. 1892–1905, Sep. 2007.
[40] W. H. Horton, J. H. Jasberg, and J. D. Noe, “Distributed Amplifiers: Practical Considerations and
Experimental Results,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 38, pp. 748–753, July 1950.
[41] S. N. Prasad and A. S. Ibrahim, “Design Guidelines for a Novel Tapered Drain Line Distributed
Power Amplifier,” Proc. 36th European Microwave Conf., pp. 1274–1277, Sep. 2006.
[42] K. Krishnamurthy, S. I. Long, and M. J. W. Rodwell, “Cascode Delay Matched Distributed
Amplifiers for Efficient Microwave Power Amplification,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microw. Symp. Dig. , pp.
819–821, June 1999.
[43] M. E. V. Valkenburg, Network Analysis, 3rd ed., Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1974.
[44] S. D. Agostino and C. Paoloni, “Design of a Matrix Amplifier Using FET Gate-Width Tapering,”
Microwave Opt. Technol. Letters, Vol. 8, pp. 118–121, Feb. 1995.
[45] S. C. Cripps, Power Amplifier for Wireless Communications, 2nd ed., Norwood, MA: Artech
House, 2006.
[46] B. Thompson et al., “Distributed Power Amplifier with Electronic harmonic Filtering,” IEEE Radio
Frequency Integrated Circuits Symp., pp. 241–244, June 2009.
[47] B. Thompson and R. E. Stengel, “System and Method for Providing an Input to a Distributed
Power Amplifier System,” U.S. Patent 7,233,207, June 2007.
[48] T. S. Tan, M. F. Ain, and S. I. S. Hassan, “Large Signal Design of Distributed Power Amplifier
with Discrete RF MOSFET Devices,” 2006 Int. RF & Microwave Conf. Proc., pp. 58–61, Sep.
2006.
[49] T. S. Tan, M. F. Ain, and S. I. S. Hassan, “100–500MHz, 1 Watt Distributed Power Amplifier
with Discrete MOSFET Devices,” Asia Pacific Conference on Applied Electromagnetics Proc., pp.
198–203, Dec. 2005.
[50] Application Notes ATF511P8, www.avagotech.com.
[51] K. Narendra and S. Pragash, “Distributed Amplifier with Multi-Section Transformer,” www.ip.com,
Sep. 2009.
[52] T. Jensen et al., “Coupled Transmission Line as Impedance Transformer,” IEEE Microw. Theory
Tech., Vol. 55, No. 12, pp. 2957–2965, Dec. 2007.
[53] V. Zhurbenko, V. Krozer, and P. Meincke, “Broadband Impedance Transformer Based on
Asymmetric Coupled Transmission Lines in Nonhomogeneous Medium,” IEEE MTT-S Int.

Microwave Symp., 2007.
[54] J. Horn, M. Huber, and G. Boeck, “Wideband Balun and Impedance Transformers Integrated in
a Four-Layer Laminate PCB,” 35th European Microwave Conf., Sep. 2005.
[55] J. Chramiec and M. Kitlinski, “Design of Quarter-Wave Compact Impedance Transformers Using
Coupled Transmission Line,” Electronics Letters, Vol. 38, No. 25, pp. 1683–1685, Dec. 2002.
[56] K. S. Ang, C. H. Lee, and Y. C. Leong, “Analysis and Design of Coupled Line Impedance
Transformers,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 1951–1954, June 2004.
[57] K. S. Ang, C. H. Lee, and Y. C. Leong, “A Broad-Band Quarter-Wavelength Impedance
Transformer with Three Reflection Zeroes Within Passband,” IEEE Microw. Theory Tech., Vol. 52,
No. 12, pp. 2640–2644, Dec. 2004.
[58] G. Jaworski and V. Krozer, “Broadband Matching of Dual-Linear Polarization Stacked Probe-Fed
Microstrip Patch Antenna,” Electron Lett., Vol. 40, No. 4, pp. 221–222, 2004.
[59] V. Tripathi, “Asymmetric Coupled Transmission Line in Inhomogeneous Medium,” IEEE Trans.
Microwave Theory Techniques, Vol. MTT 32, No. 9, pp. 734–739, Sep. 1975.
[60] Agilent report de-embed technique.
1 The term (θa – θb) represents the different phase between two current source properties; as an
example, Zu(1)/R, θa – θb = θ2 – θ1 = θ3 – θ1 = θ4 – θ1. The different phases can be determined
from (5.16) through (5.19).
2 The tantalum capacitor part number is T491D22K016AT, from KEMET, Inc. The rated voltage is 16V at
85°C.
3 The capacitors used were 600S Series ultralow ESR, high-Q microwave capacitors, from ATC Inc. Other
capacitors in the series are 545-L ultrabroadband high-Q capacitors, from Murata, Inc.
Table 5.2 Summary Drain-Line Network Elements for Various Load Terminations R*
Elements R = 5Ω R = 8Ω R = 12.5Ω R = 25Ω R = 50Ω
Ld1
3 nH
4.8 nH
7.5 nH
15 nH
30 nH
Ld2
1.5 nH
2.4 nH
3.75 nH
7.5 nH
15 nH
Ld3
1 nH
1.6 nH
2.5 nH
5 nH
10 nH
Ld4
0.75 nH 1.2 nH
1.88 nH
3.75 nH 7.5 nH
Cd1
6.6 pF
3.8 pF
2.1 pF
0.6 pF
n/a
Cd2
14.1 pF 8.48 pF 5.1 pF
2.1 pF
0.6 pF
Cd3
21.6 pF 13.2 pF 8.1 pF
3.6 pF
1.35 pF
Cd4
29.1 pF 17.9 pF 11.1 pF
5.1 pF
2.1 pF
* The n section is 4 and Cd(k) is the external shunt capacitance placed parallel to the transistor.

CHAPTER 6
Stability Analysis of Distributed Amplifiers
Hardware fabrication of microwave circuits is expensive, especially power
amplifier circuits; therefore, it is necessary to use a good technique that
allows designers to correctly predict the behavior of microwave circuits
with the purpose of detecting and correcting possible problems during the
design stage. Manufacturing tolerances cause additional variations of
input and output termination impedance. Stability, as well as circuit
performance, has to be guaranteed in spite of impedance variations.
Unconditional stability criteria [1–14] can be applied to the overall
amplifier. Note, however, that unconditional stability can be too stringent
of a requirement for the overall amplifier and can prevent the
achievement of the desired performance. If maximum variations of input
and output terminations can be estimated early on, the amplifier can be
designed to be stable for all the input and output termination
impedances. The stability of a two-port network for different values of the
input and output loads is investigated in [15, 16].
Stability criteria can be used to study the stability behavior of a two-
port network made up of a single active device as highlighted in [17–19],
but this is not adequate, and a Nyquist analysis of all the internal
feedback loops is required. These techniques, as well as stability circles
and other graphical methods, require us to visually inspect the polar plots
of properly chosen functions. Therefore, they allow the stability check to
be performed only at the end of the design phase, often resulting in a
tedious trial-and-error design process. A synthesis-oriented criterion
based on a stability factor is required to make use of optimization
routines provided by computer-aided design (CAD) tools in the design
phase. The criterion allows for a guarantee of stability in circular regions
of the input and output reflection coefficient planes surrounding the
nominal purely resistive input and output loads [20, 21]. In [21], such a
criterion has been extended to ensure the stability of circuits with nominal
complex termination impedances.
6.1 Motivation for Conducting Stability Analyses
Originally, Rollet [22] deduced the basic results for the stability of linear

two-port RF amplifiers as a function of the Z-, Y-, G-, or H-parameters of a
network. However, Woods shows simple examples of circuits with
negative resistances that do not fulfill the Rollet condition and whose
stability cannot be correctly deduced using the conditions [23]. Platzker
also paid attention to this fact illustrating real examples of circuits with
various active elements in which using the K-factor led to erroneous
conclusions [24]. Instabilities at low frequencies due to bias circuits
cannot be detected using the K-factor [25]. A study by Platzker et al. [24]
showed that the K-factor is not sufficient to analyze the stability criteria of
multistage amplifiers due to the fact that possible feedback between
stages is not taken into account. In power-combining structures with n
transistors in parallel, n possible modes of oscillation exist [25, 26], and
the K-factor only allows for the detection of even modes of oscillation. As
an alternative, Freitag [27] proposed an analysis of the K-factor capable
of detecting odd-mode oscillations using an ideal transformer that forces
the odd mode of oscillation in the circuit.
Ohtomo proposes a rigorous method for evaluating the stability of a dc
solution in microwave circuits with multiple active devices that can
contain multiple feedback loops [28]. The method is valid for the
detection of odd- and even-mode oscillations and can be applied to any
linear or nonlinear circuits with a linear equivalent around the bias point.
Centurelli et al. [20, 21] present the necessary and sufficient conditions
for the stability of circuits with multiple active devices in agreement with
the procedure proposed by Ohtomo [28], but also guarantee a stability
margin in circular regions around complex terminations. Ohtomo’s method
is based on the Nyquist criterion and requires observing the 2N transfer
functions associated with each port. However, Centurelli et al. define the
margins of gain and phase that allow determination of the stability of the
circuit.
Kassakian and Lau emphasize the possibility of the appearance of odd-
mode oscillations with voltage-combining structures [29]. Postulating a
priori the mode of oscillation of the circuit and applying the Routh-Hurwitz
[31] criterion to the zeros of the characteristic equation, an odd-mode
oscillation in a power amplifier can be detected. Freitag proposes a
method for the detection of odd-mode oscillations based on the
representation of Z-parameters of the circuit [26]. It identifies the
different modes of operation of the multistage amplifiers. The drawback
of this method is that a characteristic matrix of the system is needed;

therefore, it is not suitable for implementation for commercial simulators.
Ramberger and Merkle [31] apply Ohtomo’s method [28] to circuits with
voltage-combining structures. Instead of applying the method to the
complete circuit, they use an equivalent circuit with a single branch, which
remarkably reduced the simulation time. Costantini et al. [32] also
proposed a method that allows the detection of odd- and even-mode
oscillations, and the circuit must be analyzed using as many equivalent
circuits as modes of oscillation that can possibly exist in the circuit.
6.2 Method of Stability Analysis
In this chapter, some stability analyses—K-factor for a two-port network,
feedback and NDF factor, and finally pole-zero identification method—are
discussed. This will give the reader a good understanding of stability
analysis.
6.2.1 K-Factor Stability of a Two-Port Network
A two-port network is unconditionally stable if no combination of passive
source and load impedance exists that can cause the circuit to oscillate.
For it, it is a necessary condition that the real part of the admittance
(impedance or admittance) observed at the input of each of the ports
remains positive with any passive termination that is connected to the
other port. This is given in the following conditions from [33], where
 (6.1)
 (6.2)
 (6.3)
where γij represents the element (i, j) of any of the Z- , Y- , G-, or H-
parameter matrices. Equation (6.1) can be rewritten as a function of the
S-parameters, which are more adequate for describing RF and microwave
circuits, obtaining, in this manner, a set of conditions equivalent to (6.1)
for unconditional stability [22]. If in the whole range of frequencies for
which the device shows the following equations are fulfilled

 (6.4)
together with one of the following oscillation conditions,
 (6.5)
 (6.6)
 (6.7)
 (6.8)
 (6.9)
The unconditional stability of the two-port network is guaranteed only if
the Rollet condition is fulfilled, that is, whenever the unloaded circuit does
not have poles in the right half plane of the s-plane. The condition for K
and the auxiliary conditions can be replaced by a single figure of merit μ
[34]. The new condition for unconditional stability is
 (6.10)
whenever the Rollet condition is fulfilled. The parameter μ, in addition to
evaluating the unconditional stability of a two-port network, allows
estimation of its degree of potential instability, since it can be
geometrically interpreted as the minimum distance between the origin of
the unit Smith chart and the unstable region. Nevertheless, the parameter
μ has not been able to replace the K-factor, which continues to be mainly
used by microwave circuit designers.
If the conditions of (6.1) through (6.9) or (6.10) are not fulfilled at all
frequencies, it is said that the two-port network is conditionally stable. It
is important to study the impedance that, when connected to the input or
output, can make the circuit oscillate; that is, the source ZS and load ZL
impedance for which
 (6.11)
 (6.12)

where Γin and Γout are the reflection coefficients at the input and output
of the two-port network (Figure 6.1) that are given by the following
expressions:
Figure 6.1 Two-port network terminated with input and output impedance.
 (6.13)
 (6.14)
In a circuit that is not unconditionally stable, it is necessary to carefully
select the load impedance to avoid the presence of undesired oscillations.
For it, it is convenient to find the limit between the unstable and stable
region. At the input, the location of the points of ΓL that make 
 can
be drawn in the plane of the reflection coefficient of the load. The result is
the output stability circle [35] that is characterized by its center CL,
 (6.15)
and its radius rL,
 (6.16)
It contains the values of ΓL that are found at the limit of the stability
region. To find the limit between the unstable and the stable regions, the
location of the points of ΓS that make 
 can be drawn in the plane
of the reflection coefficient of the source [35]. The result is the input
stability circle that is also characterized by its center CS,

 (6.17)
and its radius rS,
 (6.18)
It contains the values of ΓS that are found at the limit of the stability
region. Equations (6.15) through (6.18) determine the limits of the
stability region, but we also need to determine if the stable region is in
the interior or outside the stability circles. In analyzing the output stability
circles, we will use  Γin  < 1 and on the other side  Γin  > 1. If the
load impedance is in the center of the Smith chart (ΓL = 0), from (6.13)
we obtain  Γin  = S11. In this way, if  S11  < 1, the center of the
Smith chart is in the stable region and load  S11  > 1, which places it
in the unstable region. Also, the input stability circles delimit the regions
for  Γout  < 1 and  Γout  > 1 is fulfilled. From (6.14) it is deduced
that if  S22  < 1, the center of the Smith chart, which corresponds to
ZS = Z0 and ΓS = 0, is in the stable region and if  S22  > 1, it is in the
unstable region.
An extensive K-factor still leads to erroneous conclusions since internal
feedback loops can exist. Woods [23] shows simple examples of circuits
with negative resistances that do not fulfill the Rollet condition and whose
stability cannot be correctly deduced using conditions (6.1) through
(6.10). Platzker [24] also paid attention to this fact illustrating real
examples of circuits with various active elements in which using the K-
factor led to erroneous conclusions. The fulfillment of conditions (6.1)
through (6.10) at all frequencies only indicates that a stable circuit will
continue to be stable when loading it with passive external loads at the
output or input. To guarantee the stability of the design, it is necessary to
also evaluate the Rollet condition [22]. Hence, it is necessary to verify the
stability of the circuit without loading for which the use of alternative
methods is indispensable.
6.2.2 Feedback and NDF Factor
Platzker et al. [24] established the inconvenience of applying the Rollet

stability criteria [22] in the linear networks that present a pole in the right
half plane of the complex plane. In addition, these authors proposed a
technique to determine whether a circuit has or does not have a pole in
the right half complex plane before applying the Rollet stability criterion
[36]. This technique is based on the diagram or location of a normalized
determinant function (NDF) of the circuit in the complex plane and is a
generalization of the works of Bode [30] to circuits with multiple active
elements.
Taking into account the multiple internal feedbacks that are produced in
a circuit with various active elements, the study of stability can be carried
out using the theory of feedback systems [30] and thus overcoming the
inherent limitations of the K-factor. The Bode theory [30] deals with the
systems with a single feedback loop where the active element is included
in a passive feedback network. Figure 6.2 shows the block diagram of a
system with a single feedback loop.
Figure 6.2 Block diagram of a system with a single feedback loop.
The transfer function of the complete system can be expressed in the
following form:
 (6.19)
Function Aβ is called the open-loop transfer function and is obtained in
the absence of the input voltage (Ve = 0) simply cutting the feedback
loop, introducing a unit amplitude signal at the input of the active
element, and measuring the return signal at the breakpoint (Figure 6.3).
In Bode’s works, functions −Aβ and 1 − Aβ are designated as return
level and return difference or feedback factor, respectively:
 (6.20)
 (6.21)
To measure the open-loop transfer function of a circuit with a single
active element like the one in Figure 6.3, the dependent source i = gmvin

must be replaced by an equivalent dependent source of an auxiliary
generator Vext of variable frequency, as in Figure 6.4.
Figure 6.3 Obtaining the open-loop transfer function.
The return level associated with the voltage-dependent current source
is defined as
 (6.22)
and can easily be obtained using the scheme given in Figure 6.4.
Figure 6.4 Obtaining the return level in a circuit with a single active element.
The feedback factor F with respect to a transfer parameter gm can be
expressed as [37]
 (6.23)
where Δ represents the determinant of the complete circuit (including the
terminations of each port) and Δ0 represents the determinant of the
passive network that results from setting the only dependent source of
the circuit to zero (gm = 0). Any matrix of Y-, Z- or H-parameters that
describes the linear circuit can be used to calculate the determinants Δ
and Δ0. Applying the Nyquist criterion to the function F, we obtain
 (6.24)
for which the stability of the closed-loop circuit can be determined.

For the correct application of the Nyquist criterion, it is important to
emphasize that the denominators of functions Δ and Δ0 are the same;
therefore they cancel each other out. In this way, the zeros of function F
are the zeros of the characteristic determinant of the system or, in other
words, the poles of the closed-loop transfer function. Also, since Δ0 is
calculated from a passive circuit [37], it cannot have zeros with a real
positive part; hence, function F cannot have poles with a real positive part
by analysis. On the other hand, since Δ(σ + jω) and Δ0(σ + jω) are of the
same order, when ω → ∞ or σ → ∞, function F tends to one. Lastly, since
the response of the circuit is a real function, F(−jω) = F∗(jω).
In this manner, because function F does not have unstable poles and its
zeros represent natural frequencies of the circuit, if the Nyquist trace of
function
 (6.25)
varying from 0 to ∞ does not encircle the origin, the system is stable. In
contrast, the appearance of instability is characterized by the clockwise
encirclement of the Nyquist trace around the origin. In this case, the
frequency crossing the negative real axis provides an approximation of
the starting frequency of the oscillation [38].
6.2.3 Pole-Zero Identification Method
The pole-zero identification method is based on a transfer function
approach, in which the function of the system linearized about the steady-
state solution is obtained to extract the stability information [39–43]. By
introducing a small-signal RF current generator iin in node n of an electric
circuit (Figure 6.5), there exists a direct equivalent between the circuit
and the system given in (6.26).
Figure 6.5 General diagram of an electric circuit with a current generator in parallel. The H(jωs) is
determined as the ratio of vout/iin.

To obtain the frequency response of the circuit required for stability
analysis of a dc solution, it is enough to introduce a small-signal RF
current generator iin in any node of the circuit fed solely by the bias
sources. The frequency response H(jω) is obtained by means of a linear
analysis of the impedance observed by the current generator to its
operating frequency fs while the frequency fs is being swept [40]:
 (6.26)
This is a general result, thus the frequency response in any node n of
the linearized circuit can be easily calculated by introducing a small-signal
current generator in that node n and measuring the impedance 
observed by the current source as the frequency ωs of the current source
is swept. It is important to emphasize that, as a result of its parallel
connection, the introduced current generator will not have influence on
frequencies different from its own operating frequency. The frequency
responses associated with the current source generator that displays a
low impedance path to ground are not suitable for the analysis, but
introducing a voltage generator in that branch to determine admittance 
 is rather effective [42] (see Figure 6.6).
Figure 6.6 General diagram of an electric circuit with a voltage generator in series. The H(jωs) is
determined as the ratio of vout/iin.
The next step of the technique of stability analysis consists of extracting
the information relative to the stability from the frequency response of
the circuit. In the case of dc stability analysis (as for a large signal), the
information is contained in the denominator of the transfer function
associated with the frequency response. Furthermore, in either of the
cases there is no guarantee that the associated transfer functions lack
unstable zeros, which is the reason why the simplified Nyquist analysis is

not, in general, valid [44]. The utilization of system identification
techniques like the general methodology for the extraction of information
relative to the stability from the frequency response of the circuit is
proposed. The techniques of system identification allow one to obtain the
transfer function H(s) associated with the frequency response H(jω) of
the circuit.
 (6.27)
where zi and pi are the zeros and poles, respectively, of the transfer
function H(s) of the system.
Once the poles and zeros of H(s) have been obtained, we proceed to
the analysis of the poles to determine the stability of the analyzed steady
state. In the case of a frequency response associated with a dc state of
the circuit, the poles of the identified transfer function are adjusted to the
eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix [39]. In the case of a frequency
response associated with a periodic state, the poles correspond to the
Floquet exponents of the system [39]. Therefore, in both cases, the
existence of a pair of conjugate complex poles with a positive real part in
the transfer function H(s) predicts the instability of the system. In other
words, it indicates that the analyzed steady state is unstable and that an
oscillation of increasing amplitude to an independent spurious frequency
is generated. The autonomous oscillation initiating at ωa is determined by
the magnitude of the imaginary part of these poles [43].
The identification tools available in Scilab1 are transfer functions that
have an excess pole-zero null; therefore, the order of the transfer function
is equal to the number of poles and the number of zeros. It is important
to emphasize that if we attempt to identify a frequency response with a
transfer function order that is higher than necessary, good identification
results will be obtained. Nevertheless, there will probably be pole-zero
quasi-cancellations that can be eliminated using a lower transfer function
order [39]. If the quasi-cancellations are stable, they do not represent a
problem; but if they are in the right half plane, it will be necessary to
verify whether a precise identification without the appearance of these
quasi-cancellations can be obtained [39].

6.3 Analysis and Conditions of Stability in Distributed
Amplifiers
The S-parameters of distributed amplifiers without feedback capacitance
Cgd have been calculated by Niclas et al. [45], and the analysis of such
amplifiers becomes complicated with the inclusion of Cgd in an active
device. Gamand [46] showed that the occurrence of oscillations in a
distributed amplifier (with simplified transistor model) can be caused by
the high transconductance gm and gate-drain capacitance Cgd of the
transistor. Furthermore, the approach highlighted in [46] indicates that
the impedance of the left- and right-hand parts of the circuits from any
arbitrary reference plane (node x, y, and so on) are not sufficient to
illustrate the oscillation phenomenon due to the fact the line impedances
are identical (symmetrical structure), as shown in Figure 6.7. However, in
[46], Gamand has explained that the origin of the oscillation can be found
in the loop constituted by nodes a, b, c, and d, as in Figure 6.7, and the
amplifier tends to oscillate when the gain within the loop becomes too
high.
Figure 6.7 Basic distributed amplifier structure in two-section transistors.
From circuit theory we know that oscillation occurs when a network has
a pair of complex conjugate poles on the imaginary axis. If the closed-
loop gain (Barkhusien) has a pair of complex conjugate poles in the right
half plane (RHP), close to the imaginary axis, due to the ever present
noise voltage generated by thermal noise in the network, a growing
sinusoidal output voltage appears [35]. As the amplitude of the noise-
induced oscillation increases, the amplitude-limiting capabilities of the
amplifier produce a change in the location of the poles. The origin of the
oscillation in a basic distributed amplifier structure associated with the
critical poles can be found in the loop constituted by node a, b,…, and so

forth.
To further the analysis, it is convenient to consider a basic single-
section distributed amplifier as a basic feedback oscillator circuit and to
use a simplified transistor model. The transistor is assumed to be a
voltage-controlled current source (VCVS). The real part Rds is included in
the model. The basic single-section distributed amplifier and the
simplified transistor model are given in Figure 6.8. The transformation of
the single-section distributed amplifier to the feedback oscillator circuit is
shown in Figure 6.9, where a basic Hartley oscillator is formed. As shown
in Figure 6.8(b), Z1(ω) and Z2(ω) are impedances seen by gate and drain
points, respectively. In a basic Hartley oscillator, Z1(ω) and Z2(ω) can be
replaced with single inductance element, for example, Lg 
and Ld,
respectively. For the oscillation to occur, according to [35], the loop
resistance must be zero, thus one can define a gain condition as
 (6.28)
where gm is device transconductance and the frequency of oscillation ωo
is given by
 (6.29)
where LT = Lg + Ld.
Figure 6.8 (a) Basic single-section distributed amplifier design and (b) simplified transistor model.
Pole-zero identification of a linearized frequency response is used here
for stability analysis [39]. By introducing a small-signal RF current
generator i(fs) to node Vin of the circuit shown in Figure 6.9, the
frequency response H(jω) is obtained by means of a linear analysis of the
impedance distributed amplifier observed by the current generator to its

operating frequency fs while the frequency fs is being swept.
By selecting Cgd = 2.2 pF, Lg = 8 nH, Ld = 16 nH, Rds = 200Ω, and gm
= 10 mS as an example, fo is computed from (6.29) and the network
oscillates around 694 MHz.
Figure 6.9 A basic single-section distributed amplifier is transformed to a basic feedback oscillator
(e.g., a Hartley oscillator). A small-signal RF current generator i(fs) is introduced to node Vin.
The selective elements are determined based on a constant-k network
to show the oscillation frequency below 800 MHz (within the passband).
Two peaks occur in H(jω) as shown in Figure 6.10(a), at the unstable
poles (with positive peaking and negative slope phase) and zeros (with
negative peaking and positive slope phase) at 694 MHz and 1.2 GHz,
respectively. It is clear that the critical pole close to the imaginary axis is
located at 694 MHz, as shown in Figure 6.10(b). However, by arranging
the gate and drain line to have a cutoff frequency fc around 800 MHz and
a line impedance of 50Ω, no indication of oscillation is observed.

Figure 6.10 (a) Transfer function H(jω) magnitude and phase and (b) coordinate of pole-zero of the
H(jω).
To understand the origin of the oscillation in a distributed amplifier
having multiple loops, let’s consider a two-section distributed amplifier
(from Figure 6.7), where it can be simplified to the Hartley oscillator
configuration (as given in Figure 6.9). The feedback network Z1(ω) and
Z2(ω), respectively, is formed by a multiple-loop arrangement (Figure
6.11). The impedances Z1(ω) 
and Z2(ω) rely strictly on the loop
associated due to gm2, Cgd2, Lg, Cgs2, Ld, Cds2, terminations, and so
forth. An important point to be noticed is that the poles become stable
when the primary loop (in loop 1, with Cgd2 = 0) and device 2 have a
very low gm2 effect (or negligible). Although the primary loop is not
connected, the oscillation is still exists when gm2 is increases to adequate
value due to the fact other loops (in loop 2) still present. Few cases are

examined.
Figure 6.11 In this basic two-section distributed amplifier, the main section is formed with a Hartley
oscillator configuration and the feedback network consists of a multiple-loop arrangement.
The following cases of the feedback network have been examined:
Case (a)] gm2 ≠ 0, Cgd2 ≠ 0, sweep either gm1 or Cgd2. The poles are
unstable, and the pole evolution is shown in Figure 6.12(a) by
sweeping gm2.
Case (b)] gm2 ≠ 0, Cgd2 = 0, sweep gm2. The poles are unstable, and
the pole evolution is shown in Figure 6.12(b) by sweeping gm2.
Case (c)] gm2 = 0, Cgd2 = 0. The poles are stable.
Case (d)] gm2 = 0, Cgd2 ≠ 0, sweep Cgd2. The poles are stable.
Figure 6.12 Evolution of the poles in complex plane for cases (a) and (b).
One should bear in my mind that to have an unstable condition, it
necessary for Z1(ω) and Z2(ω) to be inductive while Cgd is present, and

this is simply a Hartley oscillator. Therefore, the gate and drain
transmission line can be investigated. For instance, look at Figure 6.13(a),
where the gate line from Figure 6.8 is redrawn. The imaginary part of Zin
behaves in a capacitive manner over a wide frequency range [see Figure
6.13(b)], and it is not possible for oscillation to be present.
Figure 6.13 (a) Gate-line transmission line and (b) plot response of both real and imaginary parts
over a wide frequency range.
Let’s extend the analysis for the two-section distributed amplifier, as
shown in Figure 6.14.
Figure 6.14 Odd-mode oscillation in two-section distributed amplifier, with a virtual ground in the
middle.
The distributed amplifier is analyzed for a transient condition, and an
initial voltage condition is introduced in the circuit. By selecting Cgd = 2.2
pF, Cgs = 5 pF, Cds = 5 pF, Lg = 10 nH, Ld = 10 nH, Rds = 200Ω, and gm
= 100 mS, an odd-mode oscillation takes place (mode +,−) at a

frequency of 600 MHz, and Q1 oscillates 180° out of phase with respect to
Q2; for the virtual ground in the middle, refer to the voltage plot shown in
Figure 6.15.
Figure 6.15 Analysis plot of active nodal (i.e., Vg1, Vg2, Vd1, and Vd2). (a) The plot of the gate
lines: Vg1 and Vg2. (b) The plot of the drain lines: Vg1 and Vg2.
The symmetry of the distributed amplifier topology facilitates the
accomplishment of the oscillation conditions for odd-mode oscillations
[47]. If the symmetry is not perfect, the mode is not pure. The equivalent
circuit of the two-section distributed amplifier for odd-mode oscillation can
be simplified to Figure 6.16. The same oscillation condition can still be
obtained.
Figure 6.16 Equivalent circuit model of two-section distributed amplifier for odd-mode oscillation. The
middle reference plane is the ground plane.
The gate and drain transmission line of Figure 6.16 is investigated. For
simplicity, review Figure 6.17(a), where the gate line is redrawn. The
imaginary part of Zin behaves as inductance over a wide frequency range,
where the Hartley oscillation condition is fulfilled. The important point to
be noticed is that the gate and drain transmission line can be modified by
inserting a positive real part element (compare with Figure 6.13) to
improve stability in a distributed amplifier having more than a single

section.
Figure 6.17 (a) Gate-line transmission line and (b) plot response of both real and imaginary parts of
Zin over a wide frequency range.
Our analysis can be extended to a three-section distributed amplifier, as
shown in Figure 6.18, which allows different oscillation modes to coexist
[47]. They are dependent on the initial conditions.
Figure 6.18 Three-section distributed amplifier arrangement to explain odd-mode oscillation.

For example, for mode (+,0,−) mode, Q1 oscillates out of phase with
Q3. The active node, that is, the gate and drain point of the middle
section, behaves as a virtual ground; see the analysis plot shown in
Figure 5.19(a).
Figure 6.19 Analysis plot of active nodal (i.e., Vg1, Vg2, and Vg3: (a) odd-mode oscillation condition
for (+,0,−) mode and (b) (+,−,+) mode.
On the other hand, there is the (+,−,+) mode, in which Q1 oscillates in
phase with Q3, and out of phase with Q2. In a practical sense, odd-mode
oscillation exists when active devices are combined in a parallel
configuration (e.g., push-pull or balanced amplifier) [48].
6.4 Parametric Oscillation Detection in Distributed
Amplifiers
The multisection nature of distributed amplifiers makes them prone to
spurious oscillations due to the presence of multiple nonlinear elements
and feedback loops. In fact, under certain conditions, distributed
amplifiers can exhibit parametric oscillations, that is, spurious responses
of an autonomous nature that are a function of the input power or input
frequency. Several stability analyses based on small-signal S-parameters
can be found in the literature for distributed amplifiers [48–53]. However,
small-signal stability techniques are unable to detect parametric
oscillations and thus cannot guarantee circuit stability under large-signal
regimes [54–60].
A procedure that includes both small-signal and large-signal stability
analyses is used to, first, detect and then, second, eliminate undesired
oscillations, including those of a parametric nature. The stability analysis

is based on determining the poles of a closed-loop transfer function
resulting from linearizing the system around a steady-state regime [54].
The large-signal stability results are used to understand the origin of the
instability in the distributed amplifier and to determine an optimum place
and value of stabilization resistors that guarantee sufficient stability
margins with minimum degradation of performance. The approach is
illustrated through the stabilization of a high-efficiency LDMOS distributed
amplifier (100 to 700 MHz). The original circuit exhibited a parametric
oscillation below 700-MHz deteriorating in-band performance. A second
version of the distributed amplifier with the stabilization circuit has been
successfully fabricated and no stability problems have been reported.
6.4.1 Stability Analysis of Distributed Amplifiers
Pole-zero identification of a linearized frequency response is again
considered here for stability analysis [54]. This technique has the benefit
of being applicable to dc small-signal and large-signal stability analyses
within a similar methodology and from simulations obtained using
commercial CAD tools.
The stability verification of the circuit under study begins with a small-
signal stability analysis. The small-signal current probe required to obtain
the frequency response is introduced at the gate terminal of the third
section. Note that, except for exact pole-zero cancellations, the same
stability information can be extracted if the current source is injected at
any other circuit node, as described in [39]. The resulting pole-zero map
is plotted in Figure 
6.20(a). Figure 6.20(b) shows pole-zero map
corresponding to the small-signal stability analysis of the stabilized circuit.
Because no poles with a positive real part are present, we can conclude
that the circuit is stable under small-signal conditions. However, even
though all poles are stable, Figure 6.20(a) shows the presence of a couple
of conjugate poles with a very small absolute value for their real part.
This couple of critical poles is dangerously close to the RHP and reflects
the existence of a risky resonance about the frequency given by its
imaginary part, about 760 MHz. This means that, although stable in the
small-signal regime, the circuit exhibits a low stability margin at that
frequency. Such high-frequency critical resonance is commonly found in
distributed amplifiers and has its origin in the parasitic loop formed in the
distributed structure through the gate drain capacitances of the FET
devices [55].

Figure 6.20 Pole-zero map (O: zeros; X: poles) corresponding to (a) the small-signal stability
analysis of the original circuit and (b) the small-signal stability analysis of the stabilized circuit.
This resonance can become unstable if the gain of the individual section
is increased as described in [39]. To ensure circuit stability under large-
signal operation, it seems necessary to extend the analysis, studying the
evolution of these critical poles versus input power Pin. To achieve this
goal, a large-signal stability analysis is required. The small-signal current
probe is maintained at the same node, and mixer-like harmonic-balance
simulations, based on a conversion matrix algorithm, are performed in
order to obtain the linearized frequency responses, as in [54], for each
power level of the input drive Pin.
An input drive at 200 MHz has been arbitrarily chosen for the analysis.
The evolution of the real part of the critical poles versus Pin is plotted in
Figure 6.21, where it can be observed that for Pin > 11 dBm the poles
have a positive real part, indicating an unstable behavior that gives rise
to a parametric oscillation. Eventually, the circuit becomes stable again
for Pin higher than 17.5 dBm. Analogous results are obtained for other
frequencies of the input drive.
The results obtained from this large-signal stability analysis confirm that
the circuit, originally stable under dc or small-signal regimes, exhibits an
undesired parametric oscillation as the input drive increases. To
understand the origin of this instability, the evolution of the small-signal
gain at 760 MHz versus the input drive (at 200 MHz) has been calculated
with conversion matrix simulations. This is equivalent to calculating the

S21 at 760 MHz in the presence of a large signal at 200 MHz. The result is
superimposed in Figure 6.21 where a gain expansion phenomenon is
clearly noticeable. This gain expansion is the consequence of the deep
Class AB bias required by the circuit in order to achieve high efficiency.
The gain expansion at 760 MHz correlates with the evolution of the real
part of the critical poles and it is responsible for the undesired oscillation.
Figure 6.21 Evolution of the real part of critical poles versus Pin for the original circuit and the three
stabilization configurations; evolution of the small-signal gain at 760 MHz versus Pin, and the
frequency of the input drive is 200 MHz.
On the one hand, a frequency division by 2 is encountered for fin at
about 500 MHz and particular load conditions and input drive levels. As an
example, Figure 6.22(a) shows a pole-zero map for fin = 500 MHz, Pin =
17.1 dBm, and ΓL = −0.75. The presence of a couple of RHP complex
conjugate poles at fin/2 reveals the frequency division instability. Figure
6.22(b) plots on the Smith chart the values of load termination ZL that
imply frequency division for fin = 500 MHz and Pin = 17.1 dBm.

Figure 6.22 (a) Pole-zero map showing the frequency division for fin = 500 MHz, Pin = 17.1 dBm,
and ΓL = 0.75 ∠ 180°. (b) Unstable (circles) and stable (crosses) values of ΓL for fin = 500 MHz
and Pin = 17.1 dBm.
The detected instabilities have been experimentally verified through
tuner measurements. The picture of the distributed amplifier board is
similar to the one shown later in Figure 6.25, but the stabilization circuit is
not included. As an example, Figure 6.23 shows that a measured
frequency division by two is obtained for fin = 521 MHz, Pin = 16 dBm,
and ΓL = 0.75 ∠ 180°.
Figure 6.23 Frequency division experimentally found in distributed amplifier for fin = 521 MHz, Pin =
16 dBm, and ΓL = 0.75 ∠ 180°.
6.4.2 Circuit Stabilization Technique
As discussed in Section 4.5, the design methodology (i.e., from device

selection, synthesizing gate/drain-line elements from device packaged
values, and layout optimizations) is applied in this section. The basic
design goal of the work is to achieve high efficiency for SDR driver PA
applications, and the power operation is ~27 dBm. Therefore, a medium-
power device, for example, the LDMOS device (RD01MUS1),2 is suitable.
Low dc supply operation is required for the device, and it is typically about
7.5V. The drain loading effect of the device is not significant, but Xopt(ω)
is important since it determines the drain-line cutoff frequency ωc. A Copt
of 8.2 pF is extracted by means of device modeling (with inclusion of
packaged properties). Therefore, effective drain-line elements Li are
synthesized according to (4.58), to form the desired ωc (~0.8 GHz).
Dummy drain termination is eliminated to improve the efficiency
performance [61]. A simplified design schematic for a three-section
LDMOS distributed amplifier applying a nonuniform drain line is shown in
Figure 6.24.
Figure 6.24 Simplified design schematic for a high-efficiency LDMOS distributed amplifier. The
second version of the circuit includes the stabilization resistor Rstab at the second section of the
distributed amplifier.
The m-derived section is implemented at both terminations of the gate
line. Each device is fed with a 5V drain supply voltage. Bias voltage of
2.1V is applied to each gate, resulting in Class AB operation, with
quiescent current Idq of ~110 mA. Power performance due to load
termination R for n = 3 is investigated. Virtual impedance is seen by the

transistor in both directions depending on selection, as illustrated in
Section 5.2 and computed in (5.16) through (5.23). Broadband impedance
matching employing lowpass LC elements is designed to transform
impedance from 13Ω to 50Ω over the bandwidth of 100 to 700 MHz. A
photograph of the high-efficiency LDMOS DPA is shown in Figure 6.25.
The size of the board is 27 mm × 13 mm.
Figure 6.25 Photograph of a high-efficiency LDMOS distributed amplifier. The size of the board is 27
mm × 13 mm.
To find the best compromise between stability and circuit performance,
it is essential to combine the large-signal stability analysis with a
judicious stabilization strategy. Because the parametric oscillation is
associated with a gain increase, circuit stability should be improved by
introducing series resistors at the gate of any of the three transistors.
Since the inclusion of series resistors will impact circuit performance, an
evaluation to obtain the best placement and value is needed. Three
stabilization configurations are compared here. Each case corresponds to
the inclusion of a unique 5Ω series resistor at the gate of one of the
transistors. The evolution of the critical poles versus Pin (with fin = 200
MHz) for the three cases is plotted in Figure 6.21. As deduced from Figure
6.21, any of the three possibilities is sufficient to maintain the real part of
the critical poles at negative values. However, the best stability margin is
obtained by placing the series resistor at the second section, while the
lowest is achieved when the series resistor is located at the first section.
PAE is the goal performance in this design, the simulated PAE (at Pin =
19 dBm) for the three configurations is shown in Figure 6.26, where they
are compared to the original design. Results show that placing the
resistor at the second or third section has a low impact on PAE. However,

the resistor located at the first section offers the strongest degradation of
PAE, especially at high frequencies. Therefore, location of the series
resistor at the second section was eventually selected because it provides
the best stability margin with low PAE degradation. Once the choice is
made and before circuit fabrication, an exhaustive stability analysis
(varying load and input drive) of the circuit with the series resistor
connected at the second section is performed. This analysis serves to
confirm circuit stability for any power and frequency of the input drive and
for any circuit load. As an example, results of the small-signal stability
analysis for the circuit with the stabilization resistor are shown in Figure
6.20. We can observe how the stability margin has been increased
compared to the original circuit (critical poles shifted leftward).
The three-section LDMOS DPA with stabilization resistor in the second
section has been fabricated and characterized. Note that same board as
shown in Figure 6.25 is used but the series resistor at gate Rstab of the
second section is inserted. Measured PAE and gain results are
superimposed in Figure 6.26.
Figure 6.26 PAE simulation results for the original circuit and the three stabilization configurations for
Pin = 19 dBm. The PAE measurement results are for a stabilized amplifier for Pin = 19 dBm.
The rest of the measured performances include Pout ~30 dBm and a
gain of 10 dB over the frequency range of interest (100 to 700 MHz).
Contrary to the original circuit, no parametric oscillations are reported at
any frequency and input drive. Figure 6.27 shows an example of

measured spectra at 700 MHz, indicating that no oscillation is reported in
the measured level.
Figure 6.27 Example of measured of power spectra at 700 MHz; no oscillation is reported.
References
[1] F. Bonani and M. Gilli, “Analysis of Stability and Bifurcations of Limit Cycles in Chuas’s Circuit
Through the Harmonic-Balance Approach,” IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems , Vol. 46, No. 8, pp.
881–890, Aug.1999.
[2] V. Rizzoli and A. Neri, “State of the Art and Present Trends in Nonlinear Microwave CAD
Techniques,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques , Vol. 36, No. 2, pp. 343–365, Feb.
1998.
[3] J. Hale and H. Koçak, Dynamics and Bifurcations, New York: Springer-Verlag, 1991.
[4] R. D. Martinez and R. C. Compton, “A General Approach for the S-Parameter Design of
Oscillators with 1 and 2-Port Active Devices,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques ,
Vol. 40, No. 3, pp. 569–574, Mar. 1992.
[5] R. W. Jackson, “Criteria for the Onset of Oscillation in Microwave Circuits,” IEEE Trans. Microwave
Theory and Techniques, Vol. 40, No. 3, pp. 566–569, Mar. 1992.
[6] M. Ohtomo, “Stability Analysis and Numerical Simulation of Multidevice Amplifiers,” IEEE Trans.
Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 41, No. 6/7, pp. 983–991, June/July 1993.
[7] M. Odyniec, “Stability Criteria via S-Parameters,” Proc. 25th European Microwave Conf., Vol. 2,
Sep. 1995.
[8] M. Ohtomo, “Stability Analysis and Numerical Simulation of Multidevice Amplifiers,” IEEE Trans.
Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 41, No. 6/7, pp. 983–991, June/July 1993.
[9] S. Ramberger and T. Merkle, “A Symmetry Device to Speed Up Circuit Simulation and Stability
Tests,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Digest, Vol. 2, pp. 967–970, June 2002.
[10] A. Costantini et al., “Stability Analysis of Multi-Transistor Microwave Power Amplifiers,” Gallium
Arsenide Applications Symp. Technical Digest, Paris, 2000.
[11] V. Rizzoli and A. Lipparini, “General Stability Analysis of Periodic Steady State Regimes in
Nonlinear Microwave Circuits,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques , Vol. MTT-33, No.
1, pp. 30–37, Jan. 1985.
[12] A. Anakabe et al., “Efficient Nonlinear Stability Analysis of Microwave Circuits Using Commercially
Available Tools,” 32nd European Microwave Conf., Milan, Italy, pp. 1017–1020, Sep. 2002.

[13] A. I. Mees and L. O. Chua, “The Hopf Bifurcation Theorem and Its Applications to Nonlinear
Oscillations in Circuits and Systems,” IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems , Vol. CAS-26, No. 4, pp.
235–254, Apr. 1979.
[14] A. Suárez et al., “Nonlinear Stability Analysis of Microwave Circuits Using Commercial Software,”
IEE Electronics Lett., Vol. 34, No. 13, pp. 1333–1335, June 1998.
[15] G. E. Bodway, “Two Port Power Flow Analysis Using Generalized Scattering Parameters,”
Microwave J., Vol. 10, No. 6, pp. 61–69, May 1967.
[16] E. R. Hauri, “Overall Stability Factor of Linear Two-Ports in Terms of Scattering Parameters,”
IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 6, No. 12, pp. 413–415, Dec. 1971.
[17] D. M. Pozar, Microwave Engineering, New York: Addison-Wesley,1990.
[18] A. Suárez and R. Quéré, Stability Analysis of Nonlinear Microwave Circuits, Norwood, MA: Artech
House, 2003.
[19] P. Bianco, G. Ghione, and M. Pirola, “New Simple Proofs of the Two-Port Stability Criterion in
Terms of the Single Stability Parameters µ1 (µ2),” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and
Techniques, Vol. 36, No. 2, pp. 343–365, June 2001.
[20] F. Centurelli et al., “A Synthesis-Oriented Approach to Design Microwave Multidevice Amplifiers
with a Prefixed Stability Margin,” IEEE Trans. Microwave and Guided Wave Lett. , Vol. 49, No. 6,
pp. 1073–1076, Mar. 2000.
[21] F. Centurelli et al., “A Synthesis-Oriented Conditional Stability Criterion for Microwave Multidevice
Circuits with Complex Termination Impedance,” IEEE Trans. Microwave and Guided Wave Lett. ,
Vol. 10, No. 11, pp. 460–462, Nov. 2000.
[22] J. M. Rollett, “Stability and Power-Gain Invariants of Linear two-ports,” IRE Trans. Circuit
Theory, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 29–32, Mar. 1962.
[23] D. Woods, “Reappraisal of the Unconditional Stability Criteria for Active 2-Port Networks in Terms
of S Parameters,” IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems, Vol. 23, No. 2, pp. 73–81, Feb. 1976.
[24] A. Platzker, W. Struble, and K. T. Hetzler, “Instabilities Diagnosis and the Role of K in Microwave
Circuits,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., Vol. 3, pp. 1185–1188, June 1993.
[25] L. Samoska et al., “On the Stability of Millimeter-Wave Power Amplifiers,” IEEE MTT-S Int.
Microwave Symp. Dig., Vol. 1, pp. 429–432, June 2002.
[26] R. G. Freitag et al., “Stability and Improved Circuit Modeling Considerations for High Power MMIC
Amplifiers,” IEEE Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Monolithic Circuits Symp. Dig., pp. 125–128,
May 1998.
[27] R. G. Freitag, “A Unified Analysis of MMIC Power Amplifier Stability,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave
Symp., Vol. 1, pp. 297–300, June 1992.
[28] M. Ohtomo, “Proviso on the Unconditional Stability Criteria for Linear Two Port,” IEEE Trans.
Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 43, No. 5, pp. 1197–1200, May 1995.
[29] J. G. Kassakian and D. Lau, “An Analysis and Experimental Verification of Parasitic Oscillations in
Paralleled Power MOSFET’s,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices , Vol. ED-31, No. 7, pp. 959–963, July
1984.
[30] H. W. Bode, Network Analysis and Feedback Amplifier Design, New York: Van Nostrand, 1945.
[31] S. Ramberger and T. Merkle, “A Symmetry Device to Speed Up Circuit Simulation and Stability
Tests,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp., Vol. 2, pp. 967–970, June 2002.
[32] A. Costantini et al., “Stability Analysis of Multi-Transistor Microwave Power Amplifiers,” Gallium
Arsenide Applications Symp. Technical Digest, Paris, 2000.
[33] M. L. Edwards and J. H. Sinsky, “A New Criterion for Linear 2-Port Stability Using a Single
Geometrically Derived Parameter,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques , Vol. 40, No.
12, pp. 2303–2311, Dec. 1992.
[34] W. Struble and A. Platzker, “A Rigorous Yet Simple Method for Determining Stability of Linear N-
Port Networks,” 15th Gallium Arsenide Integrated Circuit (GaAs IC) Symp. Tech. Dig. , pp. 251–

254, Oct. 1993.
[35] G. Gonzalez, Microwave Transistor Amplifiers—Analysis and Design, Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 1997.
[36] S. Mons et al., “A Unified Approach for the Linear and Nonlinear Stability Analysis of Microwave
Circuits Using Commercially Available Tools,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques , Vol.
47, No. 12, pp. 2403–2409, Dec. 1999.
[37] A. Anakabe et al., “Efficient Nonlinear Stability Analysis of Microwave Circuits Using Commercially
Available Tools,” 32nd European Microwave Conf., Milan, Italy, pp. 1017–1020, Sep. 2002.
[38] H. Nyquist, “Regeneration Theory,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., Vol. 11, pp.126–147, 1932.
[39] J. M. Collantes, “Large-Signal Stability Analysis through Pole-Zero Identification,” Practical
Analysis, Stabilization, and Exploitation of Nonlinear Dynamics in RF, Microwave and Optical
Circuits, Workshop at MS2007, IEEE, 2007.
[40] A. Anakabe et al., “Detecting and Avoiding Odd-Mode Parametric Oscillations in Microwave Power
Amplifiers,” Int. Journal on RF and Microwave Computer-Aided Engineering, Vol. 15, No. 5, pp.
469–478, Sep. 2005.
[41] A. Anakabe et al., “Analysis and Elimination of Parametric Oscillation in Monolithic Power
Amplifiers,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., Vol. 3, pp. 2181–2184, June 2002.
[42] A. Anakabe et al., “Harmonic Balance Analysis of Digital Frequency,” IEEE Microwave Wireless
and Component Lett., Vol. 12, No. 8, pp. 287–289, 2002.
[43] J. M. Collantes and A. Suárez, “Period-Doubling Analysis and Chaos Detection Using Commercial
Harmonic Balance Simulators,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques , Vol. 48, No. 4,
pp. 574–581, Apr. 2000.
[44] A. Suárez and R. Quéré, Stability Analysis of Nonlinear Microwave Circuits, Norwood, MA: Artech
House, 2003.
[45] K. B. Niclas et al., “On Theory Performance of Solid-State Microwave Distributed Amplifiers,”
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Techniques, Vol. MTT-31, No. 6, pp. 447–456, June 1983.
[46] P. Gamand, “Analysis of the Oscillation Conditions in Distributed Amplifiers,” IEEE Trans.
Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. MTT-37, No. 3, pp. 637–640, Mar. 1989.
[47] A. Anakabe et al., “Analysis of Odd Mode Parametric Oscillations in HBT Multistage Power
Amplifiers,” 11th European Gallium Arsenide and Other Compound Semiconductors Application
Symp. (GaAs 2003), Munich, Germany, Oct. 2003.
[48] F. Bonani and M. Gilli, “Analysis of Stability and Bifurcations of Limit Cycles in Chuas’s Circuit
Through the Harmonic-Balance Approach,” IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems , Vol. 46, No. 8, pp.
881–890, Aug. 1999.
[49] S. A. Maas, Nonlinear Microwave Circuits, New York: IEEE Press, 1997.
[50] P. Bolcato et al., “A Unified Approach of PM Noise Calculation in Large RF Multitone Autonomous
Circuits,” 2000 IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Digest, Vol. 1, pp. 417–420, June 2000.
[51] J. P. Fraysse et al., “2W Ku-Band Coplanar MMIC HPA using HBT for Flip-Chip Assembly,” 2002
IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Digest, Vol. 1, pp. 441–444, June 2002.
[52] J. Portilla, H. García, and E. Artal, “High Power-Added Efficiency MMIC Amplifier for 2.4 GHz
Wireless Communications,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 34, No. 1, pp. 120–123, Jan.
1999.
[53] R. Pintelom and J. Schoukens, System Identification: A Frequency Domain Approach, New York,
IEEE Press, 2001.
[54] A. Mallet et al., “STAN: An Efficient Tool for Nonlineal Stability Analysis,” RF and Hyper Europe
2004, Microwave Power Amplifier Workshop, Paris, Mar. 2004.
[55] A. Suárez et al., “Nonlinear Stability Analysis of Microwave Circuits Using Commercial Software,”
IEE Electronics Lett., Vol. 34, No. 13, pp. 1333–1335, June 1998.
[56] K. Narendra et al., “Parametric Oscillations in Distributed Power Amplifiers,” Electronics Lett., Vol.

45, No. 25, pp. 1325–1326, Dec. 2009.
[57] A. Anakabe et al., “Automatic Pole-Zero Identification for Multivariable Large-Signal Analysis of RF
and Microwave Circuits,” 32nd European Microwave Conf., Paris, France, pp. 477–480, Sep.
2010.
[58] J. Jugo et al., “Closed-Loop Stability Analysis of Microwave Amplifiers,” Electronics Lett., Vol. 37,
No. 4, pp. 226–228, Feb. 2001.
[59] S. Basu, S. A. Maas, and T. Itoh, “Stability Analysis for Large Signal Design of a Microwave
Frequency Doubler,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques , Vol. 43, No. 12, pp. 2890–
2898, Dec. 1995.
[60] R. Quéré et al., “Large Signal Design of Broadband Monolithic Microwave Frequency Dividers and
Phase-Locked Oscillators,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques , Vol. 41, No. 11, pp.
1928–1938, Nov. 1993.
[61] K. Narendra et al., “pHEMT Distributed Power Amplifier Adopting Broadband Impedance
Transformer,” Microwave Journal, Vol. 51, pp.76–83, June 2013.
1 The Scilab program can be downloaded at www.scilab.org.
2 An LDMOS n-type MOSFET packaged device from Mitsubishi (part number RD01MUS1) was used.

CHAPTER 7
Implementation of Distributed Amplifiers
The potential of traveling wave or distributed amplification for obtaining
power gains over wide frequency bands was recognized as early as the
mid-1930s when it was found that the gain-bandwidth performance is
greatly affected by the capacitance and transconductance of the
conventional vacuum tube [1]. However, the first theoretical analysis and
its practical verification were obtained for very broadband vacuum-tube
amplifiers more than a decade later [2, 3]. The basic concept was based
on the idea of combining the interelectrode capacitances of the amplifying
vacuum tubes with series wire inductors to form two lumped-element
artificial transmission lines coupled by the tube transconductances. As a
result, the distributed amplifier overcomes the difficulty of a conventional
amplifier, whose frequency limit is determined by a factor that is
proportional to the ratio of the transconductance of the tube to the square
root of the product of its input grid-cathode and output anode-cathode
capacitances. It overcomes the difficulty by paralleling the tubes in a
special way that allows the capacitances of the tubes to be separated
while the transconductances can be added almost without limit and not
affect the input and output of the device. Since the grid-cathode and
anode-cathode capacitances form part of lowpass filters that can be made
to have a substantially uniform response up to filter cutoff frequencies,
whose value can be conveniently set within a wide range by a suitable
choice of the values of the external inductor coils, it became possible to
provide amplification over much wider bandwidths than was achievable
with conventional amplifiers.
7.1 Vacuum-Tube Distributed Amplifier
Figure 7.1 shows the basic circuit structure of a vacuum-tube distributed
amplifier [2]. Here, an artificial transmission line consisting of the grid-
cathode capacitances Cg and inductances between tubes Lg is connected
between input terminals 1–1 and 2–2, with the characteristic impedance
of the grid line defined as Z01 = 
 If the proper terminating
impedance is connected to terminals 2–2 and if this transmission line is

assumed to be lossless, then it can be shown that the driving-point
impedance at terminals 1–1 is independent of the number of tubes so
connected. In a similar fashion, a second transmission line is formed by
making use of the anode-cathode capacitances Cp to shunt another set of
coil inductances Lp, resulting in the similar characteristic impedance of
the anode (or plate) line independent of the number of tubes as Z02 = 
 Impedances connected to terminals 3–3 and 4–4 are intended to
be equal to the characteristic impedance of the anode line. The
impedance connected to terminals 2–2 is called the grid termination, the
impedance connected to terminals 3–3 is called the reverse termination,
and the impedance connected to output terminals 4–4 is called the anode
termination. These two artificial transmission lines are made to have
identical velocities of propagation. The bandwidth of a distributed
amplifier is determined by the cutoff frequency of the artificial line. In
general, the higher this cutoff frequency, the lower the characteristic
impedance of the line, and hence the less the voltage gain.
A signal generator connected to input terminals 1–1 will cause a wave
to travel along the grid line. As this wave reaches the grids of the
distributed tubes, currents will flow in the anode circuits of the tubes.
Each tube will then send waves in the anode line in both directions. If the
reverse termination is perfect, the waves that travel to the left in the
anode line will be completely absorbed, and will not contribute to the
output signal. The waves that travel to the right in the anode line are
added all in phase, and the output voltage is thus directly proportional to
the number of tubes. Hence, the effective transconductance of such a
distributed stage may be increased to any desired limit, no matter how
low the gain of each tube (or section) is (even if it less than unity). As
long as the gain per section is greater than the transmission-line loss of
the section, the signal in the anode line will increase and can be made
enough large by using a sufficient number of tubes.
The total voltage gain A of the distributed amplifier consisting of n
sections is written as
 (7.1)
where gm is the tube transconductance, Z01 is the characteristic
impedance of the grid line, and Z02 is the characteristic impedance of the

anode line. Assuming that both transmission lines are identical,
 (7.2)
where xk = f/fc, R = 1/πfcC (C = Cg = Cp), f is the frequency, and fc is
the cutoff frequency of the transmission line. Equation (7.1) can be
rewritten under conditions given by (7.2) as
 (7.3)
where the second factor shows that the gain of the simple structure of the
distributed amplifier shown in Figure 7.1 will be a function of frequency.
This is due to the fact that the midshunt characteristic impedance of a
lowpass constant-k filter section rises rapidly as the cutoff frequency is
approached. This, in turn, causes the gain of the amplifier to increase
sharply near cutoff, producing a large undesired peak.
Figure 7.1 Basic structure of vacuum-tube distributed amplifier.
Several methods can be used to eliminate this undesired peak and
improve the frequency response, and one of them is to use adjacent coils,

which are wound on the same form and in the same direction with large
coupling coefficient M, as shown in Figure 7.2.
Figure 7.2 Vacuum-tube distributed amplifier with mutual coupling.
In this case, each coupling section can be equated to the usual m-
derived filter section. As a result, the total voltage gain A and phase shift
ϕ for a distributed amplifier with n tubes can be written, respectively, as
 (7.4)
 (7.5)
where R0 = 1/πf0Cg; xk = f/f0; f0 = gm /π
, which is Wheeler’s
bandwidth-index frequency; and m is the design parameter selected for
desired tolerance [2]. Note that the presence of the parasitic capacitance
distributed throughout the transmission-line coil windings results in
lowering the amplifier cutoff frequency and in altering the impedance of

the transmission lines, thus making it difficult to terminate properly [3].
An improvement of the gain/frequency response near the cutoff frequency
can be achieved by the insertion of extra sections into the grid or anode
line, by the use of a network whose image (or terminating) impedance (at
a shunt-capacitance point) falls to zero at the cutoff frequency, or by the
use of lowpass networks containing resistive elements [4, 5]. In addition,
the rise of gain can be eliminated by having different propagation
functions for the sections in a distributed amplifier [6].
To improve both the gain/frequency characteristic by making it flatter
and the phase-shift/frequency characteristic by making it more linear, a
staggering principle can be applied when the lumped lines in the
distributed amplifier are arranged such that the anode-line traveling wave
and the grid-line traveling wave are not in phase at corresponding points
along the lines [7]. In a distributed amplifier embodying the constant-k LC
filter network as the elements of the lumped lines, the stagger is
introduced by making the cutoff frequency of the grid line a little higher
than that of the anode line. At a given frequency, a line with a higher
cutoff frequency produces a smaller phase than one with a lower cutoff
frequency. The difference between the phase shifts produced by the two
lines increases continuously as the frequency is increased.
The overall gain characteristic and phase shift of a staggered n-tube
distributed amplifier with constant-k lowpass LC filter network is given,
respectively, by
 (7.6)
 (7.7)
where
ψ = θp − θg
θp = 2 sin–1xk = phase shift introduced by the individual section of the
anode line
θg = 2 sin–1qxk = phase shift introduced by the individual section of
the grid line
xk = f/fcp
q = fcp/fcg

fcp = anode-line cutoff frequency
fcg = grid-line cutoff frequency.
In order for the amplitude to be able to fall to zero just below the cutoff
frequency of the anode line, the last factor in (7.6) has to vanish at fcp,
resulting in (nψ/2) = π at xk = 1. Hence, the ratio between grid-line and
anode-line cutoff frequencies can be obtained as
 (7.8)
Similarly, the gain and phase-shift characteristics of a distributed
amplifier with m-derived filter sections can be improved by staggering
with different m-values of the anode and grid lines when the grid line has
the larger m [7]. In practical implementation of a vacuum-tube distributed
amplifier, the distributed cascode circuit can be used to minimize
degeneration at higher frequencies caused by the common lead
inductances and feedback capacitances of the tubes [8]. However, if the
attenuation in the grid line due to grid loading is substantial, the
staggering of the lines may not necessarily provide much improvement in
the gain characteristic, although the phase-shift characteristic is
approximately the same as for the lossless case [9]. Generally, the effects
of staggering the lines in distributed amplifiers based on vacuum tubes
and transistors are different because their electrical behavior is
characterized by different equivalent circuit representations [10].
If the attenuation in the grid line is neglected in order to obtain a
general analysis of distributed amplifiers operating as large-signal
devices, all of the tubes’ currents add in phase as they progress toward
the output end of the amplifier. Consequently, the output current is just n
times the current that one tube produces in the output resistance and the
output power varies as the square of the number of tubes. This is in
contrast to the dc power input, which varies directly with the number of
tubes. As a result, it is desirable to use as large a number of tubes as
possible to increase efficiency, which increases directly with the number
of tubes.
In a distributed amplifier designed for flat frequency response, the
output power is constant with frequency as long as the driving power
remains constant. Hence, the output power calculated for low frequencies
should apply for any frequency in the operating region. Figure 7.3 shows

the instantaneous values of anode voltage and anode current for idealized
tube voltage-ampere characteristics in a Class AB operation [11]. In this
case, the instantaneous anode voltage va(ωt) varies according to
 (7.9)
where the conduction angle 2θ indicates the part of the RF current cycle
during which a device conduction occurs.
The instantaneous anode current ia(ωt) can be written as
 (7.10)
with a quiescent current Iq = Im cosθ.
Figure 7.3 Instantaneous values of anode voltage and anode current in Class AB operation.
The dc value of the anode voltage must be equal to the anode supply

voltage Va as
 (7.11)
The dc anode current I0 is the average value of the instantaneous
anode current given by
 (7.12)
The peak value of the fundamental component of the anode voltage is
written as
 (7.13)
The peak value of the fundamental component of the anode current is
obtained by
 (7.14)
The efficiency η is calculated as the ratio of the output fundamental
power to the input dc power. At low frequencies the anode circuit of the
distributed amplifier with resistive terminations is only 50% efficient since
half the output power from tubes is dissipated in the reverse termination.
Consequently, the output power is one-half the product of the
fundamental current and fundamental voltage. As a result,
 (7.15)
From (7.15), it follows that the maximum theoretical efficiency of the
distributed amplifier is derived to be about 30% and occurs with an anode

current conduction angle of about 225° [11]. However, since the average
value of the dc current drawn from the anode supply will decrease with
frequency supply, the distributed amplifier will tend to become more
efficient as the operating frequency increases. The change in efficiency is
related to the change in the average plate current from no-signal
conditions to full-signal conditions.
7.2 Microwave GaAs FET Distributed Amplifiers
The distributed amplifier using hybrid technology with lumped elements
was first investigated based on silicon bipolar transistors in 1959 [12],
MOSFETs in 1965 [13], and MESFETs in 1968–1969 [14, 15]. In circuits
that employ FETs as active elements, the gate and drain loading plays a
very significant role in the operation and high-frequency performance of
the distributed amplifier. Therefore, it is only recently, with the
availability of good-quality microwave GaAs FETs, that distributed
amplifiers have again become popular at microwave frequencies [16]. In
this case, GaAs FETs are used as the active devices, and the input and
output lines can represent the periodically loaded microstrip transmission
lines. With such an arrangement, the factors degrading the expected
performance such as device input and output resistances and
capacitances are either completely eliminated or their effect is included in
the design. The resultant distributed amplifiers exhibit very low
sensitivities to process variations and are relatively easy to design and
simulate. In the early 1980s, the technology of distributed amplification
was further improved by implementing the silicon and semi-insulating
GaAs MMICs, which provide low loss, small size, high reliability, circuit
design flexibility, and a high level of integration. The first 0.5- to 14-GHz
monolithic GaAs FET distributed (or traveling-wave) amplifier was
designed in 1981 [17].
7.2.1 Basic Configuration with Microstrip Lines
The simplified schematic representation of a four-section GaAs FET
distributed amplifier is shown in Figure 7.4, where the microstrip lines are
periodically loaded with the complex gate and drain impedances of the
devices, thus forming lossy transmission-line structures of different
characteristic impedance and propagation constant [18]. An RF signal
applied at the input end of the gate line travels down the line to the other

end, where it is absorbed by the terminating impedance connecting at the
end of the gate line, which includes the gate dummy resistor R1.
However, a significant portion of the signal is proportionally dissipated by
the gate circuits of the individual FETs along the way. The input signal
sampled by the gate circuits at different phases (and generally at
different amplitudes) is transferred to the drain line through the FET
transconductances. If the phase velocity of the signal at the drain line is
identical to the phase velocity of the gate line, then the signals on the
drain line add, forming a traveling wave. The addition will be in phase
only for the forward-traveling signal. Any signal that travels backward,
and is not fully canceled by the out-of-phase additions, will be absorbed
by the terminating impedance connecting at the end of the drain line,
which includes the drain dummy resistor R2. The gate and drain
capacitances of the FET effectively become part of the gate and drain
transmission lines, while the gate and drain resistances introduce loss on
these lines.
Figure 7.4 Schematic representation of four-section GaAs FET distributed amplifier.
In conventional power amplifiers, it is impossible to increase the gain-
bandwidth product by just paralleling the FETs because the resulting
increase in transconductance gm is compensated for by the corresponding
increase in the input and output capacitances. The distributed power
amplifier overcomes this problem by adding the individual device
transconductances without adding their input and output capacitances,
which are now the parts of the artificial gate and drain transmission lines,
respectively. If the spacing between FETs is small compared to the
wavelength, the characteristic impedances of the gate and drain lines
shown in Figures 7.5(a) and (b), respectively, can be approximated as

 (7.16)
 (7.17)
where
Cgs = gate-source capacitance
Cds = drain-source capacitances of the unit FET cell
lg and ld = lengths of the unit gate-line and drain-line sections,
respectively
Lg, Cg and Ld, Cd = per-unit-length inductance and capacitance of the
gate and drain lines, respectively.
Figure 7.5 Simplified equivalent-circuit diagram of FET distributed amplifier.
Here, the effects of the gate resistance Rgs and drain resistance Rds
are neglected. Note that the characteristic impedance expressions in
(7.16) and (7.17) are clearly independent of the number of FETs used in
the circuit.
As a result, the amplifier available gain G for an n-section circuit found

by approximating the gate and drain lines as continuous structures can be
written as
 (7.18)
where the propagation constants γg and γd are simplified using small-loss
approximation as
 (7.19)
 (7.20)
Under normal operating conditions, the signals in the gate and drain
lines are near synchronism when βglg ≅ βdld, and (7.18) can be simplified
for Zg ≅ Zd ≡ Z0 and small losses to
 (7.21)
from which it follows that, as the number of unit cells or sections n is
increased, the available gain G does not increase monotonically and
approaches zero in limit as n increases.
For values of nαglg ≤ 1 and when the drain-line losses are negligible
compared to the gate-line losses, (7.21) can be rewritten as
 (7.22)
which means that, in this operating condition, the available gain G can be
made proportional to n2. In this case, by using the expression for the
gate-line attenuation constant αg given in (7.19), one can find that
 (7.23)
which defines the upper limit to the total gate periphery that can be used

in a practical distributed amplifier or the maximum number of unit
sections for a given FET device. Similar results can be obtained by
applying a theoretical analysis based on matrix technique by employing a
finite number of active and passive circuit elements [19].
In view of the gate-line and drain-line losses, from (7.21) it follows that
the power gain of a distributed amplifier approaches zero as n → ∞. This
happens due to the fact that the input voltage on the gate line decays
exponentially, so the input signal does not reach FETs at the end of the
amplifier gate line and, similarly, the amplified signals from FETs near the
beginning are attenuated along the drain line. This implies that, for a
given set of FET parameters, there will be an optimum value of n that
maximizes the power gain of a distributed amplifier. Hence, by
differentiating (7.21) with respect to n and setting the result to zero, the
optimum number of sections nopt can be determined from
 (7.24)
which depends on the device parameters, line lengths, and frequency
through the attenuation constants given in (7.19) and (7.20). For
example, it is necessary to calculate the power gain of a distributed
amplifier operated from 1 to 12 GHz, with a maximum gain at 10 GHz.
Assuming that ωRgsCgs = 0.5, Z0/Rgs = 4, and Z0/Rds = 0.2 for the
specified device parameters and Zg = Zd = Z0 = 50Ω, from (7.19) and
(7.20) it follows that αglg = 0.5 and αdld = 0.1, resulting in nopt =
ln(0.5/0.1)/(0.5 - 0.1) = 4.0 or four sections.
Figure 7.6 shows the frequency dependence of a power gain for
different numbers of FET unit cells or sections [18]. The figure clearly
shows that there is an optimum number nopt that provides a maximum
frequency bandwidth with minimum gain variations and reasonable power
gain. For example, a power gain of 9±1 dB over a bandwidth of 1 to 13
GHz was obtained for a four-cell distributed amplifier with a total GaAs
FET gate periphery of 4 × 300 μm. Note that the resistive part of the gate
loading typically results in a 3-dB gain reduction. The effect of the drain
loading is not as significant; however, the power gain can be increased by
about 1 dB for increased values of the drain loading resistance.

Figure 7.6 Power gain versus frequency for different numbers of cells.
Replacing the conventional GaAs MESFETs with high-performance HEMT
devices in a five-section monolithic distributed amplifier will result in
significant improvements in the power gain and noise figure. For example,
use of 0.35-μm-gate-length HEMTs provides a low-noise figure that is 2
dB lower and a power gain that is 2.5 dB higher than achieved using
0.5-μm-gate-length MESFET devices in a frequency range from 2 to 20
GHz [20].
7.2.2 Basic Configuration with Lumped Elements
The equivalent gate and drain artificial transmission lines based on
lumped inductors and capacitors are shown in Figures 7.7(a) and (b),
respectively [21, 22].

Figure 7.7 Simplified equivalent circuits of FET distributed amplifier with lumped inductors.
For a constant-k type transmission line, the phase velocity is a well-known
function of the cutoff frequency fc of the line. By requiring the phase shift
between each gate-line and drain-line section to be equal, the cutoff
frequency for the gate transmission line fcg = 1/2πRgsCgs and the cutoff
frequency for the drain transmission line fcd = 1/2πRdsCds must also be
equal. As a result, the available gain G of the lumped distributed amplifier
can be written as
 (7.25)
where αg and αd are the attenuations on the gate and drain lines per
section, and Z01 = 
 and Z02 = 
 are the characteristic
impedances of the gate and drain line, respectively.
The attenuation on the gate and drain lines is the critical factor
controlling the frequency response of a distributed amplifier. When
attenuation per section is sufficiently small, the corresponding
attenuations on the gate and drain lines can be given by

 (7.26)
 (7.27)
where xk = f/fc is the normalized frequency and fc = 
 = 
[22]. From (7.26) and (7.27), it follows that the gate-line attenuation is
more sensitive to frequency than the drain-line attenuation, and the
drain-line attenuation does not vanish in the low-frequency limit, unlike
attenuation in the gate line. Therefore, the frequency response of the
distributed amplifier can be expected to be predominantly controlled by
the attenuation on the gate line. Generally, the attenuation on the gate
and drain lines can be decreased by making fc/fcg and fcd/fc small when
the transistor having high fcg and low fcd has to be chosen for a given fc.
The maximum gain-bandwidth product of the distributed amplifier can
be estimated by
 (7.28)
where G0 is the low-frequency available gain of the amplifier, f1dB is the
frequency at which the power gain of the amplifier falls below G0 by 1 dB,
and
 (7.29)
is the frequency at which the maximum available gain (MAG) of the FET
becomes unity [22].
7.2.3 Capacitive Coupling
The attenuation of gate line αg increases rapidly with frequency, as
shown in (7.19), resulting in a lower power gain at high bandwidth
frequencies. In this case, if the gate-line attenuation can be made very
small, the input signal is nearly evenly applied to all FETs in the amplifier
and the power gain will remain constant over a wide frequency band.
However, since the gate-line attenuation is directly proportional to the

gate-source capacitance Cgs, then it is possible to reduce its effect by
connecting a series capacitor C to each gate, as shown in Figure 7.8 [23,
24]. As a result, since the effective gate capacitance is reduced by a
factor of q/ ( 1 + q) when C = qCgs, the gate-line attenuation αg
decreases by a factor of q/(1 + q) and the gate-circuit cutoff frequency fg
is increased by a factor of (1 + q)/q at a fixed frequency. The gate
voltage, however, divides between C and Cgs, and the FET can now be
considered as a modified device having an effective gate-source
capacitance of C′g = qCgs/(1 + q) and an effective transconductance of
g′m = qgm/(1 + q) [25]. The series capacitor also reduces the gain per
device, but the overall amplifier gain cannot be reduced if more devices
are connected or a larger gate periphery is used. Moreover, the series
capacitance and gate-source capacitance form a voltage divider, allowing
for an increased signal level along the gate line, resulting in significantly
higher output power and efficiency for a distributed amplifier.
Figure 7.8 Schematic of a distributed amplifier with series capacitors at the FET gates.
With a much larger total FET periphery, drain-line loading begins to
limit the output power, particularly at the upper end of the operating
band, resulting in a low or even negative real part of the impedance at
the drains closer to the output. In this case, a capacitor can be inserted
between the drain line and the drain of any FET with a low real part of
the impedance, thus decreasing the drain-line loading and increasing the
impedance at the drains [26]. As a result, a higher total FET periphery
can be accommodated and higher output power can be achieved. Figure
7.9 shows an example of a three-cell GaAs FET distributed amplifier that
uses capacitive drain coupling.

Figure 7.9 Schematic of a distributed amplifier with a series capacitor at the FET drain.
This circuit with a drain coupling capacitor connected to FET3, which
operates from 14 to 37 GHz, also features varying gate periphery and
capacitive gate coupling. Inserting the 0.25-pF capacitor between FET3
and the drain line substantially increases the real part of the impedances
at the drains of FET2 and FET3 over the frequency range from 18 to 38
GHz. This, in turn, results in higher and flatter output power performance
up to much higher frequencies, with a power increase of 1.5 dB at 18 GHz
and 5 dB at 27 GHz compared to the circuit without drain capacitive
coupling.
7.3 Tapered Distributed Amplifier
As an alternative, to compensate for the attenuation that results from the
gate finite input resistance so that the FETs in the distributed network are
not driven equally, equal drive to each transistor can be restored by
increasing the characteristic impedance of the gate line in a
systematically tapered manner from the input of the gate line to its end
toward the gate load resistor [27]. In a manner analogous to gate voltage
equalization, the voltage at the drains of all of the FETs can be made the
same by tapering the drain-line impedance, but by systematically
decreasing the impedance along the line toward the output load [2].
Improved performance in terms of the smaller gain flatness and wider
frequency bandwidth can also be achieved by using a concept of the
declining drain-line lengths when the lengths of the drain-line elements
between the FET drains become shorter with optimized values the closer
the drain line is located toward the output terminal [28].
The effect of a tapered drain line in terms of current distribution for a
two-section distributed amplifier is shown in Figure 7.10, where the first

FET device operates into a section of the drain line with a characteristic
impedance Z0, and the entire drain current id flows to the next section
[2].
Figure 7.10 Current distribution in optimally tapered drain line.
If the next section has a lower characteristic impedance of Z0/2, one-
third of the incident drain current from the second FET device will cancel
the reflected current from the first FET device at the junction of the
second FET device. The remaining two-thirds of the drain current from the
second FET device and four-thirds of the drain current from the first FET
device add and propagate toward the end of the second section of the
drain line into the new third section. At the next junction, the third section
should have a characteristic impedance equal to Z0/3. This process
continues where each successive transmission-line section has a
characteristic impedance of Z0/n, where n is the number of sections. The
entire current of the FET devices may thus be effectively used in the load
without the necessity of half the drain current flowing into the load and
half the drain current flowing into the reverse termination. In this case,
Note that current equalization is difficult to achieve in practice due to
unequal drive voltages on the gate line and FET process variation, and
there exists a small range of useful realizable impedances for microstrip-
line practical implementation.
Figure 7.11(a) shows the general structure of a distributed FET
amplifier, 
where Zg(i) 
and Zd(i) are the optimum characteristic
impedances of the gate- and drain-line ith sections, while RLg and RLd

are the gate and drain dumping resistors, respectively [29].
Figure 7.11 Schematics of nonuniform pHEMT distributed amplifiers.
In this case, the optimum input and output capacitances of each FET
device are absorbed into the artificial gate and drain lines to synthesize
the optimum characteristic impedances Zg(i) and Zd(i). In the particular

case of uniform distributed amplifiers, assuming an identical gate voltage
amplitude on each transistor, the characteristic admittances of the drain-
line sections can be given as
 (7.30)
 (7.31)
where
Gopt = optimum output conductance of each transistor
Yd(1) = 1/Zd(1) = optimum characteristic admittance of the first drain-
line section
Yd(i) = 1/Zd(i) = optimum characteristic admittance of the ith drain-
line section
GLd = 1/RLd = drain dummy conductance.
The resulting optimum output power Pout of the uniform distributed
amplifier is defined as
 (7.32)
where Pmax is the maximum power at the 1-dB gain compression point,
and n is the total number of transistors within the amplifier.
In the case of nonuniform distributed amplifiers, the generalized
optimum power-matching structure can be analytically determined to add
the individual power contribution in the direction of the output power as
Yd(1) = Gopt(1) (7.33)
 (7.34)
 (7.35)
where Pmax(1) is the maximum power of the first device, Pout is the
amplifier output power, and Gopt(k) and Pmax(k) are the optimum output

conductance and output power of the kth transistor, respectively [29].
Note that, in the case of moderate frequency bandwidth applications
(fmax/fmin < 3), the drain dumping load RLd can be removed so that
each transistor could be ideally matched and yield its maximum output
power, resulting in
 (7.36)
 (7.37)
To achieve the equal-gate voltage distribution, the characteristic
impedances of the gate-line sections Zg(i) = 1/Yd(i) are defined as
 (7.38)
 (7.39)
and the electrical lengths θg(i) and θd(i) of the corresponding gate- and
drain-line sections must always verify θg(i) = θd(i).
Figure 7.11(b) shows the simplified circuit schematic of a monolithic
nonuniform distributed amplifier composed of six amplifying cells and
implemented in a 0.25-µm power pHEMT process, where the first
transistor represents a 600-µm HEMT and the other transistors represent
300-µm HEMTs [29]. Here, discrete series capacitors couple each
transistor to the gate line and act as voltage dividers to ensure equal
drive levels on the transistor gates. Implanted GaAs resistors shunt the
series MIM capacitors to supply gate bias. As a result, an output power of
30 dBm with a power gain of 7 dB and a PAE of greater than 20% was
achieved across the frequency band from 4 to 19 GHz at a drain supply
voltage of 8V. By optimizing the nonuniform nature of the gate and drain
lines and using the series capacitors at the device gates, the average
5.5W output power and 25% PAE were achieved over 2 to 15 GHz for a
five-cell monolithic distributed amplifier using a high-voltage 0.25-µm
AlGaN/GaN HEMT on SiC technology with a total gate device periphery of
2 mm at a 20V drain bias [30].
The efficiency can be further increased for the same multiple-octave
frequency bandwidth when the resistive termination is neglected and an

optimum load can be presented to each active device by corresponding
tapering of the drain-line characteristic impedance [31]. In addition, the
transmission-line lengths can be adjusted such that the transistor currents
add in-phase and the FET output capacitances can be absorbed into the
transmission line. If the optimum load resistance Ropt(k) for the kth
transistor is a known quantity for the process and is extracted from load-
pull data, the unknown drain-line characteristic impedances Zd(k) can be
calculated from
 (7.40)
where Ropt = Ropt(k)WQk and WQk is the gate width of the kth transistor
[32]. At low frequency, the individual FET optimum load resistances
Ropt(k) will combine in parallel and this parallel combination should be
equal to the load impedance RL to maximize the output power of the
amplifier, where Zd(k) = RL.
Table 7.1 shows the device and transmission-line parameters
corresponding to the 10-cell nonuniform distributed amplifiers with equal
and unequal device gate sizes. In the case of equal gate widths for each
cell, the maximum characteristic impedance of the transmission line is
equal to 500W, which is difficult to realize with microstrip lines using
normal GaN on SiC process. However, by making the first FET cell larger
by three times than that of the others, the maximum characteristic
impedance of the first transmission line can be significantly reduced to an
acceptable value. The estimated maximum RF output power shown in
Table 7.1 is calculated assuming a sinusoidal output voltage across the
load as 
 where Vdd is the drain supply voltage.
Table 7.1 Parameters of a Ten-Cell Nonuniform Distributed Amplifier
Parameters
FET number
Equal FET cells
Unequal FET cells
WQ (mm) Zd (mm)
WQ (mm) Zd (mm)
FET Ropt (Ω-mm) = 120
RL (Ω)= 50
Total FET width (mm) = 2.4
Number of cells = 10
Supply voltage (V) = 30
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0.24
0.24
0.24
0.24
0.24
0.24
0.24
500
250
167
125
100
83
71
0.60
0.20
0.20
0.20
0.20
0.20
0.20
200
150
120
100
86
75
67

Max RF power (W) = 9.0
8
9
10
0.24
0.24
0.24
63
56
50
0.20
0.20
0.20
60
55
50
A circuit schematic of a monolithic 10-cell nonuniform distributed
amplifier designed to operate over a 10:1 bandwidth including as much of
the Ku-band as possible is shown in Figure 7.12(a) [32]. In this case, by
using (7.40) and assuming a 35Ω load impedance, the first FET cell was
sized at 520 μm with the remaining nine cells sized at 320 μm each for a
total periphery of 3.4 mm. To transform the standard 50Ω load to 35Ω
impedance, a quarterwave microstrip line centered near the upper band
edge was used, as shown in Figure 7.12(b). As a result, the saturated
output power greater than 8W with a peak value of 13W and PAE greater
than 20% with a peak value of 38% were achieved over a frequency
bandwidth of 1.5 to 17.0 GHz at a drain supply voltage of 30V for an input
power of 32 dBm using a 0.25-μm GaN HEMT on SiC technology. With
some process modifications resulting in higher current handling capability
for passive elements and increased gain and voltage handling at the
device unit cell, a minimum output power of 11W with a minimum PAE of
28% was achieved across 2 to 18 GHz at a drain supply voltage of 35V
[33].

Figure 7.12 Circuit topology and MMIC of nonuniform GaN HEMT distributed amplifier.
Greater efficiency can be provided at lower frequencies when the
power-added efficiencies of 30% to 60% with an output power of around
40 dBm over the frequency bandwidth of 100 MHz to 2.2 GHz have been
achieved for a monolithic four-cell distributed amplifier with a tapered
drain line using a 0.5-μm GaN HEMT on Si process [34]. A low-
temperature cofired ceramic (LTCC) technology is an attractive choice for
fabricating power amplifiers because it provides a sufficiently high circuit
density integration, low RF loss, and good thermal performance. In this
case, the discrete active devices can be placed directly on top of 400-μm
silver-filled vias, which provide a good thermal dissipation to ground [35].
As a result, a five-cell distributed amplifier using pHEMT devices with a
2.1-mm gate periphery each provides a 1W output power over the
frequency bandwidth from 800 MHz to 2.1 GHz with a 3.2V supply
voltage. Here, a broadband multisection output impedance transformer

(incorporating two 4:1 coupled-coil transformers in series with additional
matching elements) is required to transform the optimum output
impedance of 3.3Ω to a standard 50Ω load throughout the band.
A three-cell design for a distributed amplifier using pHEMT devices with
a 1.9-mm gate periphery each, whose circuit schematic is shown in Figure
7.13, can provide a 2W output power over the frequency range from 0.6
to 2.2 GHz with a PAE of greater than 30% at a 12V supply voltage [36].
In this case, the drain-line termination was set well above 50Ω, since the
impedance at that point in the circuit is approximately 150Ω, and it could
be made even larger at the expense of gain flatness and stability with
only 1% to 2% efficiency drop due to the extensive drain-line impedance
tapering. A 6W distributed amplifier based on five LMOSFET devices
having a 5-mm gate width each can achieve a PAE of greater than 30%
over the frequency bandwidth from 100 MHz to 1.8 GHz at a 28V supply
voltage [36]. With a hybrid implementation using a Rogers RT5880
substrate and discrete transistors, a higher than 30% PAE over a
frequency bandwidth of 20 MHz to 2.5 GHz was achieved for a 5W three-
cell distributed amplifier with an optimized tapered drain line using a
0.35-μm GaN HEMT on SiC process at a supply voltage of 28 V [37].
Figure 7.13 Schematic of a three-cell pHEMT distributed amplifier using LTCC technology.
7.4 Power Combining

Because there is a strong demand for solid-state power amplifiers to
provide high output power, high efficiency, and a wide bandwidth in
different microwave and millimeter-wave radar and communication
systems, distributed amplifiers can be considered a good candidate for
ultrawideband operation because their bandwidth performance is
dominated by a high cutoff frequency for artificial input and output
transmission lines. However, output power is generally limited by the
drain-line termination and maximum total gate periphery that can be
included in a single-stage design. In this case, it is necessary to use
power-combining schemes that employ a transmission-line Wilkinson
power divider or coupled-line Lange-type power dividers and combiners
[38].
Figure 7.14 shows the circuit schematic of a monolithic two-stage
distributed amplifier, where the input signal is equally divided into the
gate lines, each employing four 150-µm FETs and using a Wilkinson power
divider without the isolation resistor [39]. Such a configuration with a
single-section Wilkinson divider had contributed to obtaining a decade
bandwidth 
performance 
because 
of 
the 
good 
input 
matching
characteristics of the individual amplifiers. In this circuit, the FETs excited
from the two separate gate lines are combined on a single drain line,
effectively giving a 4 × 300-μm drain periphery, thus doubling the output
power over a frequency range of 2 to 20 GHz.
Figure 7.14 Distributed power amplifier with eight FET cells.
Figure 7.15 shows the circuit diagram of a monolithic balanced
nonuniform distributed amplifier for which an input power divider and an
output power combiner represent the monolithic Lange couplers, which

were designed to achieve operation over 6 to 18 GHz using highly
overcoupled lines [40]. In this case, some output power degradation at
upper operating frequencies because of the loss in artificial gate and drain
lines due to the parasitic resistors in transistors was compensated for by
using a shunt short-circuited quarterwave microstrip line at the output of
each distributed amplifier. As a result, the fabricated monolithic balanced
nonuniform distributed amplifier using a 0.25-μm AlGaN/GaN HEMT
technology was able to deliver an output power of more than 10W over 6
to 18 GHz at a drain supply voltage of 40V.
Figure 7.15 Schematic of a balanced distributed amplifier with Lange couplers.
7.5 Bandpass Configuration
Similar to the conventional distributed amplifiers representing a lowpass
configuration, it is possible to achieve sufficient power gain over extreme
bandwidths with the bandpass distributed amplifiers limited only by the
high-frequency effects of the amplifying devices [8]. In this case,
additional inductive elements are placed in parallel with the shunt

capacitance of the FETs, and this allows the gate capacitance to be
effectively reduced, thus increasing the upper operating frequency for a
given FET [41, 42]. However, there has to be some drop in fractional
bandwidth owing to the introduction of a lower cutoff frequency. Besides,
better noise performance and linear phase response can be achieved with
the bandpass distributed amplifiers. However, the basic bandpass
distributed amplifier has an amplitude response that is inherently nonflat
and that may require an additional parameter optimization procedure or
insertion of additional compensating circuits.
The gate and drain lines in such a bandpass distributed amplifier have
capacitors in the series arms of the gate and drain lines, thus preventing
direct biasing of the gate and drain terminals in the usual manner by
means of two common dc power supplies connected to both lines. An
alternative structure for the three-cell bandpass distributed amplifier with
the series inductors and shunt series LC circuits in the gate and drain lines
is shown in Figure 7.16 [43]. The values of the corresponding inductances
in the gate and drain circuits are calculated from
 (7.41)
 (7.42)
where
RL = RLg = RLd = load impedance
ω0 = 
 = center bandwidth frequency
f1 = lower bandwidth frequency
f2 = upper bandwidth frequency
m = f1/f2
C = Cg = Cd = effective capacitance.
The effective capacitance is determined for particular device input and
output capacitances, load impedance, and boundary frequencies. For
example, C = 3.18 pF for f1 = 1 GHz, f2 = 3 GHz, RL = 50Ω, and GaAs
FET NE72218 with Cin = 0.96 pF and Cout = 0.64 pF. In this case, the
inductor values are calculated from (7.41) and (7.42) as Lg1 = Ld1 = 1.99

nH and Lg2 = Ld2 = 7.97 nH. As a result, the passband of this
bidirectional and symmetric distributed amplifier with surface-mounted
inductors covers a frequency bandwidth from 842 MHz to 3.17 GHz with a
power gain of around 10 dB and linear phase response [43].
Figure 7.16 Schematic of a three-cell bandpass distributed amplifier.
7.6 Parallel and Series Feedback
Among the various factors affecting the amplifier gain are the input and
output loss factors of the active device. The input loss factor determines
the rate at which the input signal decays along the gate line, and the
output loss factor affects the growth rate of the output signal along the
drain line. As a result, the optimum number of transistors to be used in
the distributed amplifier is determined by the input and output loss
factors, which can be changed to achieve higher gain values through the
use of feedback provided by the active element.
Figure 7.17 shows the small-signal equivalent circuit of a common-
source FET device, where Yf = Gf + jBf is a parallel feedback admittance
and Zf = Rf + jXf is a series feedback impedance. For studying the effects
of various feedback elements on the maximum available gain (MAG) of
the two-port network derived in [44], a perturbation method can be used
where the feedback is assumed small and only the first-order correction

term ΔMAG is considered. As a result, for a series resistive feedback,
 (7.43)
and for a series reactive feedback,
 (7.44)
where Xj = ωLf if the feedback element is an inductance, and Xf =
−1/ωCf if it is a capacitance [45]. From (7.44), it follows that capacitive
series feedback increases MAG at low frequencies, acting as positive
feedback. In contrast, inductive series feedback acts as a negative
feedback at low frequencies. At the same time, at higher frequencies
when the numerator in (7.44) becomes positive, capacitive feedback is
negative and inductive feedback is positive. The role of the resistor as a
positive or negative feedback element is not only frequency dependent
but also dependent on various FET parameters at a given frequency.
Specifically, series source resistance acts as a negative feedback element
only if the numerator in (7.43) is positive. At low frequencies, the increase
in gain due to positive capacitive feedback and the reduction in gain due
to negative resistance feedback do not have the same frequency
dependence. Therefore, a series RC feedback cannot be used for
broadband loss compensation, unlike a parallel RC feedback, which can
lead to the possibility of broadband loss compensation.

Figure 7.17 General FET model to evaluate the effect of series and parallel feedback.
Similarly, for a parallel resistive feedback,
 (7.45)
and for a parallel reactive feedback,
 (7.46)
where Bj = ωCf if the feedback element is a capacitance, and Bf =
−1/ωLf for inductive feedback [45]. It can be seen from (7.45) that a
parallel resistive element always gives negative feedback regardless of
frequency or FET parameters. However, according to (7.46), the role of
capacitive and inductive elements in giving positive or negative parallel
feedback is reversed compared to that for series feedback.
Note that the maximum level of positive feedback usable in a given
distributed amplifier is limited by the requirement of unconditional
stability of the amplifier over the entire frequency range. Generally, the
risk of oscillations increases with greater device transconductance gm,
feedback gate-drain capacitance Cgs, or transmission-line cutoff frequency
fc = 
 however, the parasitic resistances Rgs and Rds tend to
moderate the oscillation phenomena. The detailed analysis of a two-cell
distributed structure has shown that the oscillation conditions can be
satisfied at high frequencies and are due to an internal loop formed by
the transconductance and the feedback capacitance of the active devices,
combined with the transmission lines [46]. The oscillations cannot occur
due to reflections at the terminations (ZLg 
and ZLd) because the
oscillation frequency is lower than the cutoff frequency of the transmission
lines and an active feedback is necessary to provide gain in the loop to
generate oscillations. The feedback gate-drain capacitance Cgd of the
active devices strongly modifies the behavior of distributed amplifiers, but
mainly when the frequency is high and transistors with high

transconductance are used.
Figure 7.18 shows the circuit schematic of a monolithic three-cell
distributed driving amplifier, in which each active unit cell represents a
cascade pHEMT amplifier with a self-biasing circuit through the parallel
and series feedback resistors [47]. The feedback resistor values were
determined for high stability and high gain in a distributed amplifier using
200-μm pHEMTs as input devices and 480-μm pHEMTs as output devices
(187Ω for parallel feedback resistors and 53Ω for series feedback
resistors). The conventional drain termination resistor was eliminated for
increasing output power and efficiency in this amplifier. As a result, a
maximum available gain of more than 25 dB across 5 to 20 GHz and a
stability factor of larger than unity over all frequencies were simulated,
and a small-signal gain of 16±0.6 dB over 5 to 21 GHz and an output
power of more than 22 dB at 1-dB gain compression point over 6 to 18
GHz were achieved.
Figure 7.18 Schematic of a three-cell distributed amplifier with parallel and series feedback.
7.7 Cascode Distributed Amplifiers
In practical implementations of a vacuum-tube distributed amplifier, the
distributed cascode circuit was used to minimize the degeneration at
higher frequencies caused by the common lead inductances and feedback
capacitances of the tubes [8]. By using a cascode connection of

transistors, it is possible to significantly improve the isolation between the
input and output artificial transmission lines. The cascode MESFET cell is
characterized by a higher output shunt resistance, which reduces the
loading of the drain line, and by a lower gate-drain capacitance than the
common-source cell, which reduces negative feedback at the high end
and provides for the possibility of automatic gain control. As a result, a
higher MAG can be achieved for the cascode cell over a very wide
frequency range. For example, a cascode monolithic distributed amplifier
based on 0.25-μm InP HEMT technology was able to produce a gain as
high as 12±1 dB from 5 to 60 GHz and a noise figure as low as 2.4 to 4.0
dB in the Ka-band [48].
Figure 7.19 shows the circuit schematic of a three-cell nonuniform
cascode AlGaN/GaN HEMT distributed amplifier exhibiting an output
power of 5W to 7.5W and a PAE of 20% to 33% over the operating
frequency range from dc to 8 GHz [49]. In this case, three cascode-
connected AlGaN/GaN HEMT cells each having a 0.3-μm gate length and a
1-mm gate periphery were employed to design and fabricate a high-
power monolithic distributed amplifier. The drain-line dummy load was
removed, and the gate- and drain-line sections were optimized to
maximize the output power and efficiency and provide a flat gain
throughout the operating frequency range.
Figure 7.19 Schematic of a three-cell nonuniform cascode GaN HEMT distributed amplifier.
Note that the lines nearer the output are of lower characteristic
impedance and, hence, are wider and more able to supply higher dc
current in a Class A bias mode. The corresponding center conductor
widths of CPW drain lines are 27 μm (60Ω), 40 μm (50Ω), and 66 μm

(30Ω), with ground-to-ground spacing of 80 μm. The nine-cell monolithic
cascode distributed amplifier using a 0.2-μm AlGaN/GaN low-noise GaN
HEMT technology with an fT of ~75 GHz was able to achieve 1W to 4W
from 100 MHz to over 20 GHz with a noise figure of around 3 dB at a drain
supply voltage of 30V [50].
Figure 7.20(a) shows the MMIC of a five-cell cascode GaN HEMT
distributed amplifier (Cree CMPA0060025F), which operates between 20
MHz and 6.0 GHz [51]. The amplifier typically provides 17 dB of small-
signal gain and an average 30W (from 42 to 45 dBm) of saturated output
power with a drain efficiency of better than 23% (better than 30% up to
4.0 GHz), as shown in Figure 7.20(b) for an input power of 32 dBm and
two different drain supply voltages of 40V and 50V. To achieve high
efficiency, a nonuniform approach was used in the design of the drain line
where the characteristic impedances change cell by cell and the output
reverse termination was eliminated. Proper design of the gate and drain
lines and resizing of the individual cells provide a reasonable load-line
impedance for each cell.

Figure 7.20 Schematic of a five-cell nonuniform cascode GaN HEMT distributed amplifier.
The dual-gate GaAs FET device, which is equivalent to a cascode-
connected single-gate device, has an input impedance that is comparable
to that of a single-gate device, but a much higher isolation and output
impedance. Note that high reverse isolation in the device is necessary for

high amplifier isolation to achieve better operation stability, and high
device output impedance improves gain flatness and output VSWR. Figure
7.21 shows the circuit schematic of a monolithic four-cell dual-gate
MESFET distributed amplifier, which provides a power gain of 6.5±0.5 dB
with greater than 25-dB isolation across the frequency range of 2 to 18
GHz [52]. With dual-gate AlGaN/GaN HEMT technology, broadband
performance can be improved when a small-signal gain of 12±1 dB over a
bandwidth of 2 to 32 GHz with a peak PAE of 16% and a peak output
power of about 30 dBm is achieved for a five-cell monolithic dual-gate
distributed amplifier [53]. Using a two-stage distributed amplifier when
the first stage consists of six 4 × 50-μm dual-gate GaN HEMTs and the
second stage consists of six 4 × 100-μm dual-gate GaN HEMTs allows the
small-signal gain to be increased to more than 20 dB with a peak output
power of 33 dBm over a bandwidth of 2 to 18 GHz [54].
Figure 7.21 Schematic of a four-cell dual-gate MESFET distributed amplifier.
When using bipolar technology, superior gain-bandwidth performance of
the HBT cascode cell compared to a conventional common-emitter HBT
shows that the cascode offers as much as 7 dB more maximum available
gain, especially at higher bandwidth frequencies [55, 56]. Figure 7.22(a)
shows the circuit schematic of a three-cell cascode distributed amplifier
based on SiGe HBT devices [57]. Here, the emitter degeneration resistor
increases the device input impedance and helps to reduce the output
distortion. Instead of a constant-k T-section consisting of a series lumped
inductor L and a shunt capacitor C with the frequency-independent

characteristic impedance Z0 = 
 shown in Figure 7.22(b), the m-
derived T-section shown in Figure 7.22(c) can be used by adding a
parallel inductor to provide an additional degree of freedom [58]. Both
sections still maintain the same input and output impedances, but the m-
derived T-section has an LC series resonance in its shunt arm. This
resonance provides the ability to modify the passband attenuation. As a
result, the m-derived T-section has a flatter passband and a better input
reflection coefficient than its corresponding T-section with constant Z0.
The choice of a filter section is limited by the available die area,
complexity of design, and the technology used. Being implemented in
SiGe BiCMOS or HBT technology, such a cascode distributed power
amplifier can achieve a measured passband from 100 MHz to 50 GHz with
a 1-dB compression power gain varying from 6 to 8.5 dB with an output
power of 4.2±2 dBm [57]. In this case, the m-derived filter sections were
used for the drain line, and the constant-k T-sections were used for the
gate line.
Figure 7.22 Schematic of a three-cell bipolar cascode distributed amplifier.

To further improve the gain-bandwidth characteristics required for high-
bit-rate telecommunication systems, the design approach based on the
attenuation compensation technique when a common-collector stage is
followed by a cascode transistor pair in each distributed cell can be used.
In this case, a gain of 12.7 dB over a bandwidth of 50 MHz to 27.5 GHz
was achieved for the fabricated monolithic three-cell “common-collector
cascode” HBT distributed amplifier [59]. The measured midband saturate
output power of 17.5 dBm with a peak PAE of 13.2% and the 3-dB output
power bandwidth greater than 77 GHz were achieved with a monolithic
eight-cell nonuniform cell-scaled cascode distributed amplifier using a
0.13-µm SiGe BiCMOS technology [60].
Monolithic integration of HEMT and HBT devices in a single chip can
combine the advantages of both processes, such as a low-noise figure and
high input impedance from HEMTs and low 1/f noise, higher linearity, and
high current driving capability from HBTs. In this case, the monolithic
distributed amplifier can be designed using the stacked 2-μm InGaP/GaAs
HBT and 0.5-µm AlGaAs/GaAs HEMT process for each cascode-connected
cell [61]. To simplify the design procedure, the modified m-derived
lowpass T-section can be used where the capacitance is fixed and only
the inductance varies with m. Figure 7.23 shows the circuit schematic of a
monolithic six-cell HEMT-HBT cascode distributed amplifier where the
peaking inductances Ldeg and Lb are utilized to resonate with the
parasitic capacitances of the common-source and common-base
transistors, resulting in a gain peaking at the cutoff frequency. For a
supply voltage of 4.5V with a total dc current consumption of 50 mA, the
distributed amplifier achieves an average small-signal gain of 8.5 dB and
a 3-dB bandwidth of wider than 43.5 GHz.

Figure 7.23 Schematic of a six-cell HEMT-HBT cascode distributed amplifier.
7.8 Extended Resonance Technique
An extended-resonance power-combining technique can be used to space
transistors in a distributed manner to the proper distance from each other
to form a resonant power combining/dividing structure where quarter- or
half-wavelength spacing between transistors can be avoided [62]. The
spacing is such that the input/output admittance of one transistor is
converted to its conjugate value at the input/output of the next transistor.
In this case, both gate- and drain-line termination resistors used in a
traveling-wave structure are eliminated, resulting in a lower frequency
bandwidth but higher efficiency. Since the magnitude of the voltage at
each transistor is the same, the gain of the extended-resonance power-
combining amplifier with equal-size n transistors is equal to the gain of a
single-device amplifier, while its power capability is increased by n times.
This approach enables a compact circuit to be designed that is particularly
suitable for MMICs.
Figure 7.24(a) shows the circuit schematic of a MESFET distributed
amplifier using an extended-resonance technique to combine powers from
n devices, where the gates and drains are sequentially linked with
transmission lines [63]. Here, θgk and θdk are the electrical lengths of

the transmission lines connecting each device for the gate and drain lines,
respectively, where 1 ≤ k ≤ n − 1.
Figure 7.24 Schematics of MESFET distributed amplifiers using extended resonance technique.
The quarterwave transmission-line transformers are used at the input
and output of the amplifier to match with the respective 50Ω source and
load impedances. The gate and drain extended resonance circuits can be
designed separately after calculating the simultaneous conjugate-match
admittances. It is assumed that each device has the same gate
admittance Yg = Gg + jBg and drain admittance Yd = Gd + jBd. The
extra susceptance jBg connected to the device input is provided by shunt
capacitors or inductors, which can be realized in the form of open- or
short-circuit stubs. To provide proper power combining, the voltage phase
difference between successive drains should be equal to the voltage
phase shift between successive gates. An example of a lumped four-

device version of a distributed extended-resonance amplifier is shown in
Figure 7.24(b) [64].
As shown in Figure 7.24(a), the gate-line length θg(n–1) transforms the
admittance Yg = Gg + jBg from the Nth device to its conjugate value Y∗g
= Gg − jBg at the location of the next device. Adding the gate admittance
of the next device, the imaginary components cancel, resulting in the gate
admittance at the (n − 1)th device being equal to 2Gg. Then, a shunt
susceptive element Bg is placed at this device so that line length θg2
transforms the resulting admittance Yi2 = 2Gg + jBg from the second
device to its conjugate value Y∗i2 = 2Gg − jBg at the next device. This
process continues all the way to the gate of the first device where the
admittance Yin = nGg can be matched to a given source impedance using
a quarterwave transformer. Similarly, but only in the reverse direction,
the drain-line length θd1 transforms the admittance Yo1 = Yd + jB1,
where the shunt susceptance jB1 is connected to the device drain, from
the first device to its conjugate value Y∗o1 = Gd − j(Bd + B1) at the
location of the second device. Then, the drain-line length θd2 transforms
the resulting admittance Yo2 = 2Gd + j(B2 − B1) at the second device to
Yo3 = 2Gd + j(B2 − B2 + B1) at the third device. This continues to the
drain of the nth device, where the resulting susceptance is canceled by
jBn. Consequently, an input signal applied to the gate of the first device
will be divided equally among all devices. Then, each device amplifies 1/n
of the input power and delivers it to the output combining circuit where
the power from each device is recombined at the load. Assuming lossless
transmission lines, it can be shown that the total output power is equal to
n times the power generated by each device.
Note that, due to the resonant nature of the dividing and combining
circuits, their 3-dB frequency bandwidth is limited to about 5%. However,
to maximize the bandwidth performance, the optimized lowpass ladder-
type networks can be used in the dividing and combining circuits. Besides,
the broadband matching circuit is required at the input to match the low
impedance presented by the transistors at the gate to the 50Ω source. As
a result, measured output power of around 32 dBm with 1-dB flatness and
a PAE of 20% to 40% from 4 to 9 GHz were achieved for a hybrid four-

device distributed extended-resonance amplifier using AlGaAs/InGaAs
pHEMT transistors [65]. To increase the overall output power capability, a
40-device distributed multicell multistage amplifier based on the
extended-resonance technique was designed in which each multicell
includes four 0.25-μm AlGaAs/InGaAs pHEMT devices with a 600-μm gate
width and a total MMIC gate width of 24 mm, resulting in a small-signal
gain of 15 dB and an output power of around 32 dBm at 1-dB compression
point within the frequency bandwidths of 25 to 30 GHz and 28 to 34 GHz
[66].
7.9 Cascaded Distributed Amplifiers
High gain over a wide frequency range can be achieved by cascading
several stages of a single-stage amplifier, thus creating an artificial active
transmission line that includes active-device parameters. Figure 7.25
shows the schematic representation of a four-cascaded single-stage
distributed amplifier (4-CSSDA), where each stage is based on equal-size
transistors and equal-value characteristic impedances for all cascades. A
feature of this arrangement is that the need to maintain the characteristic
impedance Z0int of the intermediate stages at the standard impedance of
50Ω is eliminated. An increase in this intermediate impedance results in a
higher available gain since the gate voltage at each intermediate stage is
correspondingly increased.
Figure 7.25 Schematic of a four-cascaded single-stage distributed amplifier.
The available gain for an n-cascaded single-stage distributed amplifier
(CSSDA) can be calculated as
 (7.47)
where gm is the device transconductance, Z0g is the characteristic
impedance of the input gate line, and Z0d is the characteristic impedance

of the output drain line [67]. An RF signal from a matched generator will
be coupled by the transconductance of the active device at each stage,
and finally terminated by the matched output load port. The amplified
signal is valid only up to the cutoff frequency, which is controlled by the
gate circuits. Unlike the conventional distributed amplifiers, it is only
necessary to equalize the characteristic impedances of the input gate and
output drain ports of the active device involved at each stage, and this
can be done by adding an extra capacitance with the output capacitance
Cds to equalize with the input capacitance Cgs. In this case, the CSSDA is
characterized by two main features when the input and output stages are
the only stages to match with the 50Ω source and load, respectively, and
the intermediate characteristic impedance Z0int can be optimized to
boost the overall available gain according to (7.47).
In order for the CSSDA to produce available gain equal to or higher than
the forward available gain for an ideal lossless n-stage conventional
distributed amplifier (CDA) derived from (7.1) as
 (7.48)
from (7.47) and (7.48), it follows that
 (7.49)
which shows that the required interstage characteristic impedance Z0int
decreases for the same devices as the stage number n increases [68].
Hence, a cascade of four single-stage FETs with intermediate
characteristic impedance of 86.6Ω and device transconductance gm = 28
mS should yield a 50Ω matched distributed amplifier configuration with a
20-dB available gain over a wide frequency band, compared to only a 9-
dB available gain for a conventional distributed amplifier according to
(7.48). In a practical case of the four-CSSDA using low-noise MESFET
devices with gm = 55 mS, a power gain of 39±2 dB over a frequency
bandwidth of 0.8 to 10.8 GHz was measured [68].

Figure 7.26 Schematics of cascaded conventional and single-stage distributed amplifiers.
Due to the typical second-order lowpass filter configurations, the
bandwidth of the two-CSSDA is band limited compared to the CDA. As the
number of stages of the amplifier increases, the low-frequency gain also
increases so it is not easy to design a flat gain performance for a
multistage CSSDA. Therefore, to provide a wider bandwidth with high-
gain performance, the broadband distributed amplifier can combine the
CDA and CSSDA with a different number of stages [69]. As a result, the
forward available gain of the distributed amplifier combining the n-stage
CDA and n-stage CSSDA is given by
 (7.50)
Figure 7.26(a) shows the circuit schematic of a monolithic two-stage
CDA cascaded with a single-stage CSSDA using 0.15-μm pHEMT
technology, which provides a small-signal gain of 19±1 dB over the

frequency range of 0.5 to 27 GHz. To extend the amplifier gain-bandwidth
performance for millimeter-wave applications, a monolithic seven-stage
CDA cascaded with a two-stage CSSDA using the same technology with a
die size of 1.5 × 2 mm2 was designed, as shown in Figure 7.26(b),
achieving a small-signal gain of 22±1 dB over the frequency range of 0.1
to 40 GHz with a total dc consumption of 484 mW [69]. The group delay
of 30±10 ps is sufficiently flat over the whole bandwidth, which is very
important for digital optical communications.
The gain response and efficiency of the CSSDA are increased if the
intermediate impedance Z0int = Rvar + jωLvar at the drain terminal of
each active device is included, as shown in Figure 7.27 for a lumped
three-stage cascaded reactively terminated single-stage distributed
amplifier (CRTSSDA) [70].
Figure 7.27 Schematic of a three-cascaded reactively terminated single-stage distributed amplifier.

Although the bandwidth of this amplifier is also limited by the gate and
drain inductances L, it can be substantially improved by the inclusion of
the inductance Lvar and resistance Rvar. The effect of the reactive
termination is to enhance the voltage swing across the input gate-source
capacitance Cgs of each active device, which results in an increased
output drain current from each device. This consequently improves the
amplifier overall gain performance over the multioctave bandwidth. In this
case, to provide a flat gain response over the desired bandwidth, it is
simply necessary to adjust the impedance Z0int, because the effect of the
inductance Lvar is negligible at lower frequencies (in the range of 10 kHz
to 1 GHz) when the intermediate impedance can be written as Z0int =
Rvar. The selection of the bias components Lbias and Cbias also plays a
critical role in optimizing the bandwidth and must have minimum intrinsic
parasitics.
The initial value of the resistance Rvar can be calculated from (7.49),
which is dependent on the device transconductance gm and the number
of stages n constituting the CRTSSDA. However, the calculated value of
Rvar will have to be optimized in order to achieve the required small-
signal response. The inductive component Lvar will have an effect on the
small-signal gain at higher frequencies (over 2 GHz). The primary effect of
this component is to alter the magnitude of the small-signal level at the
input port of the respective device of the CRTSSDA chain to be amplified
by its device transconductance. The initial value of the inductance can be
calculated from
 (7.51)
The fabricated three-stage CRTSSDA based on a 0.25-μm double
pHEMT technology, with a gate periphery of 360 μm for each transistor
with a self-biased mode of operation (gates are directly grounded through
the inductances Lbias) providing a dc current of 120 mA, achieved a gain
of 26±1.5 dB, an input and output return loss of better than 9.6 dB
(VSWR of better than 2:1), and a PAE of greater than 12.6% across the
frequency bandwidth of 2 to 18 GHz [71]. The output power of greater
than 24.5 dBm with a PAE of greater than 27% across 2 to 18 GHz was
achieved when a pHEMT device with a gate width of 720 μm was used in

a final stage and a pHEMT device with a gate width of 200 μm was used
in a first stage [72].
7.10 Matrix Distributed Amplifiers
The concept of the matrix amplifier combines the processes of additive
and multiplicative amplification in one and the same module. Its purpose,
therefore, is to combine the characteristic features of both principles,
namely, to increase the gain of the additive amplifier concept and the
bandwidth of the multiplicative amplifier concept. This can be
accomplished in a module whose size is significantly reduced when
compared with the traditional amplifier types of similar gain and
bandwidth performance. In its most general form, the matrix amplifier
consists of an array of m rows and n columns of active devices. Each
column is linked to the next by inductors or transmission-line elements
connected at the input and output terminals of each transistor, composing
a lattice of circuit elements. For m active tiers, there are 2m idle ports
that are terminated into power-dissipating loads. By adding the vertical
dimension to the horizontal dimension of the distributed amplifier in the
form of the n × m rectangular array, the multiplicative and additive
process in one and the same module is achieved. The advantages of the
matrix amplifier include significantly higher gain and reverse isolation
over wide bandwidths at considerably reduced size.
Figure 7.28(a) shows the circuit schematic of a distributed matrix
MESFET amplifier in the form of a 2 × 4 array representing a six-port
flanked by the input and output four-ports [73, 74]. The active six-port
incorporates the transistor characterized by its set of Y-parameters, the
network of transmission-line elements represented by their respective
characteristic impedances and electrical lengths, and the open-circuit
shunt stubs capacitively loading the drain line. In contrast, the input and
output four-ports contain only passive circuit elements, that is, the
terminations of the amplifier idle networks and simple input and output
matching networks. Each idle port is terminated into either a resistor or
an impedance consisting of a resistor shunted by a short transmission line
that allows biasing of the active devices without any power dissipation in
the termination resistors. The choice for the termination elements is
critical for gain flatness, noise figure, gain slope, and operational stability.
Based on a rigorous solution for voltages and currents involving GaAs
MESFETs with 0.25 × 200-μm gate dimensions, the 2 × 4 matrix amplifier

was fabricated with an overall size of 0.5 × 0.24 in. using a 10-mil-thick
quartz substrate, achieving a large-signal gain of 11.6±1.5 dB from 2 to
21 GHz with an output power of 100 mW [73]. In addition, note that the
matrix amplifier can offer a most desirable compromise between its
broadband maximum noise figure on one hand and its gain and VSWR
performance on the other. As a result, a computer-optimized two-tier (2 ×
4) GaAs MESFET matrix amplifier could provide a noise figure of F =
3.5±0.7 dB with an associated gain of 17.8±1.6 dB across the frequency
band of 2 to 18 GHz [75]. The monolithic 2 × 3 matrix amplifier using
0.2-μm pseudomorphic InGaAs HEMT technology achieved a 20-dB gain
and a 5.5-dB noise figure over the frequency band of 6 to 21 GHz [76].
The circuit schematic of a 3 × 3 matrix MESFET amplifier is sho

Figure 7.28 Schematics of matrix distributed amplifiers.
wn in Figure 7.28(b), where the left port of artificial transmission line B
and both ports of artificial transmission line C are terminated into short
circuits [77]. The input and output matching circuits are necessary to
improve the reflection coefficients of the amplifier, and biasing of the
active devices is easily provided through the short-circuited idle ports. The
theoretical analysis of the amplifier circuit shows that a low-frequency

gain of the matrix distributed amplifier with three tiers (m = 3) can be
estimated by
(7.52)
where Gds = 1/Rds is the device drain-source conductance, Y0 = 1/Z0 is
the characteristic admittance of the artificial transmission lines, and n is
the number of MESFETs per tier. If one terminal of the artificial
transmission line is short-circuited, the stability of the amplifier can only
be maintained if the other terminal of the same line is terminated into a
finite impedance or a short. By using GaAs MESFETs with 0.35 × 200-μm
gate dimensions and termination resistors RA = 29Ω, RB3 = 49Ω, and RD
= 212Ω (RB0 = RC0 = RC3 = 0), a noise figure of 5.2±1.2 dB and a gain
of 27.7±0.9 dB were achieved across the frequency band of 6 to 18 GHz.
The low-frequency gain of the matrix distributed amplifier with two tiers
(m = 2) can be calculated from
 (7.53)
where Z0c is the characteristic impedance of the central line and b =
(n/4)(Z0/Rds2) [78].
The integration on the same chip of the active devices based on
different technologies can merge the advantages inherent to these
technologies. For example, using simultaneously the HEMT and HBT
devices on a single chip allows high-gain performance in a multioctave
frequency band and achievement of low dc power consumption and noise
figure. Figure 7.29(a) shows the simplified circuit schematic of a 2 × 4
HEMT-HBT matrix amplifier, where the first tier consists of HEMTs and the
second tier is replaced by HBT devices [79]. Here, the higher input
capacitance of each HBT is absorbed in the central line, whose
characteristic impedance can be different from 50Ω without degradation
of the input and output matching. As a result, a flat gain of 18 dB, which
is only by 1 dB less than that for the HEMT matrix amplifier and 2 dB
higher compared to the HBT matrix amplifier; a noise figure of 5 to 6 dB,
which is close to that for the HBT matrix amplifier and more than 2 dB

better than the noise figure of the HEMT matrix amplifier; and a more
than 40% reduction in the dc-power consumption compared to the HEMT
matrix amplifier were achieved across the frequency band up to 30 GHz.
Figure 7.29 Schematics of (a) a lumped matrix amplifier and (b) an active balun.
The matrix balun, which is based on the matrix amplifier concept, can
provide a decade bandwidth and a high gain, while having small size,
compared to the conventional active and passive baluns. Figure 7.29(b)
shows the simplified circuit schematic of a 2 × 3 HEMT matrix balun,
where the phase balance is achieved by utilizing the fact that the phase
difference between two rows in a matrix amplifier with common-source
transistors is 180° [80]. The analytical expression for the common-mode

rejection ratio (CMMR) for this matrix balun with finite output
conductances for zero normalized frequency Ω is defined as
 (7.54)
where
Z0 = characteristic impedance of the artificial transmission lines
R3 = idle-port termination resistance of the output line
gm2 = transconductance
Rds2 = drain-source resistance of the transistors connected to the
output line.
As a result, a 2 × 3 matrix balun implemented in a 0.15-μm GaAs
mHEMT technology with a chip size of 0.9 × 1.1 mm2 (R1 = R2 = 39Ω
and R3 = 29Ω) achieved more than a decade bandwidth of 4 to 42 GHz
with a CMRR of greater than 15 dB, a gain of 2±1 dB, and a maximum
phase imbalance of 20° with a power consumption of 20 mW. The same
matrix balun circuit may also be biased for amplification and used as a
matrix amplifier. In this case, the circuit exhibited a 10.5-dB gain up to 63
GHz with a 1-dB ripple above 5.5 GHz and a power consumption of 67 W.
7.11 CMOS Distributed Amplifiers
Unlike the semi-insulating GaAs process, which provides high quality
lumped inductors and transmission lines, a CMOS-based implementation
is advantageous in that it results in lower costs and a higher level of
integration. One of the first designs of a four-cell CMOS distributed
amplifier was based on a 0.6-μm CMOS process with a three-layer Al-
metal interconnect, for which a flat gain of 6.5±1.2 dB over a bandwidth
from 500 MHz to 4 GHz with approximately linear phase over the
passband was achieved [81]. Figure 7.30(a) shows the basic circuit
schematic of a four-cell lumped CMOS distributed amplifier. In this case, if
the gate- and drain-line inductors are matched, and the drain capacitance
is made equal to the gate capacitance for each transistor, then the input
and output currents are phase synchronized. Another modification to the
basic circuit relates to the proper gate- and drain-line termination. The

impedance seen looking into the LC artificial transmission lines will exhibit
a strong deviation from the nominal impedance near the cutoff frequency
of the lines. Ideally, all four ports would be image-impedance matched to
the lines to eliminate reflections. However, it is not practical to realize
direct image-impedance matching. Thus, the method used will be to
insert the m-derived half-sections between the lines and the input port,
output port, and terminations. These half-sections will greatly improve
the impedance matching, while also allowing simple resistive terminations
to be used. The modified circuit of a lumped four-cell CMOS distributed
amplifier with matching sections is shown in Figure 7.30(b) [81]. Based
on 0.18-μm SiGe BiCMOS technology with six-layer metal interconnects
and a final two thick-copper layers to realize low-loss inductors and using
only nMOS transistors, a frequency bandwidth was extended from 500
MHz to 22 GHz with a flat gain of 7±0.7 dB and input return loss of better
than 10 dB over most of the bandwidth [82].
Figure 7.30 Schematics of lumped four-cell CMOS distributed amplifiers.
Silicon-on-insulator (SOI) CMOS technologies can provide high-gain
performance at the millimeter-wave frequencies required for low-power
broadband microwave and optical systems. For example, a 0.12-μm SOI

CMOS process offers a low-parasitic nMOS transistor with a peak fT in
excess of 150 GHz for a gate length of less than 60 nm. Here, since the
integration of the low-loss 50Ω microstrip lines is difficult, the coplanar
waveguide (CPW) structures were implemented on the last 1.2-μm-thick
metal layers to reduce the parasitic capacitances to the substrate [83]. As
a result, a gain of 4±1.2 dB over the bandwidth of 4 to 91 GHz and an 18-
GHz output 1-dB compression point of 10 dBm were measured for the
cascode five-cell distributed amplifier with a power consumption of 90
mW. The cascode three-cell distributed amplifier implemented in a 45-nm
SOI CMOS process with a peak fT in excess of 230 GHz, whose value
strongly depends on the layout parasitics and may reach 380 GHz,
achieved a 3-dB bandwidth of 92 GHz and a peak gain of 9 dB with a gain
ripple of 1.5 dB and an input return loss of better than 10 dB [84]. Note
that the noise behavior of a distributed amplifier over entire frequency
band depends significantly on the number of cells n. For example, the
best low-frequency noise performance is achieved for larger values of n,
whereas the lowest noise figures are reached at high frequencies for
smaller values of n [85]. This noise behavior is attributed to the fact that
the drain noise is inversely proportional to n, whereas the gate noise is
proportional to n. Besides, for the same number of cells, a cascode CMOS
distributed amplifier demonstrates better noise performance over the
most of the frequency bandwidth, especially at higher frequencies,
compared to the conventional CMOS distributed amplifier with the
transistors in a common-source configuration.
Figure 7.31 Schematic of cascode nonuniform seven-cell CMOS distributed amplifier.
By employing a nonuniform architecture for the artificial input and
output transmission lines, the CMOS distributed amplifier exhibits

enhanced performance in terms of gain and bandwidth. Figure 7.31 shows
the circuit schematic of a cascode nonuniform seven-cell distributed
amplifier using standard 0.18-μm CMOS technology where the transistor
sizes and inductance values of the center cell are 2.5 times as large as
those of the other cells [86]. In this design, the parameters of the
common-source transistors are designed in consideration of the cutoff
frequency of the input line and the transconductance of the gain stages.
On the other hand, the common-gate transistors are designed to provide
an output capacitance equivalent to the input capacitance of the gain
stages such that matched input and output lines can be utilized to
optimize the phase response of the distributed amplifier. The values of
the inductive elements Lm between cascode transistors need to be
adjusted for maximum bandwidth extension and better noise performance
[87]. Finally, the high-impedance CPW structures were employed to
realize the required gate and drain inductances, resulting in a passband
gain of 9.5 dB and a 3-dB bandwidth of 32 GHz for this distributed
amplifier.
The main drawback of an integrated CMOS implementation of the
single-ended 
common-source 
amplifiers 
including 
system-on-chip
solutions is that parasitic interconnects, bondwires, and package inductors
degenerately degrade their gain-bandwidth performance. Specifically, for
a packaged single-ended distributed amplifier that exhibits a unity-gain
bandwidth of 4 GHz, there is a bandwidth degradation of 27% compared
to its unpackaged performance [81]. Figure 7.32 shows the circuit
schematic of a fully differential four-cell CMOS distributed amplifier with
the ideal passive components [88].

Figure 7.32 Circuit schematic of a fully differential four-cell CMOS distributed amplifier.
The characteristic impedances of the gate and drain lines are designed
to be 25Ω each to provide a load impedance of 50Ω for fully differential
signals. The highest achievable line cutoff frequency for the 0.6-μm CMOS
process is about 10 GHz and is limited by the smallest practical values of
the circuit inductances and capacitances. Since high-quality tail current
sources are essential to achieving high common-mode and power-supply
rejection ratios, a regulated cascode current source is employed in each
stage. Such an architecture also minimizes undesirable signal coupling
between stages through the common substrate. To improve impedance
matching between the termination resistors and the artificial transmission
line over a wide range of frequencies, two pairs of m-derived half-sections
are used, and the drain and gate bias voltages are supplied through the
termination ports. As a result, the measured results for this fully
differential CMOS distributed amplifier with transistor gate widths of 400
μm demonstrated a bandwidth of 1.5 to 7.5 GHz, which is about 50%
greater than for a single-ended counterpart, but obtained at the expense
of increased power consumption, die size, and noise figure.

Figure 7.33 Schematics of CMOS distributed amplifiers with (a) bisected-T–type and (b) π-type m-
sections.
Bisected-T m-derived filter sections at the input and output of the
distributed amplifiers, as shown in Figure 7.33(a) for n = 4, are widely
used to improve matching and gain flatness near the amplifier cutoff
frequency. In this case, a bisected-T–type m-section matches a T-type k-
section (or cascade of them) on one side and matches the constant real
impedance on the other side. Thus, the bisected-T m-section can couple
power from a real source into a cascade of T-type k-sections over the full
frequency range from dc to cutoff frequency. Similarly, the bisected- π m-
section can couple power from a real source into a cascade of π-type k-

sections over the same frequency range [89]. Here, the shunt 0.3C
capacitance in the matching section is connected in parallel with the
adjacent capacitance from the first k-section. This can be added together
into a single transistor or gain cell that is 80% of the size of a full gain
cell, thus resulting in a higher voltage gain by
 (7.55)
than its T-type equivalent. The second factor 0.6/n comes from an extra
transistor area in the matching sections at both the beginning and end of
the artificial transmission line. It follows from (7.55) that the gain boost is
higher for smaller n, but gives appreciable improvement over the typical
range of n, specifically of 1 dB for n = 5. In addition, because inductors
are generally lossy and difficult to accurately model at microwave
frequencies, the π-type topology reduces both the number and the size of
inductors. Figure 7.33(b) shows the circuit schematic of a cascode five-cell
CMOS distributed amplifier with bisected π-type m-sections. In a practical
implementation, an overall area reduction of 17% (excluding pads) was
achieved for a π-type topology [89]. To extend the flat bandwidth and
improve the input matching of a cascode distributed amplifier, the gate
artificial transmission line based on coupled inductors in conjunction with
series-peaking inductors in cascode gain stages can be used [90].
The cascaded CMOS distributed structure is an alternative configuration
to exhibit simultaneous high gain and wide operating bandwidth. When
compared with the matrix CMOS amplifier topology, which has the same
low-frequency 
gain 
characteristic, 
the 
cascaded 
structure 
offers
robustness to high-frequency mismatches in the signal delays along the
individual paths, thus compromising the overall gain [91]. It also has no
loading effect at interstage artificial transmission lines, yielding a larger
operating bandwidth, and the omission of the idle drain terminations at
intermediate cascaded stages or interstages results in a significant gain
improvement. The basic structure of a generalized cascaded CMOS
distributed amplifier includes artificial transmission lines in the form of the
constant-k LC network with a simultaneous match to both T- and π-
sections [92]. It consists of m cascading stages of n-cell distributed
amplifiers with matched idle drain terminations. To achieve a gain
improvement, the idle terminations are omitted, except for the output
mth stage, so that the current and voltage waves along the interstage

drain/gate lines are enhanced, and hence the total gain is increased. In
this case, the tapered structure offers an additional bandwidth
improvement as compared to the case of the uniform-drain cascaded
distributed amplifier, with only a small sensitivity-to-impedance ratio
variation. Figure 7.34 shows the circuit schematic of a cascaded tapered-
drain double-stage cascode CMOS distributed amplifier along with the
component parameters [92]. The size of the amplifier transistors M1 and
M2 was selected to be W/L = 100 μm/0.18 μm, whereas that of the
cascoded transistors MC1 and MC2 was selected to be twice the smaller
gate periphery as W/L = 
50 μm/0.18 μm, so that the drain/gate
capacitance ratio was equal to 0.25 for n = 2. The measured results
demonstrated an output driving capability of −2.5 dBm and a gain of 14
dB with a noise figure of 5.5 to 7.5 dB over the bandwidth from 1.0 to
13.8 GHz.

Figure 7.34 Schematic of a cascaded double-cell cascode CMOS distributed amplifier.
References
[1] W. S. Percival, “Improvements In and Relating to Thermionic Valve Circuits,” British Patent
460,562, Jan. 1937.
[2] E. L. Ginzton et al., “Distributed Amplification,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 36, pp. 956–969, Aug. 1948.
[3] W. H. Horton, J. H. Jasberg, and J. D. Noe, “Distributed Amplifiers: Practical Considerations and
Experimental Results,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 38, pp. 748–753, July 1950.
[4] H. G. Bassett and L. C. Kelly, “Distributed Amplifiers: Some New Methods for Controlling
Gain/Frequency and Transient Responses of Amplifiers Having Moderate Bandwidths,” Proc. IEE,
Part III: Radio and Commun. Eng., Vol. 101, No. 69, pp. 5–14, 1954.
[5] W. K. Chen, “Distributed Amplifiers: Survey of the Effects of Lumped-Transmission-Line Design
on Performance,” Proc. IEE, Vol. 114, pp. 1065–1074, Aug. 1967.
[6] W. K. Chen, “Distributed Amplification: A New Approach,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices , Vol. ED-

14, pp. 215–221, Apr. 1967.
[7] D. G. Sarma, “On Distributed Amplification,” Proc. IEE, Part B: Radio and Electronic Eng., Vol.
102, pp. 689–697, Nov. 1955.
[8] F. C. Thompson, “Broad-Band UHF Distributed Amplifiers Using Band-Pass Filter Techniques,” IRE
Trans. Circuit Theory, Vol. CT-7, pp. 8–17, Oct. 1960.
[9] W. K. Chen, “The Effects of Grid Loading on the Gain and Phase-Shift Characteristics of a
Distributed Amplifier,” IEEE Trans. Circuit Theory, Vol. CT-16, pp. 134–137, Feb. 1969.
[10] W. K. Chen, “Theory and Design of Transistor Distributed Amplifiers,” IEEE J. Solid-State
Circuits, Vol. SC-3, pp. 165–179, June 1968.
[11] J. A. Gallagher, “High-Power Wide-Band RF Amplifiers,” IRE Trans. Aerospace and Electronic
Syst., Vol. AES-1, pp. 141–151, Oct. 1965.
[12] L. H. Enloe and P. H. Rogers, “Wideband Transistor Distributed Amplifiers,” 1959 IEEE Int.,
Solid-State Circuits Symp. Dig., pp. 44–45.
[13] G. W. McIver, “A Travelling-Wave Transistor,” Proc. IEEE, Vol. 53, pp. 1747–1748, Nov. 1965.
[14] G. Kohn and R. W. Landauer, “Distributed Field-Effect Amplifiers,” Proc. IEEE, Vol. 56, pp.
1136–1137, June 1968.
[15] W. Jutzi, “A MESFET Distributed Amplifier with 2 GHz Bandwidth,” Proc. IEEE, Vol. 57, pp. 1195–
1196, June 1969.
[16] J. A. Archer, F. A. Petz, and H. P. Weidlich, “GaAs FET Distributed Amplifier,” Electronics Lett.,
Vol. 17, p. 433, June 1981.
[17] Y. Ayasli et al., “Monolithic GaAs Travelling-Wave Amplifier,” Electronics Lett., Vol. 17, pp. 413–
414, June 1981.
[18] Y. Ayasli et al., “A Monolithic GaAs 1–13 GHz Traveling-Wave Amplifier,” IEEE Trans. Microwave
Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-30, pp. 976–981, July 1982.
[19] K. B. Niclas et al., “On Theory and Performance of Solid-State Microwave Distributed Amplifiers,”
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-31, pp. 447–456, June 1983.
[20] S. G. Bandy et al., “A 2–20 GHz High-Gain Monolithic HEMT Distributed Amplifiers,” IEEE Trans.
Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-35, pp. 1494–1500, Dec. 1987.
[21] E. W. Strid and K. R. Gleeson, “A DC-12 GHz Monolithic GaAs FET Distributed Amplifier,” IEEE
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-30, pp. 969–975, July 1982.
[22] J. B. Beyer et al., “MESFET Distributed Amplifier Design Guidelines,” IEEE Trans. Microwave
Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-32, pp. 268–275, Mar. 1984.
[23] B. Kim and H. Q. Tserng, “0.5 W 2–21 GHz Monolithic GaAs Distributed Amplifier,” Electronics
Lett., Vol. 20, pp. 288–289, Mar. 1984.
[24] Y. Ayasli et al., “Capacitively Coupled Traveling-Wave Power Amplifier,” IEEE Trans. Microwave
Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-32, pp. 1704–1709, Dec. 1984.
[25] S. N. Prasad, J. B. Beyer, and I. K. Chang, “Power-Bandwidth Considerations in the Design of
MESFET Distributed Amplifiers,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol. MTT-36, pp. 1117–
1123, July 1988.
[26] M. J. Schindler et al., “A K/Ka-Band Distributed Power Amplifier with Capacitive Drain Coupling,”
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-36, pp. 1902–1907, Dec. 1988.
[27] C. Z. Den Brinker and M. Parkyn, “Amplifiers,” British Patent 1,235,472, June 1971.
[28] K. B. Niclas et al., “The Declining Drain Line Lengths Circuit—A Computer Derived Design
Concept Applied to a 2–28.5-GHz Distributed Amplifier,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. ,
Vol. MTT-34, pp. 427–435, Apr. 1986.
[29] C. Duperrier et al., “New Design Method of Uniform and Nonuniform Distributed Power
Amplifiers,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-49, pp. 2494–2500, Dec. 2001.
[30] J. Gassmann et al., “Wideband, High-Efficiency GaN Power Amplifiers Utilizing a Non-Uniform
Distributed Topology,” 2007 IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 615–618.

[31] B. M. Green et al., “High Efficiency Monolithic Gallium Nitride Distributed Amplifier,” IEEE
Microwave and Guided Wave Lett., Vol. 10, pp. 270–272, July 2000.
[32] C. Campbell et al., “A Wideband Power Amplifier MMIC Utilizing GaN on SiC HEMT Technology,”
IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-44, pp. 2640–2647, Oct. 2009.
[33] E. Reese et al., “Wideband Power Amplifier MMICs Utilizing GaN on SiC,” 2010 IEEE MTT-S Int.
Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 1230–1233.
[34] C. Xie and J. Pavio, “A High Efficiency Broadband Monolithic Gallium Nitride Distributed Power
Amplifier,” 2008 IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 307–310.
[35] L. Zhao, A. Pavio, and W. Thompson, “A 1 Watt, 3.2 VDC, High Efficiency Distributed Power
PHEMT Amplifier Fabricated Using LTCC Technology,” 2003 IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp.
Dig., Vol. 3, pp. 2201–2204.
[36] L. Zhao et al., “A 6 Watt LDMOS Broadband High Efficiency Distributed Power Amplifier
Fabricated Using LTCC Technology,” 2002 IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 897–900.
[37] S. Lin, M. Eron, and A. E. Fathy, “Development of Ultra Wideband, High Efficiency, Distributed
Power Amplifiers Using Discrete GaN HEMTs,” IET Circuits Devices Syst., Vol. 3, pp. 135–142,
May 2009.
[38] D. E. Meharry et al., “Multi-Watt Wideband MMICs in GaN and GaAs,” 2007 IEEE MTT-S Int.
Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 631–634.
[39] Y. Ayasli et al., “2−20-GHz GaAs Traveling-Wave Power Amplifier,” IEEE Trans. Microwave
Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-32, pp. 290–295, Mar. 1984.
[40] S. Masuda et al., “Over 10W C-Ku Band GaN MMIC Nonuniform Distributed Power Amplifier with
Broadband Couplers,” 2010 IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 1388–1391.
[41] P. N. Shastry and J. B. Beyer, “Bandpass Distributed Amplifiers,” Microwave and Optical
Technology Lett., Vol. 2, pp. 349–354, Oct. 1989.
[42] P. N. Shastry, A Kajjam, and Z. M. Li, “Bandpass Distributed Amplifier Design Guidelines,”
Microwave and Optical Technology Lett., Vol. 10, pp. 215–218, Nov. 1995.
[43] N. P. Mehta and P. N. Shastry, “Design Guidelines for a Novel Bandpass Distributed Amplifier,”
Proc. 35th Europ. Microwave Conf. Dig., Vol. 1, pp. 1–4, 2005.
[44] J. M. Rollett, “Stability and Power-Gain Invariants of Linear Twoports,” IRE Trans. Circuit
Theory, Vol. CT-9, pp. 29–32, Mar. 1962.
[45] M. Riaziat et al., “Feedback in Distributed Amplifiers,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol.
MTT-38, pp. 212–215, Feb. 1990.
[46] P. Gamand, “Analysis of the Oscillation Conditions Distributed Amplifiers,” IEEE Trans. Microwave
Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-37, pp. 637–640, Mar. 1989.
[47] H. T. Kim et al., “6–18 GHz MMIC Drive and Power Amplifiers,” J. Semiconductor Technology
and Science, Vol. 2, pp. 125–131, June 2002.
[48] C. Yuen, Y. C. Pao, and N. G. Bechtel, “5-60-GHz High-Gain Distributed Amplifier Utilizing InP
Cascode HEMT’s,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-27, pp. 1434–1438, Oct. 1992.
[49] B. M. Green et al., “High-Power Broad-Band AlGaN/GaN HEMT MMICs on SiC Substrates,” IEEE
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-49, pp. 2486–2493, Dec. 2001.
[50] K. W. Kobayashi et al., “Multi-Decade GaN HEMT Cascode-Distributed Power Amplifier with
Baseband Performance,” 2009 IEEE RFIC Symp. Dig., pp. 369–372.
[51] R. S. Pengelly et al., “A Review of GaN on SiC High Electron Mobility Power Transistors and
MMICs,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-60, pp. 1764–1783, June 2012.
[52] W. Kennan, T. Andrade, and C. C. Huang, “A 2–18-GHz Monolithic Distributed Amplifier Using
Dual-Gate GaAs FETs,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol. MTT-32, pp. 1693–1697,
Dec. 1984.
[53] R. Santhakumar et al., “Monolithic Millimeter-Wave Distributed Amplifiers Using AlGaN/GaN
HEMTs,” 2008 IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 1063–1066.

[54] R. Santhakumar et al., “Two-Stage High-Power High-Power Distributed Amplifier using Dual-Gate
GaN HEMTs,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-59, pp. 2059–2063, Aug. 2011.
[55] K. W. Kobayashi et al., “A 2–32 GHz Coplanar Waveguide InAlAs/InGaAs-InP HBT Cascode
Wave Distributed Amplifier,” 1995 IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 215–218.
[56] J. P. Fraysse et al., “A 2W, High Efficiency, 2-8GHz, Cascode HBT MMIC Power Distributed
Amplifier,” 2000 IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 529–532.
[57] J. Aguirre and C. Plett, “50-GHz SiGe HBT Distributed Amplifiers Employing Constant-k and m-
Derived Filter Sections,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol. MTT-52, pp. 1573–1579,
May 2004.
[58] Y. Chen et al., “A 11GHz Hybrid Paraphase Amplifier,” 1986 IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf.
Dig., pp. 236–237.
[59] S. Mohammadi et al., “Design Optimization and Characterization of High-Gain GaInP/GaAs HBT
Distributed Amplifiers for High-Bit-Rate Telecommunication,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory
Tech., Vol. MTT–48, pp. 1038–1044, June 2000.
[60] J. Chen, and A. M. Niknejad, “Design and Analysis of a Stage-Scaled Distributed Power
Amplifier,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-59, pp. 1274–1283, May 2011.
[61] H. Y. Chang et al., “Design and Analysis of a DC–43.5-GHz Fully Integrated Distributed Amplifier
Using GaAs HEMT-HBT Cascode Gain Stages,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol. MTT-
59, pp. 443–455, Feb. 2011.
[62] A. Martin, A. Mortazawi, and B. C. De Loach, “A Power Amplifier Based on an Extended
Resonance Technique,” IEEE Microwave and Guided Wave Lett., Vol. 5, pp. 329–331, Oct. 1995.
[63] A. Martin, A. Mortazawi, and B. C. De Loach, “An Eight-Device Extended-Resonance Power-
Combining Amplifier,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol. MTT-46, pp. 844–850, June
1998.
[64] A. Martin and A. Mortazawi, “A New Lumped-Elements Power-Combining Amplifier Based on an
Extended Resonance Technique,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-48, pp. 1505–
1515, Sep. 2000.
[65] X. Jiang and A. Mortazawi, “A Broadband Power Amplifier Design Based on the Extended
Resonance Power Combining Technique,” 2005 IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 835–
838.
[66] R. Lohrman, H. Gill, and S. Koch, “A Novel Distributed Multicell Multistage Amplifier Structure,”
Proc. 33rd Europ. Microwave Conf., pp. 379–382, 2003.
[67] J. Y. Liang and C. S. Aitchison, “Gain Performance of Cascade of Single-Stage Distributed
Amplifier,” Electronics Lett., Vol. 31, pp. 1260–1261, July 1995.
[68] B. Y. Banyamin and M. Berwick, “Analysis of the Performance of Four-Cascaded Single-Stage
Distributed Amplifiers,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol. MTT-48, pp. 2657–2663, Dec.
2000.
[69] K. L. Deng, T. W. Huang, and H. Wang, “Design and Analysis of Novel High-Gain and Broad-
Band GaAs pHEMT MMIC Distributed Amplifiers with Travelling-Wave Gain Stages,” IEEE Trans.
Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-51, pp. 2188–2196, Nov. 2003.
[70] A. S. Virdee and B. S. Virdee, “2–18GHz Ultra-Broadband Amplifier Design Using a Cascaded
Reactively Terminated Single Stage Distributed Concept,” Electronics Lett., Vol. 35, pp. 2122–
2123, Nov. 1999.
[71] A. S. Virdee and B. S. Virdee, “Experimental Performance of Ultra-Broadband Amplifier Design
Concept 
Employing 
Cascaded 
Reactively 
Terminated 
Single-Stage 
Distributed 
Amplifier
Configuration,” Electronics Lett., Vol. 36, pp. 1554–1556, Aug. 2000.
[72] A. S. Virdee and B. S. Virdee, “A Novel High Efficiency Multioctave Amplifier Using Cascaded
Reactively Terminated Single-Stage Distributed Amplifier Configuration,” 2001 IEEE MTT-S Int.
Microwave Symp. Dig., Vol. 1, pp. 519–522.

[73] K. B. Niclas and R. R. Pereira, “The Matrix Amplifier: A High-Gain Module for Multioctave
Frequency Bands,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol. MTT-35, pp. 296–306, Mar.
1987.
[74] K. B. Niclas, R. R. Pereira, and A. P. Chang, “On Power Distribution in Additive Amplifiers,” IEEE
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-38, pp. 1692–1700, Nov. 1990.
[75] K. B. Niclas, R. R. Pereira, and A. P. Chang “A 2–18 GHz Low-Noise/High-Gain Amplifier Module,”
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-37, pp. 198–207, Jan. 1989.
[76] K. W. Kobayashi et al., “A 6–21-GHz Monolithic HEMT 2 × 3 Matrix Distributed Amplifier,” IEEE
Microwave and Guided Wave Lett., Vol. 3, pp. 11–13, Jan. 1993.
[77] K. B. Niclas and R. R. Pereira, “On the Design and Performance of a 6–18 GHz Three-Tier
Matrix Amplifier,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-37, pp. 1069–1077, July 1989.
[78] C. Paoloni and S. D’Agostino, “A Design Procedure for Monolithic Matrix Amplifier,” IEEE Trans.
Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-45, pp. 135–139, Jan. 1997.
[79] C. Paoloni, “HEMT-HBT Matrix Amplifier,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , Vol. MTT-48,
pp. 1308–1312, Aug. 2000.
[80] M. Ferndahl and H. O. Vickes, “The Matrix Balun—A Transistor-Based Module for Broadband
Applications,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-57, pp. 53–60, Jan. 2009.
[81] B. M. Ballweber, R. Gupta, and D. J. Allstot, “A Fully Integrated 0.5–5.5-GHz CMOS Distributed
Amplifier,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-35, pp. 231–239, Feb. 2000.
[82] G. A. Lee, H. Ko, and F. De Flaviis, “Advanced Design of Broadband Distributed Amplifier Using
a SiGe BiCMOS Technology,” 2003 IEEE RFIC Symp. Dig., pp. 703–706.
[83] J. O. Plouchart et al., “A 4–91-GHz Travelling-Wave Amplifier in a Standard 0.12-µm SOI CMOS
Microprocessor Technology,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-39, pp. 1455–1461, Sep. 2004.
[84] J. Kim and J. F. Buckwalter, “A 92 GHz Bandwidth Distributed Amplifier in a 45-nm SOI CMOS
Technology,” IEEE Microwave and Wireless Comp. Lett., Vol. 21, pp. 329–331, June 2011.
[85] F. Ellinger, “60-GHz SOI CMOS Traveling-Wave Amplifier with NF below 3.8 dB from 0.1 to 40
GHz,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-40, pp. 553–558, Feb. 2005.
[86] L. H. Lu, T. Y. Chen, and Y. J. Lin, “A 32-GHz Non-Uniform Distributed Amplifier in a 0.18- μm
CMOS,” IEEE Microwave and Wireless Comp. Lett., Vol. 15, pp. 745–747, Nov. 2005.
[87] P. Heydari, “Design and Analysis of a Performance-Optimized CMOS UWB Distributed LNA,”
IEEE Trans. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-42, pp. 1892–1905, Sep. 2007.
[88] H. T. Ahn and D. J. Allstot, “A 0.5–8.5-GHz Fully Differential CMOS Distributed Amplifier,” IEEE J.
Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-37, pp. 985–993, Aug. 2002.
[89] A. Kopa and A. B. Apsel, “Alternative m-Derived Termination for Distributed Amplifiers,” 2009
IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 921–924.
[90] K. Entesari, A. R. Tavakoli, and A. Helmy, “CMOS Distributed Amplifiers with Extended Flat
Bandwidth and Improved Input Matching Using Gate Line with Coupled Inductors,” IEEE Trans.
Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-57, pp. 2862–2871, Dec. 2009.
[91] J. C. Chien and L. H. Lu, “40-Gb/s High-Gain Distributed Amplifiers with Cascaded Gain Stages in
0.18-µm CMOS,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-42, pp. 2715–2725, Dec. 2007.
[92] A. Worapishet, I. Roopkom, and W. Surakampontorn, “Theory and Bandwidth Enhancement of
Cascaded Double-Stage Distributed Amplifiers,” IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems-I: Regular
Papers, Vol. CAS-57, pp. 759–772, Apr. 2010.

CHAPTER 8
Distributed Power Amplifiers
A distributed power amplifier is simply a distributed amplifier in which
high-power devices are used instead of small-signal transistor devices [1–
4]. Distributed amplifiers have already demonstrated high performance
for small-signal broadband operation, but have limited output power
performance [5–9]. They represent an attractive candidate for high-power
SDR applications [10–16]. Each transistor demonstrates a strongly
frequency-dependent power behavior so that the overall output power is
only a small fraction of the combined power capabilities for all active
devices [17–19]. The limitation to achieving high output power with a
distributed power amplifier can be addressed on both the device
technology level and circuit design level [19]. The realization of
distributed power amplifiers has posed a significant challenge due to the
electrical and thermal limitations of GaAs or HBT transistor technology. In
recent years, AlGaN/GaN technology has established itself as a strong
contender for such applications, because of its large electron velocity,
bandgap, breakdown voltage Vbk for current-gain cutoff frequency fτ, and
sheet carrier concentration [15, 16, 19–21]. Few recent distributed power
amplifier circuit design techniques, such as drain impedance tapering [12–
14], nonuniform device periphery [2, 3], cascode [21, 22], cascaded
nonidentical transistors [10], dual-fed [23], and extended resonance
power combining [24], lead to high output power performance over the
desired bandwidth frequency of operation.
8.1 Dual-Fed Distributed Power Amplifier
In a conventional distributed amplifier, current combining efficiency at the
drain line is poor due to the fact that the current splitting on the drain line
into two branches forms waves traveling both toward the load termination
and toward the dummy termination. The tapered drain-line distributed
amplifier (DA) [13,14, 25, 26] eliminates the drain-line reverse wave by
suitable tapering of the drain-line impedance. The dual-fed distributed
power amplifier topology proposed by Aitchison et al. [27–29] allows
efficient power combining at the load termination. A similar technique

that realizes a Lange coupler and Wilkinson combiner at the input and
output of the DA to improve output power, gain, and PAE has been
studied by D’Agostino and Paoloni [30–32]. An approach by Liang and
Aitchison [29] showed efficiency improvement by reducing backward
wave propagation at the drain transmission line. Eccleston’s approach
[33, 34] investigated when a microstrip line periodically loaded with short
open-circuit stubs can be used in place of a transmission line to reduce
the size.
This section discusses the high-power, dual-fed distributed power
amplifier (DPA) with termination adjustment, which demonstrated
remarkable 
bandwidth-efficiency 
improvement 
over 
conventional
distributed amplifiers. Instead of a lumped transmission line, discrete
approach LC components are utilized and followed by selection of an
optimum resonance frequency of the splitter/combiner [35, 36].
The conventional distributed amplifier consists of an input port on one
side of the gate line and an output port on the opposite side of the drain
line. In a basic dual-fed DPA, the unused gate and drain ports, which are
known as the dummy termination, will be terminated in appropriate
characteristic impedances. The two ports of the gate line are
simultaneously fed and both ends of the drain line are assumed to be
output ports. In this work, the termination of the dual-fed DPA is
modified, where remarkable bandwidth extension is possible with
optimum impedance termination selection at both end ports of the gate
line [23], as shown in Figure 8.1. In a similar manner, by adjusting the
termination impedance at the drain line, efficiency is maximized over the
entire bandwidth range.
Figure 8.1 Schematic diagram of dual-fed DPA with termination adjustment [23].
Under linear conditions superposition will apply to its operation and it
follows that the output due to forward gain from the left to right gate

input signal will appear at the right-hand drain port and similarly the
output due to forward gain from the right to the left gate input signal will
appear at the left-hand gain port [29]. These two output signals can be
combined to give the total output power. The reverse gain must also be
taken into account and, if the phase of the splitter/combiner is
appropriate, the currents due to reverse gain flow out of the same output
port and are added vectorially to the forward gain [28].
Reference [31] explains that if both terminations’ end ports are
terminated with appropriate impedance values (i.e., higher than Z0), gain
improvement is achieved while maintaining the same device structure.
D’Agostino and Paoloni have demonstrated significant output power, gain
and efficiency improvement over a conventional DA by applying Wilkinson
[31] and Lange couplers [30, 37]. Nevertheless, this work is focused on
improving the bandwidth-efficiency response over conventional DA with
modified dual-fed distributed power amplifier (DFDA). Beyer et al. have
shown analytically that the gate-line attenuation αg is more sensitive to
frequency response than the drain-line attenuation αd [5].
The proposed concept in this work provides optimum impedance at both
ends of the DA distributed amplifier gate line to extend the bandwidth
response. With reference to Figure 8.2, Za(ω) = Ra(ω) + jXa(ω) and
Zb(ω) = Rb(ω) + jXb(ω) can be defined as Thevenin impedances for the
driving sources ea and eb, respectively, at both ends of the distributed
amplifier gate line. Figure 8.2 can be simplified to Figure 8.3(a).
Neglecting eb as shown in Figure 8.3(b), voltage V1 can be expressed as
 (8.1)
where ZOT(ω/ωc) represents the T-section constant-k LC network
terminated with matched characteristic impedance [28]. Note thatωc = 
 and is known as the line cutoff frequency.
Figure 8.2 Termination adjustment is placed at both ends of the input of DPA gate line to provide

efficient gate-line adjustment over a wide frequency range.
Figure 8.3 (a) Simplification of Figure 8.2 and (b) exclusion of eb.
Equation (8.1) can be investigated to gather the V1 behavior over
frequency. Assuming ea is set to V1 = 1 ∠ 0°V, an optimum Xa(ω) can
be numerically determined for various cases of Ra(ω). Figure 8.4 shows a
plot of V1 in magnitude; note that the magnitude can be increased over a
wide frequency range with proper selection of Ra(ω) + jXa(ω).
Figure 8.4 Voltage V1(ω) over normalized frequency (ω /ωc) with proper selection of Ra(ω) +
jXa(ω).
Superposition can be now applied to Figure 8.3(a) considering also eb
(and Zb). The total resulting voltage V1(ω) is expressed by
 (8.2)
where

 and 
For equal injection at both ends of the gate line, ea = eb, the voltage
response V1(ω) from (8.2) can be widened over a wide frequency range
in similar manner by terminating optimum Za(ω) and Zb(ω). Termination
impedance adjustments of Za(ω) and Zb(ω) are accomplished by tuning
the resonance frequency fo of the Wilkinson splitter at the gate-line input.
A termination adjustment network is realized with the Wilkinson splitter
approach. The splitter offers broad bandwidth and equal phase
characteristics at each of its output ports [35]. The splitter employs λ/4
transmission-line sections at the design center frequency, which can have
unrealistic dimensions at low RF frequencies, where the wavelength is
large [36]. Due to size constraints, a lumped-element equivalent network
that replaces the λ/4 transmission line would be preferable and is shown
i n Figure 8.5(a). This network is equivalent to the original only at the
center frequency fo. Consequently, the expected performance (insertion
loss, return loss, isolation, and so on) should be similar to that exhibited
by the distributed-form divider for a narrow bandwidth centered in fo,
wide enough for most applications. The “π“ LC equivalent networks
exhibit lowpass behavior [Figure 8.5(b)], rejecting high frequencies, while
the response of the classical splitter repeats at odd multiples of the center
frequency (3fo and 5fo, mainly) [36].
A 1-GHz microstrip Wilkinson splitter or combiner can occupy about 6
cm2 on FR-4 PCB, whereas this lumped-element version occupies less
than 1 cm2. Lumped-element circuits with a higher Q than distributed
circuits have the advantage of smaller size, low cost, and wide bandwidth
characteristics [36]. The element values are given by the following
equations:
 (8.3)
 (8.4)
where Zo and fo are characteristic impedance and resonance frequency of

the lumped elements, respectively, as shown in Figure 8.5(b).
Figure 8.5 Lumped element π-section: (a) transmission line and (b) lumped elements.
To investigate the output drain line of the modified dual-fed DPA,
consider Figure 8.6.
Figure 8.6 Theoretical circuit analysis of the drain of the modified dual-fed DPA [31].
Forward currents (Io1 and Io2), summing in phase on the correspondent
output ports, are considered [31]. For simplicity, the circuit is analyzed at
low frequencies. By assuming that the input voltage of each gate line is 
 the output current toward each output port is expressed as
 (8.5)
where
n = number of FETs
Rds = drain-source resistance of the active devices
gm = device transconductance
Z0o = load impedance of the output ports (Z0a and Z0b).
The total output power Pout, computed as the sum of the contribution
from Io1 and Io2, is given by

 (8.6)
and when Z0a = Z0b = Z0, Pout can be simplified as follows:
 (8.7)
The power delivered from input source Pin is
 (8.8)
where Vi represents the supply voltages, and Zo is the gate-line
characteristic impedance. The overall gain of the topology, G, is given by
 (8.9)
From (8.9), when increasing Z0, higher gain and output power can be
obtained. Unfortunately, the correspondent degradation of the output
reflection is a critical limitation [31]. The gain as a function of the output
loads Z0a and Z0b for different number of FETs (n = 2, 3, 4) and the
correspondent return loss are discussed in [31]. One can conclude from
[31] that the correct selection of Z0a and Z0b for a chosen n will lead to
optimum power performance without trading off output return loss. In this
work, it is worthwhile to select the fo of the drain line, to improve the
output matching over the entire bandwidth.
Therefore, a medium-power device, for example, an LDMOS n-type
MOSFET packaged device1 is suitable. Low dc supply operation is required
for the device, which typically is about 7.5V. The breakdown voltage Vbk
of the device is ~25V, which is close to the computation value from
(4.47). The drain loading effect of the device is not significant, but
Xopt(ω) is important because it determines the drain-line cutoff frequency
ωc. The effective device input and output capacitances are Cin = 14 pF
and Cout = 8 pF, respectively. They are extracted by means of device
modeling (with inclusion of packaged properties). Therefore, effective
drain-line elements Li are synthesized by means of (4.58) to form the

desired ωc (~800 MHz). The dummy drain termination is eliminated to
improve device efficiency.
Design of the modified dual-fed DPA is very similar to that of a high-
efficiency DA (as discussed in Chapter 5); additionally, a termination
adjustment network is implemented. Hence, the method of synthesizing a
DA, comprised of the steps of device selection, determining an
appropriate topology, synthesizing gate/drain-line elements from device
packaged values, and so on, is applied. High-Q discrete inductors and
capacitors from Coilcraft, Inc., and Murata, Inc., are selected for their
lower equivalent series resistor (ESR) value and minimum part tolerance.
The gain of the amplifier increases with additional devices until the
optimum number of devices at a given frequency is reached [36]. Any
device added beyond this optimum number is not driven sufficiently to
excite the signal in the drain line, which will induce attenuation in the
extra section of the drain line. Based on (4.37), nopt is 3.26 for an
RD01MUS1 device. Due to this, three devices have been used in our
design.
Inductances of gate and drain lines could be determined from the value
of the line image impedance and ωc. As for the RF standard, gate- and
drain-line image impedance are set to 50Ω. In order for the currents on
the drain line to interfere constructively (add in phase), the phase shift
per section on gate and drain lines must be equalized. Synchronization of
the phase velocities between the gate and drain lines is achieved by
adjusting the inductance value of the gate line (the capacitively coupled
technique [49], in which discrete capacitors in series form to each gate of
the transistor, is not implemented). The m-derived filter section serves
wideband image impedance image termination and is placed at both ends
of gate and drain lines. The m-derived half section is designed with m =
0.6 for best flatness across the bandwidth [39]. For the termination
adjustment network, L and C are selected according to (8.3) and (8.4),
where an optimum fo and Zo will be identified in simulation analysis. For
reasons of convenience, Zo is set to 70.7Ω, but fo will be determined. The
modified dual-fed DPA topology is shown in Figure 8.7.

Figure 8.7 Modified dual-fed DPA having a termination adjustment network at both gate and drain
lines. The m-derived filter section is terminated at both ends of the gate- and drain-line termination
[23].
Figure 8.8 shows that by applying a termination adjustment with proper
selection of fo at the gate line, an improvement in bandwidth is obtained,
although a small degradation in gain is expected due to loss of the
splitter. The measured loss of the splitter is characterized as
approximately 3 dB over the entire bandwidth. Nevertheless, the gain of
the amplifier from low frequency can be boosted in a similar way at the
drain line. The fo selection at the drain line does not improve bandwidth
performance. As shown in Figure 8.9, the gain response of the modified
DFDA is improved by 200 MHz compared to the conventional distributed

amplifier. Simulation analysis (with harmonic balance) of the modified
dual-fed distributed amplifier with a nonlinear device and passive models
showed that optimum selection of fo (i.e., fo ~ 600 MHz) led to
bandwidth extension with minimum gain peaking (see Figure 8.8).
Figure 8.8 Gain response for a few cases: conventional distributed amplifier, applying termination
adjustment at gate line, and termination adjustment at gate and drain line.
Hence, as a guideline, tuning the fo of the termination adjustment
network in a range that is less than the line cutoff frequency fc yet
greater than the conventional distributed amplifier center frequency can
lead to significant bandwidth extension and is a promising aspect over the
conventional distributed amplifier.
Figure 8.9 Gain versus frequency for various cases of fo tuning. Fine selection of fo ~ 600 MHz
leads to bandwidth extension with minimum gain peaking.
Performance of the three-section modified dual-fed DPA is compared to
a conventional distributed amplifier. Both topologies used the same

device, same input, and same output artificial transmission line, as well
as a dc biasing scheme at the same condition (VGS = 2.1V and VDS =
7.8V) and same Pin = 17 dBm for both amplifiers. The resonance
frequency fo is selected to be 600 MHz. The gain of the conventional
distributed amplifier is 9.5 ± 1 dB, whereas for the modified dual-fed DPA
it increased by ~2 dB across the 100- to 900-MHz bandwidth (Figure
8.10). The PAE for a conventional distributed amplifier is lower than 20%,
whereas the PAE for the modified dual-fed DPA is increased by ~10%, as
shown in Figure 8.10.
Figure 8.10 Gain and PAE comparison for modified dual-fed DPA and conventional distributed
amplifier having same input and output artificial transmission line and a dc biasing scheme at the
same condition (VGS = 2.1V and VDS = 7.8V) and same Pin = 17 dBm.
The remarkable achievement of the modified dual-fed DPA in the
power-efficiency operation range is tremendously improved by 200 MHz
over a conventional distributed amplifier. Refer to Figure 8.11 for the S-
parameter data over the bandwidth of interest.

Figure 8.11 S-parameter comparison for modified dual-fed DPA and conventional distributed
amplifier having the same input and output artificial transmission line and a dc biasing scheme at the
same condition (VGS = 2.1V and VDS = 7.8V) and same Pin = 17 dBm.
8.2 Tapered Termination Cascaded Distributed Power
Amplifier
Several gain stage configurations that are widely used in distributed
amplifiers are shown in Figure 8.12 [10, 13, 38]. Figure 8.12(a) is a
common-source type that provides a decent gain and very large
bandwidth. Figure 8.12(b) is a cascode structure used to enhance reverse
isolation. This structure does not provide higher transconductance gm
than the common-source transistor and, thus, does not have considerable
gain advantage over that in Figure 8.12(a). Figure 8.12(c) shows the
cascade common-source gain structure, where two identical transistors
are connected with each other through a peaking inductor and a series
resistor [12]. Figure 8.12(d) shows a proposed topology for two cascaded,
nonidentical transistors with interstage tapered impedance [10].

Figure 8.12 Several gain stage configurations used in distributed amplifiers: (a) common-source, (b)
cascode [38], (c) two cascaded, identical transistors with common-source gain [39], and (d)
cascaded nonidentical transistors and interstage tapered impedance [12].
Due to the loading effect of the bigger size transistor, dc-RF energy
conversion is not optimum as the frequency increases toward the cutoff
frequency. These amplifiers, in fact, have never exhibited high power and
high gain performance simultaneously. Beyer et al. have showed that the
gain in a conventional distributed amplifier cannot be increased
indefinitely by adding more sections [5]. However, few works have shown
high output power with distributed amplifier topology while preserving
reasonable gain [14, 25, 22, 40].
Achieving high output power with a distributed amplifier is very
challenging. Conventional distributed amplifier design is different from a
reactively matched design because the drain line is fixed to approximately
25Ω with constant-k ladder [41], and could be a higher value if the drain
line is tapered. RF current swing is the main limitation to power increases
due to the high impedance of the tapered drain line [14]. To increase
power, the device gate periphery must be increased, but this will increase
input capacitance Cgs as well. A capacitively coupled technique [49]
allows for a power-handling increase with constant bandwidth and gain.
However, this technique never demonstrated high gain and high output
power simultaneously.
Many techniques have been reported to improve gate-line matching
problems in distributed amplifiers such as tapering of device gate widths

[42], tapering the capacitors connected in series with transistor inputs
[43], tapering the gate line to gain equal voltages at the transistors by
moving the characteristic impedance higher than 50Ω [50], and tapering
the gate line to reduce gate-line mismatching [41]. Image impedance of
the constant-k filter causes gain peaking (expansion) close to cutoff
frequency ωc. The first attempt to achieve a wideband matching solution
using nonidentical high-fτ transistors in a cascaded DPA is discussed in
[13], where an adjustable interstage matching network between the two
nonidentical high-fτ transistors is introduced.
A constant-k network isolates the parasitic capacitances of the
transistors to form a wide bandwidth response with lumped inductance.
This frequency-dependent impedance implies that fixed impedance (e.g.,
50Ω termination) cannot provide ideal matching transformation. A
constant real termination causes ripples as the signal moves toward the
cutoff frequency due to unmatched power that reflects back to the input
since the imaginary part has not been canceled [41]. It is worthwhile to
trade off the low-frequency matching to improve matching at high
frequencies.
A high-fτ transistor typically has a lower input parasitic capacitance Cgs
and breakdown voltage Vbk. Examples include SiGe, HBT, and pHEMT
devices coupled to the input of the power transistor (i.e., GaN HEMT
device) with tapered impedance termination ZT, as shown in Figure 8.13.
Figure 8.13 Schematic of a cascaded DPA with nonidentical transistors and controlled interstage
tapered impedance for wideband solution.
Note that ZT improves matching near the cutoff frequency ωc with
minimum trading off at low frequencies. Typically, the output capacitance
C’ds of the high-fτ transistor is much lower than C″gs of the power
transistor. In this work we make the assumption that C″gs ≈ 2×C′ds;

however, the concept is applicable to any ratio of C″gs/C′ds. Figure 8.14
shows a general configuration for two nonidentical transistors (high-fτ
transistor and power transistor) terminated with interstage tapered
impedance matching.
Figure 8.14 Configuration of a two-stage nonidentical transistor. The first transistor is high-fτ and
the second is a power transistor. An interstage matching configuration with tapered termination is
included.
The impedance Zin seen by the current source ii is illustrated in Figure
8.15. The ZT could be proposed with any suitable broadband interstage
impedance termination. In this work, a proposal for ZT that consists of
three elements (jX, jB, and G) is used, as shown in Figure 8.16.
To begin the explanation of the concept technique shown in Figure
8.15, the impedance Zin seen by the current source ii will be analyzed.
Figure 8.16, which is a simplified schematic of Figure 8.15, will be used.
Figure 8.15 Schematic to illustrate the impedance Zint, which is seen by the current source ii.
The analysis will focus on achieving optimum matching up to ωc in

order to overcome reflection (poor matching) caused by a constant-k
network near ωc. Note that Vgs has proportional behavior to Zint. The
impedance Zint is given by
 (8.10)
where L and C values will determine the cutoff frequency ωc of the line.
From Figure 8.16, C/2 is referred to C″gs. The elements, for example, G,
X, and B, are shown in Figure 8.12(d).
Figure 8.16 Simplified version of Figure 8.15 that explains Zint. Note that ZT consists of three
elements: jX, jB, and G.
The real and imaginary parts of Zint at ωc are analyzed as a function of
jX and jB. A numerical example is given for illustration purposes, where L
= 6.93 nH and C = 2.77 pF, providing ωc = 2.3 GHz. Careful selection of
G is required to minimize by variation of Zint real over the entire
bandwidth response. The improved match at ωc (68Ω real part and zero
imaginary) requires B = 0.02076 and X = 10 (for case G = 0.018), as
shown in Figure 8.17. For the same value of B = 0.02076 (while G is
fixed), to keep the Zint imaginary null, various values of X can be chosen.
However, to obtain an optimum design across the bandwidth, Zint real at
ωc must be as closer to a low frequency. Therefore, by selecting an
appropriate termination at any frequency, the matching can be improved.
As a result, the interstage termination impedance is tapered.

Figure 8.17 The (a) real and (b) imaginary parts of Zint evaluated at cutoff frequency versus B
(susceptance) for a few cases of X (for fixed G of 0.018).
The plot in Figure 8.18 shows the frequency response of the impedance
Zint. For comparison, the fixed termination impedance (50Ω) is included
in the plot. From the plot, the real part of Zint is almost constant, for
example, almost 55Ω over the entire bandwidth, and the imaginary part is
null. As for the conventional approach (fixed termination), strong peaking
in the real part is observed as the frequency reaches close to ωc and the
imaginary part deviates to capacitance. From Figure 8.16, Vgs will have
proportional behavior to Zint.

Figure 8.18 Real and imaginary parts of Zint with tapered impedance (line with triangle) and fixed
termination (line with diamond).
To extend the explanation of the concept for any ratio of C″gs/C′ds,
Figure 8.19 is used. In practical application, C″gs of the power transistor
could be more than 2 times that of C′ds of the high-fτ transistor.
Figure 8.19 Schematic to illustrate the impedance Zint, which is seen by the current source ii.
The value of C″gs is approximately 2.4 times that of the C′ds for a gate
periphery ratio of 8 times [13]. To deliver maximum power from the
current source ii, the impedance Zint must have zero imaginary part and
gain peaking must be minimal for stability considerations. In a
conventional method (fixed termination), the imaginary part behaves at
the capacitive region near ωc, and Zint seen by the current source ii due
to any ratio of C″gs/C′ds is given as
 (8.11)
The benefit of the proposed ZT network is significant when the m-ratio
increases. For instance, consider m = 2.4. Again, a numerical example is
given for illustration purposes; L = 6.93 nH and C = 2.77 pF are selected,
providing ωc = 2.3 GHz. A negative value for X and a lower value for G
are needed to improve the match at ωc. The improved match at ωc (85Ω
real part and zero imaginary) requires B = 0.05227 and X = −3 (for case
G = 0.012), as shown in Figure 8.20. Careful selection of G is necessary to
provide the required real part Zin across the bandwidth and to ensure the
real part Zint with experiences minimum variation. Since G = 0.012

(which equals 83Ω), at ωc, the real part Zint is approximately 85Ω (with
zero imaginary part). The X (of negative value) would be absorbed to the
line inductance L/2. However, suitable values for G, jX, and jB depending
on the design need for any ratio of m can be easily obtained through
numerical analyses.
Figure 8.20 The (a) real and (b) imaginary parts of Zint for the circuit shown in Figure 8.15 for m =
2.4, evaluated at ωc versus B (susceptance) for a few cases of X (for a fixed G of 0.012).
As discussed in Chapter 4, the gain in a common-source distributed
amplifier cannot be increased indefinitely by adding more sections due to
losses of the lines [36], and the increase in the number of sections will
directly 
impact 
the 
cost 
and 
implementation 
of 
the 
size.
Transconductance gm for each section device is the most important issue
for the gain. Figure 8.21 shows a small-signal equivalent circuit for the
proposed circuitry to determine gm (from Figure 8.14). The analysis will
lead to determining the overall transconductance gm due to high-fτ and
power transistors gm1 and gm2, respectively, and the influence of ZT,
especially over the entire bandwidth frequency.

Figure 8.21 Small-signal model for gain analysis including two nonidentical transistors with interstage
tapered impedance.
Transconductance gm is defined as change of drain current ID with
respect to the corresponding change of gate voltage VGS with drain
supply voltage VDS equals to a constant [44]:
 (8.12)
The voltage across the input capacitor of the power transistor vgs2 with
inclusion of interstage tapered impedance ZT is as follows:
 (8.13)
where 
 and iL is the current flowing across L.
Substituting iin = gm1vin into (8.13), we obtain
 (8.14)
and thus
 (8.15)
Therefore, one can derive gm for the circuit shown in Figure 8.21:
 (8.16)

where gm1 and gm2 are intrinsic transconductances of the respective
transistors. By substituting (8.15) into (8.16), we can derive
 (8.17)
The simplification of (8.17) by substituting jω → s,2 thus one can show
gm as
 (8.18)
Normalization of the transconductance G(s) can be written as
 (8.19)
and can be written as
(8.20)
where m = C″gs/C′ds.
Transconductance G(s) is analyzed for a few cases of m (2, 2.4, and 3),
when L = 6.925 nH; C′ds = 1.385 pF, which was chosen to define ωc =
2.2 GHz; and ZT is a fixed termination, for example, 50Ω. The transfer
function of G(s) as given in (8.20) is identified using the Scilab program.
As shown in Figure 8.22(a), when ZT = 50Ω is selected, 1 zero (only real
part) and 4 poles (which are in complex conjugate location) exist, and all
lie on the left half plane (LHP) and have positive real functions. The zero
for any case of m does not change. The two complex conjugate poles,
which are located close to the complex imaginary axis of the left s-plane,
boost up the G(s) at ωc. However, as m increases, the complex conjugate
poles move lower on the x-axis, reducing the bandwidth operation. This is
clear evidence that with fixed termination ZT, bandwidth operation
reduces as m increases. The roots (zero and pole) are illustrated in Figure
8.22(a).

With the proposed design technique, ZT helps to retain bandwidth
operation as m increases. We can define ZT as
 (8.21)
where jωLx = jX and jωBx = jB from (6.4). It has been explained
previously that for any m case, ZT elements (e.g., G, B, and X) are
determined numerically from (8.21).
By substituting (8.21) into (8.20), and knowing ZT elements for any
case of m, the roots of G(s) are plotted in Figure 8.22(b). The complex
conjugate pole at the imaginary axis is located at a higher frequency with
ZT compared to a fixed termination. It is evident from a theoretical point
of view that the tapered impedance significantly improved bandwidth
performance compared with fixed termination. In a similar manner, G(s)
from (8.20) can be analyzed in the ω domain by means of the inversion
Laplace transformation.3 Clearly, the bandwidth operation is extended
significantly with this new concept.

Figure 8.22 Roots of G(s) for (a) fixed termination (ZT = 50Ω) and (b) tapered termination for a
few cases of m.
Take note that phase synchronization is not necessary for the cascaded
DPA topology [47], but the effective input capacitance Cin of the first
high-fτ transistor and effective output capacitance Copt of the power
transistor are important to form ωc. As shown in Table 4.1, the effective
Cin of the first high-fτ transistor and Copt of the power transistor are
lower than 3 pF, which means a ωc of 2.2 GHz can be formed with a 50Ω
load. Therefore, as shown in Chapter 4, effective gate- and drain-line
elements Li are synthesized by means of (4.58) to form the desired ωc.
Dummy drain termination is eliminated to improve the efficiency
performance [16]. The elements of ZT1 and ZT2 have different values,
since the termination provides a wideband matching solution between the
respective interstage networks. A simplified design schematic for the DPA
topology is shown in Figure 8.23.

Figure 8.23 Simplified schematic of the distributed power amplifier: high-fτ transistors cascaded to
the power transistor with interstage tapered impedance. The gate and drain lines are formed with a
constant-k ladder network for 50W input and output impedances.
DC bias networks, including gate and drain feeding for each transistor,
are illustrated in Figure 8.23. As explained in Chapter 4, Lg–Cg and Ld–Cd
networks are implemented. As the next step, integration of the dc bias
network to the DPA topology is necessary while satisfying the RF-to-dc
isolation over the wide bandwidth response. For the first and second
high-fτ transistors, Ld and Cd of 180 nH4 and 33 pF,5 respectively, are
selected for bandwidth operation up to 2 GHz [14]. For the final stage,
the dc feeding line is connected to a high-Q air-wound coil.6
To verify the design example, simulation with harmonic balance (HB) is
carried out to understand its power performance. Nonlinear models of the
devices and a passive elements model were developed. For comparison
purposes, a simulation template with interstage fixed termination
impedance was developed. The simulated results of drain voltage for
each device and each device’s power performance are shown in Figures
8.24 and 8.25, respectively.

Figure 8.24 Simulation results of drain voltage of each nonidentical transistor for interstage tapered
(solid line with circle) and fixed termination impedance (solid line only).
It is clear that the performance with interstage tapered termination is
significantly improved compared to the case of fixed termination. The
drain voltage of each transistor is kept constant over the entire bandwidth
operation, as shown in Figure 8.24. For tapered termination, output power
and gain of 40 dBm and 32 dB, respectively, achieved a flat response up
to 2.2 GHz (refer to Figure 8.25). It is an evident that bandwidth with this
new topology is extended by 500 MHz compared to the fixed termination.
To pursue experimental validation of the concept technique, a
prototype board for the design was developed that uses Rogers 4350B
PCB material. The dc biasing terminals are bypassed to ground with
multiple chip capacitors (e.g., 100 pF, 33 nF, 10 uF). 7 For the gate
biasing, high-Q chip inductors (value of 220 nH, same series from
Coilcraft, Inc.) are used. A series resistor of 3Ω is included in the biasing
circuitry as a precaution against oscillation in the measurement level.

Figure 8.25 Simulation results of power performance, that is, power, gain, and PAE of a cascaded
DPA with interstage tapered (solid line with circle) and fixed termination impedance (solid line only).
A four-layer, high-density Rogers PCB and the bottom layer are
connected with a grounded heat sink. Component placement takes place
at the top of layer 1. Layer 2 provides grounding for quasi-TEM
transmission lines, for example, microstrip, and layer 4 is solid bottom
ground. A via hole will connect from the top layer to the bottom layer.
The prototype has an open grounding area with adequate via holes, and
dc and RF routing are well isolated in the PCB for minimum spurious
levels. If additional dc routing is required, then it is possible to implement
that at layer 3. However, no additional dc routing is needed for this
design. Modeling with a full-wave EM simulator including PCB layer
stackup, via holes, indium foil, grounded heat sink, and RF connectors
[11] is considered. For a GaN power transistor, a grounded heat sink is
attached at the bottom layer via the indium foil8 and multiple screws, as
discussed in Chapter 4. To understand the grounding behavior of the GaN
device, the contact between the screw thread and the heat sink is
investigated in the EM simulator, and an important point to be noted is
that the contact between the screw thread and heat sink influenced the
grounding of the device, especially at higher frequencies. One way to
improve the grounding is to use bigger diameter screws and more of them
to trade off with the surface contact of the screws.
The layout from Cadence (ODB++ file) is imported to the CST. Discrete
ports for the component pads are created, and the layout information is
exported to the ADS. ADS cosimulation assisted with CST in the HB
simulator (ADS environment), where layout geometry dimensions are
modified for optimum power performance. A photograph of the distributed

power amplifier is shown in Figure 8.26.
Figure 8.26 Photograph of the DPA prototype with high-fτ transistors cascaded to the power
transistor with interstage impedance termination. The DPA size area is 38 mm × 22 mm.
Supply voltages of 5.5V and 28V are applied to the high-fτ transistors
and to the power transistor, respectively. The high- fτ transistors are
biased with IDQ of 34 mA (20% Idss) and 93 mA (14% Idss), and the
power transistor with 188 mA (4% Idss), respectively. For a GaN HEMT
device, one important issue is the biasing sequence. The goal while
biasing the device is to stay away from areas of sensitivity to the
potential instability of the device. Designers need to pay attention to how
to deal with the positive gate current that will arise when a device is
driven into saturation. To overcome this limitation, a resistor is used that
is connected across the power supply terminals. The resistor will enable
the power supply to always provide a negative current while allowing the
device to source or sink current [47].
The measured results of the S-parameter are shown in Figure 8.27.

Figure 8.27 Measured versus simulated S-parameters for a distributed power amplifier having
high-fτ transistors cascaded to the power transistor with interstage tapered termination.
The output return loss S22 is less than −6 dB and the input return loss
S11 is less than −10 dB across the bandwidth. Note that S22 is higher
than −10 dB across the bandwidth, and this is because the dummy
termination is eliminated to maximize power load of 50Ω. For this reason,
output from the DPA will be coupled to the harmonic filter in a real
application such that reflection matching can be improved. Reverse
isolation S12 performance is better than −50 dB over the entire
bandwidth operation. The measured output power, gain, and efficiency of
the distributed amplifier versus frequency with the initial design (without
any optimization) are shown in Figure 8.28. Output power of 10W, 32 dB
gain, and a PAE of >15% across the bandwidth are recorded in the
measurement level (Figure 8.28). As can be observed in Figure 8.28,
output power is quite flat (10W) beyond 1.3 GHz, and slight degradation
is seen beyond 1.3 GHz due to the grounding effect of the GaN device.
However, good correlation between simulation and measurements is
achieved through full-wave EM modeling of the complete structure.

Figure 8.28 Measured versus simulated power performance for distributed power amplifier having
high-fτ transistors cascaded to the power transistor with interstage tapered termination.
8.3 Vectorially Combined Distributed Power Amplifier
Due to the loading effect of the bigger size transistor, dc-to-RF energy
conversion is not optimum as the frequency increases toward the cutoff
frequency. With these amplifiers, in fact, it is quite difficult to achieve
higher output power [10–16, 20, 25, 51]. GaN HEMT grown in SiC
substrate is a favorable device candidate for high output power [21, 25,
52, 53] besides the LDMOS, GaAs HBT, pHEMT, and SiGe HBT processes
[12–14, 20].
The loading effect of the drain line becomes stronger the bigger the
device periphery, and typically an attenuation compensation technique is
used, where an active load (common-gate FET) is coupled to the
common-source FET to reduce the drain-line losses dominated by the real
part Ropt [71]. Some literature refers to this technique as a cascode
distributed amplifier [38, 40]. However, in principle, this technique offers
higher output impedance and improved reverse isolation, but additional
FET device and biasing gate circuitry to the common gate are needed.
Nevertheless, this is a good solution for an MMIC approach [40].
8.3.1 Overview of Vectorially Combined DPA with Load Pull
Determination
To maximize power Po from each transistor section (as shown in Figure
8.29), each current source should be loaded with an optimum load

impedance R′opt (for optimum excursion RF voltage Vmax/Imax current
swing) [55]. To utilize the Vmax and Imax, which is known as power
match condition, an optimum lower value of Rload would be selected to
provide loadline match, R′opt = Vmax/Imax [55] (Figure 8.29). It has
been assumed that Rgen (i.e., Rds) >> R′opt so if Rgen is taken into
account, it would be necessary to solve the equivalent impedance (Rgen
//R′opt). The effective real part of the device at reference plane A (R′opt)
and B (Ropt) is different due to the fact of its shunt capacitance and
package parasitic effect, as explained in Figure 4.24(b). In real
applications, it is convenient to identify the real part of the device at
reference plane B, which will be used to match to standard output
termination (e.g., 50Ω load). The optimum impedance of the transistor
Zopt(ω) (which consists of a real and imaginary part) can be extracted by
means of the nonlinear load pull technique [55] either by simulation or
measurement, which generally exhibits frequency-dependent behavior.
Figure 8.29 Optimum power condition of the device current source loaded by Ropt.
As generally confirmed by experimental results on FETs, the optimum
reactive part Xopt(ω) to be absorbed in a distributed output drain-line
network is almost equivalent to a constant capacitance Copt over very
wide bandwidths in MMIC implementation [40], and may have nonuniform
value in hybrid packaged implementation. Nevertheless, in the hybrid
implementation, Xopt(ω), that is, intrinsic parasitic capacitances, extrinsic
elements, packaging effect, and so forth, and the power optimization
consist of loading the equivalent output source of the transistor with
optimum power load Ropt(ω).
Bear in mind that to combine multicurrent sources into a single load

termination, an optimum virtual impedance to each source in two
directions, Zu(k) and Zr(k), must be fulfilled (as discussed in Chapter 5).
The generalized design equations developed are not sufficient when
device current source is loaded by Ropt(ω). In this section, a technique
for achieving power match to each source while satisfying multicurrent
sources combined into a single load termination is presented. Figure 8.30
shows a simple schematic of two current sources combined at a common
node connected to a load RL, and each current source is loaded with
optimum power load Ropt(ω).
Figure 8.30 The virtual impedance seen by the current source i1(t) in both directions Zu(1) and
Zr(1), respectively, when two current sources are combined to a single node.
As shown in Figure 8.30, the virtual impedance Zu(1) looking into the
common node with i2(t) in parallel with Ropt(ω) and load termination RL
is what current source vector i1(t) is loaded with. Applying the Thevenin
theorem to Figure 8.30, the impedance Zu(1) can be derived as
 (8.22)
By substituting 
 where k = 1 and 2, we can derive the
virtual impedance
 (8.23)
where I1 and I2 represent the magnitude of the complex current source,
and θ1 and θ2 are independent phase values, respectively.
Phase offset or in-phase combining (θ2 = θ1) is considered to simplify
the concept, and the concept can be easily explained for θ2 ≠ θ1. In this

manner, (8.23) can be simplified as
 (8.24)
From (8.24), the virtual impedance Zu(1) seen by the current source
i1(t) is directly dependent on RL and I2/I1. As an example, for equal
injection value I2/I1 = 1 (equal device periphery), Zu(1) ≈ Ropt when RL
is set to ≥10Ropt. The selection of RL reveals what characteristic
impedance of transmission line Zr(1) needs to be designed. Note that the
virtual impedance seen by current source Zu(1) must be close to Ropt
while both current sources are combined at single load RL; this meets the
power match/current combining conditions. Nevertheless, Zr(1) will
absorb the imaginary part Xopt to form broadband frequency operation.
In a similar manner, we can derive Zu(k), k = 1, 2,…,n, as shown in
Figure 8.31:
 (8.25)
Let’s review the analysis for n-section, for which an identical device
periphery is selected, Zu(1) = Zu(2) = Zu(3) ≈ Ropt // ZL, and it can be
approximated to Ropt if ZL has reasonable termination. Figure 8.31 shows
drain transmission line Zr(k). It must be synthesized to load each device
generator by its optimum Ropt(k)(ω), where k = 1,2,…,n. It is clear from
Figure 8.31 that Zr(1) must be loaded with an optimum load resistive of
the first generator Ropt1, and Zr(n) should be loaded with a ZL value.
Nevertheless, the middle section, Zr(2), is dependent on Zu(2) and Zu(3).
Figure 8.31 Synthesize drain transmission line to load each device generator with its optimum
Ropt(k)(ω).

It is necessary to know the initial value of Ropt1, which typically can be
obtained with a single device load pull determination. In a similar
manner, ZL must be performed with an initial guess of Zr(1),…,Zr(n). To
obtain the initial guess, it is convenient to use a CAD simulator assisted
by an optimizer (e.g., ADS), where the transistor is modeled with an ideal
current source and parallel high impedance resistor. To additively
combine the currents at each junction, phase synchronization between
the current source and the transmission line delay Zr(k) is matched. From
design equations of an optimum virtual impedance to each source in two
directions, that is, Zu(k) and Zr(k) have behavior that adaptively reduces
toward load termination. For example, Zr(1) = 50Ω, Zr(2) = 25Ω, Zr(3) =
16.7Ω, and Zr(4) = 12.5Ω is achieved if no loading effect is taken into
consideration. Therefore, we can consider this distributed power amplifier
to have vectorially combined current sources with load pull determination.
Achieving high power, efficiency, and gain in the 10- to 2000-MHz
operating bandwidth is a key focus, so DPA systems should be able to be
coupled directly to a voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO). The VCO output
is typically ~8 dBm, and the output power of 30W is the design goal over
the entire bandwidth operation (40 to 2000 MHz). Thus, a gain of 37 dB is
required to deliver high output power up to 30W.
A high-fτ transistor with the lowest input parasitic capacitance Cgs (an
ATF54143 device) is coupled to the gate line, and this may improve the
loading effect of the input gate line. The achievement of high gain in the
40- to 2000-MHz operating range is adopted from Section 8.2, allowing
the resulting DPA to be coupled directly to the VCO. Each section has two
nonidentical high-fτ transistors (ATF54143 and ATF511P8), respectively,
from Avago, Inc., which are cascaded to the power transistor (GaN device
from CREE, Inc.) with interstage tapered impedance. As discussed earlier,
the optimum number of n-sections to maximize power at any frequency is
3…4 [11]; therefore, three sections are used in this design to deliver 30W
output power (assuming each GaN device contributes ~10W). The
general diagram for this DPA topology is shown in Figure 8.32. The terms
n 
and N refer to the number of cascaded stages and sections,
respectively.

Figure 8.32 General diagram of high-power DPA circuit proposal. The terms n and N refer to the
number of cascaded stages and sections, respectively. An impedance transformer may be included
when the termination is less than 50Ω.
The design methodology discussed in Section 4.5 is applied in this
section. A GaN device (CGH40010F) is used in this work, and the Vbk of
the device is ~73V. The drain loading effect of the device is very
significant. Effective input and output real and imaginary parts of the
packaged devices Xin(ω) and Xopt(ω) (of high-fτ and power transistors),
respectively, are extracted as explained in Section 4.5, and the values are
tabulated in Table 4.1. For instance, Xopt(ω) of the second output high-fτ
transistor will be matched to the Xin(ω) of the input power transistor
(GaN device) by means of the theoretical approach presented in Section
8.2.
The effective input capacitance of the first high-fτ transistor Cin and
effective output capacitance of the power transistor Cout are important to
form ωc. As shown in Table 4.1, the effective input capacitance of the first
high-fτ transistor and output capacitance of the power transistor are lower
than 3 pF, which means ωc of 2.2 GHz can be formed with a 50Ω load.
Therefore, effective gate and drain-line elements Li are synthesized by

means of (4.48) to form the desired ωc. Dummy drain termination is
eliminated to improve the efficiency performance [20, 21]. To achieve
30W of output power, a PAE of >35%, and a gain of more than 35 dB
(since the input drive is ~8 dBm), and to achieve bandwidth up to 2.2
GHz, N = 3 and n = 3 are proposed. It is important to note that the DPA
gain-bandwidth response is dominated by the gate line and cascaded
stages, whereas the power-efficiency response is mainly contributed by
the drain line. Therefore, design work focused on synthesizing the gate-
line network and interstage tapered impedance, followed by a drain-line
network to achieve power performance for the broadband range up to 2
GHz. An approach demonstrated in [13] was adopted for the gate line,
whereby phase synchronization is achieved with a nonuniform gate-line
design and the gate-line impedance is adaptively reduced. A power match
and current combining technique is implemented at the drain line.
DC bias networks include a gate and drain feeding design for each
high-fτ transistor from Section 4.5, where the Lg–Cg and Ld–Cd networks
from Figure 4.20 are implemented. Integration of the dc bias network to
the DPA topology is necessary while satisfying the RF-to-dc isolation over
the wide bandwidth response. It is beneficial to measure RF-to-dc
isolation over a wide frequency response of the DPA to ensure the design
of broadband bias networks. For the first and second high-fτ transistors,
Ld and Cd of 180 nH9 and 33 pF,10 respectively, are selected for
bandwidth operation up to 2 GHz [14]. The dc gate biasing terminals are
bypassed to ground with multiple chip capacitors (e.g., 100 pF, 33 nF, 10
uF, etc) 11 for each transistor. The dc feeding lines for the final stage are
connected to a high-Q air-wound coil (from Coilcraft, Inc.),12 and high-Q
chip inductors (value of 220 nH)13 for the first and second stages from
Coilcraft, Inc.
To begin the drain-line synthesis, it is important to identify Ropt of the
power transistor for optimum dc-to-RF energy conversion. For single-
ended dc-to-RF energy conversion of the power transistor (CGH40010F),
Ropt(ω) ≈ 40Ω (average value across bandwidth) is obtained from the
load pull simulation technique. Bear in mind that the optimum load
impedance has frequency-dependent behavior. Hence, Zr(1) » 40Ω, and
Zr(2) and Zr(3) » ZL are optimized in a CAD simulator for optimum power

performance up to 2 GHz; refer to Figure 8.33 for the drain-line synthesis.
Figure 8.33 Synthesized drain transmission line to load each device generator by its optimum
Ropt(k)(ω) for n = 3. Note that ZL is identified for optimum power performance in a CAD simulator.
A simplified design schematic for the new DPA topology is shown in
Figure 8.34.
To verify the design example, simulation with HB is carried out to
understand the design’s power performance. Nonlinear models of the
devices and a passive elements model were developed. Supply voltages
of 5.5V and 28V were applied to the high-fτ transistors and to the power
transistor, respectively. The high- fτ transistors are biased with IDQ of 34
mA (20% Idss) and 93 mA (14% Idss), and the power transistor with 188
mA (4% Idss), respectively. The input drive throughout the measurement
level is fixed to a low level (~8 dBm).

Figure 8.34 Simplified schematic of the new DPA topology. The input drive of the VCO is ~8 dBm,
and a nonuniform gate line is adopted from [41]. Two nonidentical high-fτ transistors (ATF54143 and
ATF511P8) are cascaded to the power transistor (GaN device). Output impedance is terminated to
ZL, which will be coupled to a transformer/filter.
The simulated results of the S-parameter and power performance (i.e.,
power, PAE, and gain) are shown in Figures 8.35 and 8.36, respectively.
The small-signal gain S21 is quite flat over the frequency range (about 40
dB) and small peaking occurred outside the band. Good reverse isolation
S12 of the distributed power amplifier is more than −60 dB, and the input
and output return loss is better than −10 dB, respectively, over the
frequency. The large-signal performance (i.e., output power) is achieved
at a constant 45 dBm (30W), with a flat gain of 37 dB up to 2 GHz. The
PAE is more than 40%, but in general an average PAE of ~52% was

achieved at the simulation level.
Figure 8.35 Simulation analysis of S-parameters for the new topology distributed power amplifier
across 0.1 to 2 GHz. A ZL of ~14Ω is required for optimum performance.
Figure 8.36 Simulation analysis of power performance (power, gain, and PAE) for the new DPA
topology across 0.01 to 2 GHz. A ZL of ~14Ω is required for optimum performance.
To validate the concept technique experimentally, a prototype board for
the design was developed that uses Rogers 4350PCB material. Because
additional dc routing is needed to connect each gate of high-fτ and power
transistors, layer 3 is used. An open grounding area with adequate via
holes, and dc and RF routing are well isolated in the PCB for minimum
spurious levels. As part of EMC requirements, it is necessary to have the
dc layer below the RF grounding layer [56, 57]. Hence, layer 2 and layer 4
have solid grounding planes. The thickness of the dc routing is computed

to carry adequate dc current, and the width thickness is shown in Figure
8.37. For an example, in layer 3, thickest routing (line 2) is used for the
drain supply of the second high-fτ transistor, and the routing shown in line
1 is for the drain supply of the first high-fτ transistor. Layout artwork for
the new DPA topology (for all layers from Cadence) is shown in Figure
8.37.
Figure 8.37 Layout artwork for the new DPA topology for all layers. Additional dc routing is done via
layer 3, where layer 2 is RF grounding. (a) Top layer, (b) layer 2, (c) layer 3, and (d) bottom layer.
Two diameter screws, which are 5 and 1.4 mm, are mounted to hold
the grounded heat sink chassis. The modeling of the screws and the foil
are reused (from Section 8.2), and the RF connector (from Section 5.5) is
reused. The inductance of the gate and drain lines is realized in a lumped

transmission line with the aid of CST. The layout structure (from Figure
8.37) was imported from Cadence, and the line properties (i.e., length
and width) are optimized to obtain an optimum value for the inductance
and Q-factor over a wide frequency range. Because the length is fixed
(because of power transistor length dimension to 9.5 mm), only the width
will be optimized. From the CST simulation, self-resonance of the line is
kept higher than 4 GHz for the uniform result of inductance and a
reasonably high Q-factor.14
For the high-fτ transistors and power transistors, supply voltages of
5.5V and 28V are applied, respectively. A bias current IDQ of 34 mA (20%
Idss) and 93 mA (14% Idss) are biased for the high-fτ transistors and the
power transistor with 188 mA (4% Idss), respectively.
First, the measurement work of the prototype board was started by
identifying the optimum load impedance to be terminated at point a′ in
Figure 8.38.
Figure 8.38 Photograph of the new DPA topology prototype. The DPA size is 38 mm × 32 mm.
A test fixture for line calibration15 was built to de-embed the
transmission line length [58, 59]. Figure 8.39 shows the example
measured results of the load pull impedance contour for 100 MHz and 1
GHz, respectively.

Figure 8.39 Example of measurement results of load pull impedance determination for 100 MHz
and 1 GHz, respectively. The maximum power occurred at 
{ZL} of 25Ω.
The highest power is recorded at an impedance of 25 + j39Ω and 25 −
j18Ω for 100 MHz (40W) and 1.9 GHz (25W), respectively. The imaginary
impedance data indicated that at a low frequency the line has higher
capacitance and the inductance varies as the frequency increases. Figure
8.40 shows the comparison between measured versus simulated results
for the highest output power with the load pull technique across the
bandwidth.
Figure 8.40 Measurement results for the highest output power with load pull impedance
determination across the entire bandwidth. The maximum power occurred at 
{ZL} of ~25Ω at the
measurement level.

However, the optimum performance (output power, gain, and PAE) is
achieved at the ~12Ω region at the measurement level across the entire
bandwidth (Figure 8.41). The output of 25W, and PAE results of 45% to
56% are recorded at the measurement level, while a flat response for the
operating gain is obtained. Although some imaginary part exists (the
variation ±j4Ω), the real part of 12Ω is sufficient to be terminated at the
output of the distributed power amplifier. The following section explains
the design of a broadband transformer (12Ω to 50Ω) with a minimum
insertion loss (~1 dB) within the operating bandwidth frequency.
Figure 8.41 Measurement results of optimum power performance (power, gain, and PAE) with load
pull impedance determination across the entire bandwidth. The maximum power occurred at 
{ZL}
of ~12Ω at the measurement level.
With the same prototype board, measurement with 50Ω termination
was carried out to understand its performance. Measured versus
simulated results of S-parameters and power performance of the topology
terminated to 50Ω are presented in Figures 8.42 and 8.43, respectively.

Figure 8.42 Measured versus simulated S-parameters for the DPA topology terminated to 50Ω
load.
The output return loss S22 is less than −8 dB and the input return loss
S11 is less than −12 dB across the bandwidth. Bear in mind that S22 is
higher than −10 dB across the bandwidth, and this is because the dummy
termination is eliminated to push all the current from each device to a
single load termination. As a result, output reflection matching is not well
optimized.
Figure 8.43 Measured versus simulated power performance for the DPA topology terminated to
50Ω load.
The measured isolation S12 is about 60 dB, and the small-signal gain
S21 is more than 40 dB across the bandwidth. No small-signal peaking is

recorded at the measurement level (near ωc), although a small value is
observed at the simulation level. An output power of ~15W and a PAE of
15% to 42% are recorded at the measurement level with 50Ω
termination. At 50Ω termination, the highest output power is 18W at low
frequency, and at 2 GHz, the power is degraded to 10W.
Since the measurements were done with low input drive to meet SDR
applications, power characterization (power and PAE) at 1 GHz by
sweeping the input drive was carried out, as shown in Figure 8.44.
Figure 8.44 Measured results of power performance (power and PAE) with sweeping of the Pin
drive (at 1 GHz) of the new DPA topology.
The results indicated that the output power can hit ~18W with a PAE of
34% with 50Ω termination. The optimum power happened at an input
drive of ~10 dBm (slightly higher than output level from VCO capability).
Keep in mind that the input drive required for a DPA may change with
frequency behavior. As the frequency increases, higher drive is needed.
Therefore, a RF input drive adjustment circuitry to provide adequate RF
signal strength to the distributed power amplifier under constant envelope
modulation [60] can be implemented. Implementation of capacitors at
the drain line that is, 22 μF (tantalum capacitor)16 and 10 pF, 33 pF, 470
pF, and 22 nF (ceramic capacitors) takes place as a precaution against
low-frequency parasitic oscillation. No oscillation is reported and the DPA
operation is very stable with 50Ω termination. Nevertheless, further work
on a stability check with a 4:1 VSWR will be carried out.
8.3.2 Impedance Transformer Design via Real-Frequency
Technique

This section explains the use of impedance transformation to fulfill the
vectorially combined distributed power amplifier from Section 8.3.1. In
designing wideband communication systems, the use of impedance
transformers and filters is inevitable. Usually, filters are designed between
resistive terminations, say, R1 and R2, to restrict the frequency band of
operations. As shown in Figure 8.45, R1 designates the idealized internal
resistance of the Thevenin driving source EG, the load which dissipates
transferred signal power PL over the prescribed frequency band of
operation [61–65]. In practice, the source side may represent the output
of the distributed power amplifier, which may be a low resistance such as
R1 = 12Ω, and the load may be a standard termination like R2 = 50Ω.
Figure 8.45 Classical filter problem for transformation from R1 to R2, to transform the lowpass
monotone roll-off Chebyshev filter response.
The classical filter literature [61–65] has well established that passband
filters are constructed based on the lowpass prototype using lowpass-to-
bandpass transformations that in turn double the number of elements of
the original lowpass prototype. For many RF applications, it is customary
to design a lossless two-port, which transforms a resistive termination R1
t o R2 to provide maximum power transfer over a prescribed band of
operation as shown in Figure 8.46. This configuration is neither an ideal
transformer nor an ideal filter. It is the combination of both. Hence, we
call it a transformer/filter.

Figure 8.46 An ideal transformer with a filter, which constitutes a transformer/filter.
For transforming resistance R1 to R2, an ideal transformer/filter must
have a flat transducer power gain T0 = 1 over the passband B = f2 − f1;
or equivalently over the angular frequency band B(ω) = ω2 − ω1 as
depicted in Figure 8.47. In these descriptions, f2 and f1 are the upper and
the lower cutoff frequencies of the transformer/filter, and the angular
cutoff frequencies are specified by ω2 = 2πf1 and ω2 = 2πf2.
To the researcher’s knowledge, there is no known analytic form of a
lowpass prototype transfer function that approximates the idealized
characteristic of a transformer/filter as concluded above. In practice,
however, a transformer/filter can be designed using readily available CAD
tools such as Spice, AWR, ADS, and so forth. In the design process, the
user first selects a proper circuit topology with unknown element values,
then initializes the element values. Eventually, using a nonlinear
optimization algorithm, unknown element values are determined to
approximate the ideal transducer gain characteristic. When dealing with a
few elements in the circuit topology, say, up to three elements, this
ordinary approach may be sufficient to construct a narrow bandwidth
transformer/filter. Unfortunately, if the bandwidth becomes wide enough,
the optimization process becomes highly nonlinear in terms of the
element values. In this case, one needs to employ state-of-the-art
approaches such as real frequency techniques [61–65].
Figure 8.47 An ideal transformer/filter with transducer power gain (TPG) characteristics.
In this chapter, we would like to design a transformer/filter that can
transform a resistance R1 = 12Ω to R1 = 50Ω over a 100-MHz to 2.2-GHz
bandwidth. In fact, in this problem, R1 = 12Ω represents the output
resistance of a distributed amplifier that is supposed to deliver its

maximum power to a standard 50Ω termination. Hence, we face a typical
design problem for using a transformer/filter over a wide frequency band.
In the course of the design process, we try to use readily available CAD
tools by selecting proper circuit topology. Due to the highly nonlinear
nature of the problem, an optimization scheme for the design was not
successful. Eventually, we employed the Real Frequency Direct
Computational Technique (RF-DCT), which yields an excellent solution for
the transformer/filter problem under consideration. RF-DCT may be
considered a semianalytical procedure for constructing lossless two-ports
for a preassigned gain performance [66–69].
Referring to Figure 8.48, in RF-DCT, the lossless transformer/filter is
fully described in terms of its Darlington’s driving point impedance.
Darlington proved that any positive real impedance can be realized as a
lossless two-port in resistive termination [66].
Figure 8.48 Darlington’s description of a lossless two-port transformer/filter, where p = σ + jω
(complex variable) [66].
In the present case, ZB(p) must be determined to approximate the
idealized transformer/filter characteristics in such a way that, when it is
synthesized in the Darlington sense, the lossless transformer/filter is
obtained in desired termination R1. Positive real (PR) impedance such as
ZB(p) from Figure 8.48 can be expressed as the summation of a minimum
reactance ZM(p) and a Foster ZF(p) function, ZM(p) + ZF(p). The
minimum reactance impedance function ZM(jω) is expressed as
 (8.26)
where the real part RM(ω2) is a nonnegative even function in the angular
frequency ω, and by definition, a minimum reactance function ZM(jω) is
free of the right half plane (RHP) and jω poles [66].
From the design point of view, the rational form of RM(ω2) specifies a

lumped-element network topology for the lossless transformer/filter when
it is terminated in a resistance. The general form of RM(ω2) is given by
 (8.27)
This form corresponds to highly complicated circuit topologies
depending on the values of the numerator coefficients Ai; i = 0. In this
case, there is no way to control the termination resistance at the far end
of the synthesis. On the other hand, a simpler form is given by
 (8.28)
which yields an n-element LC lowpass ladder circuit topology terminated
in ZM(0) = RM(0) = R1 as desired.
At this point, we should note that once RM(ω2) is specified as in (8.28),
eventually the closed-form of ZM(p) of (8.29) yields the full degree
rational PR function in complex variable p, as follows:
 (8.29)
Synthesis of (8.28) yields a lowpass LC ladder as shown in Figure 8.49.
Figure 8.49 Circuit topology dictated by the real part of the positive real impedance ZB.
It is noted that the LC ladder starts with a shunt capacitor C1 since
ZM(p) is a minimum reactance function. Depending on the value of
integer n, the last component is either a capacitor Cn (n = odd case) or
an inductor Ln (n = even case). For the problem under consideration, a
simpler and meaningful form of the Foster part of the driving point
impedance ZB(p) is given as

 (8.30)
Then, one can deduce the PR impedance of Darlington’s driving point as
 (8.31)
where (8.29) and (8.30) fully describe a bandpass lossless two-port
structure for a transformer/filter terminated in specified resistance R1.
Referring 
to Figure 8.47, the transducer power gain of the
transformer/filter is given by
 (8.32)
Over a specified angular frequency band B(ω) = ω2 − ω1, ideally, T(ω)
= 1. Thus, within the passband, let’s define an error function ε(ω) such
that
 (8.33)
or
 (8.34)
The crux of RF-DCT is to determine RM(ω) and XF(ω) such that the
error function ε(ω) is minimized over the band of interest [69]. Obviously,
this is a nonlinear optimization problem. The success of the nonlinear
optimizations depends on the degree of nonlinearity of the error function.
If the error function is quadratic in terms of the unknowns, it is possible to
hit the global minimum; otherwise, the solution may be complicated [69].
Now, let us investigate the degree of nonlinearity of the optimization by
starting with the selected topology. In this case, let xi designate the
unknown element values of the selected topology. Then, the driving point
impedance ZB(p) is expressed as

 (8.35)
When we generate the real part RM(ω) from (8.29), it can be shown
that the leading term B1 of (8.28) is B1 = ((x)x2…xn)2, which describes a
2n degree of nonlinearity as opposed to direct generation of B1. Similarly,
the other coefficients B2, B1, …, Bn exhibit a descending degree of
nonlinearity {(2n − i); i = 2, 3, …, n} in terms of the unknown elements
values. As far as RF-DCT is concerned, in (8.31), RM (ω) and XF (ω) are
the unknowns of the optimization problem. In other words, coefficients Bi;
i = 1, 2, …, n of (8.28) are determined to minimize ε(ω) over the
passband. Once Bi is initialized, XM(ω) is evaluated by means of (8.26).
In this case, the Foster part XF is selected in such a way that it practically
cancels XM; that is, XM + XF ≈ 0.
8.3.2.1 Numerical Evaluation of Hilbert Transformation and Real
Frequency Line Segment Technique
Once RM(ω) has been initialized, XM(ω) can be generated via the Hilbert
transformation integral. In RF-LST, the real part is approximated by
means of straight lines as shown in Figure 8.50.
Figure 8.50 Piecewise linearization of RM(ω).
Let {Rj, ωj; j = 1,2,…N} be the selected sampling points of RM(ω). In this
case, RM(ω) is expressed by

 (8.36)
where 
with 
 and ΔRj = Rj+1 −
Rj.
Using (8.36), the Hilbert transformation integral reveals the imaginary
part XM(ω):
 (8.37)
such that
 (8.38)
with
 (8.39)
It is interesting to note that, in fixing rL as specified by the design
problem of the transforming filter, transducer power gain optimization can
be carried out over the break points {Rj; j = 2,…RN-1} for the prefixed
break frequencies {ωj; j = 1,2,…ωN}. In this case, the error function ε(ω)
= (RM − R2)2 + (XM + XF)2 is quadratic in terms of the unknown break
points {Ri; i = 1,2,3,…,(n − 1}. Obviously, under the current optimization
scheme, residues of the Foster function XF(ω) of (8.30) are included
among the unknowns. Thus, RF-LST results in idealized data points for
ZM(jω) = RM(ω) +jXM(ω) and the analytic form of the Foster function XF
(i.e., XF = −k0/ω). Once data points for RM(ω) have been generated,
they can be modeled as a nonnegative even rational function as in (8.28)
by means of any regression algorithm, which in turn leads to an analytical
form for ZM(p) of (8.29); at this point, practical generation of minimum
reactance functions becomes crucial. Therefore, instead of using the
integral equation from [67], it may be preferable to implement the

parametric approach to generate ZM(p) from RM(ω) as outlined in the
following subsection [68].
8.3.2.2 Approach for Generating a Minimum Reactance Function from Its
Real Part
In this method, ZM(p) is expressed in terms of its poles, which are all
located in the LHP as follows:
 (8.40)
Its even part is given as
(8.41)
Thus, the residues can directly be computed from (8.41) as
 (8.42)
with
 (8.43)
In this approach, RM(−p2) is initialized (i.e., known) and it is specified
as in (8.41) replacing ω2 with −p2. Once all of the residues have been
computed, by straightforward algebraic manipulations, ZM(p) is generated
in its rational form for synthesis purposes.
8.3.2.3 Actual Design Principle of the Impedance Transformer
From Section 8.3.1, the distributed power amplifier has a measured
output impedance of ~12Ω, which is supposed to drive a RL = 50Ω load
over a finite frequency band of 100 MHz to 2.2 GHz. As it stands, this

problem describes a typical design for an impedance transformer/filter. In
this case, the output of the distributed amplifier is considered to be the
Thevenin generator EG with internal resistance RG = 12Ω. Referring to
(8.40), we can choose the impedance normalization number as Ro = 50Ω,
which makes the normalized load rL = RL/Ro = 1. Similarly, the
normalized generator resistance rG becomes rG = RG/Ro = 12/59 = 0.24.
Actual frequencies may be normalized with respect to the upper edge of
the frequency passband. Hence, fo is selected as fo = 2.2 GHz. In this
case, normalized lower and upper edge angular frequencies become ω1 =
0.0455 and ω2 = 1, respectively. For the construction of the lossless
transformer/filter, we use a main Matlab program called “Transfilter.m.”
“Transfilter.m” takes all user-defined inputs to minimize the objective
function. Initials for the coefficients can be determined by means of the
real frequency line segment technique. This is an extra computational
step that may not be desirable. On the other hand, it is verified that an ad
hoc choice on the initial values such as {xi = +1 or −1; i = 1, 2, …, n, n +
1} is sufficient to obtain a successful optimization. In fact, this is how we
initiated the optimization for the problem under consideration.
“Isqnonlin.m” returns to the main program with optimized polynomial
coefficients {x1, x2, …, xn} = {Ci; i = 1, 2, …, n} and xn+1, which in turn
yields the normalized value of the series capacitor Cn+1 = 1/x2n+1 > 0.
After the optimization, Matlab polynomials a(p) = [a1 a2 a3 an an+1]
and b(p) = [b1 b2 b3 bn bn+1] are determined. Then, ZM(p) = a(p)/b(p)
is synthesized and, eventually, the resulting transducer power gain in
decibels and the transformer/filter circuit with optimized element values
are printed as a lossless LC ladder in unit termination. Let’s review the
main program “Transfilter.m” with the following inputs.
Inputs:
Normalized value of rG = 0.24.
Initial values of the polynomial coefficients. Note that here we used five
polynomial coefficients, which will result in a five-element LC ladder
network when ZM(p) is synthesized.
Initial value for the series capacitor Cn+1 = 1/x2n+1 = 10, which

corresponds to xn+1 = 0.31623.
Lower edge of the angular frequency band: ω1 = 0.045 which
corresponds to 99 MHz to bias the optimization in favor of f1 = 100MHz
(or normalized frequency = 100MHz/2.2GHz = 0.045455).
Upper edge of the angular frequency band: ω2 = 1.
Flat gain level of transducer power gain To = 0.99. (Actually, ideal value
of To = 1. However, we prefer to work with To = 0.99 to reduce the gain
fluctuations within the passband.)
Results of Optimization:
Optimized unknown vector: x = [2.2069 −0.41107 −7.7351 0.871 3.8151
0.085061], which reveals optimized coefficients of the auxiliary
polynomial C(ω) such that
C = [2.2069 0.41107 7.7351 0.871 3.8151 0.085061]
and xn+1 = 0.085061, meaning that the series capacitor Cn+1 =
1/(0.085061)2 = 138.21.
Coefficients of polynomial of Pn(ω2):
C = [−4.87 −33.9 −75.95 −59.084 −16.29]Pn(ω2) = (1/2)[C2(ω) +
C2(−ω)] = B1ω2n + B2ω2(n–1) + … + Bnω2 + 1
Analytic-rational form of minimum reactance function ZM(p) = a(p)/b(p),
where
a(p) as a Matlab polynomial vector:
a = [0 1.65 1.0653 2.2253 0.84655 0.45312]
and
b(p) as a Matlab polynomial vector:
b = [1 0. 0.64563 3.696 2.0286 2.2769 0.45312].
Note that the leading coefficient of a(p) is zero, which means that the

degree of a(p) is one degree lower than that of b(p)—as it should be.
Furthermore, a6 = b6 = 0.45312, which yields R1 = 1 as desired.
Synthesis of YM(p) = 1/ZM(p) = b(p)/a(p) by long division yields the
following normalized element values:
 (8.44)
with
C1 = 0.6061; L2 = 0.7029; C3 = 2.870; L4 = 1.165e; C5 = 1.549e; rL =
1.00
The resulting circuit diagram is shown in Figure 8.51. Actual capacitors
are given by CiA = CiN/2πfoRo; similarly, actual inductors are given by LiA
= LiNRo/2πfo where CiN and LiN represent the normalized values of
capacitors and inductors, respectively. Normalization numbers are
specified as Ro = 50Ω and fo = 2.2 GHz. Hence, we have C1A ≅ 0.88 pF,
L2A ≅ 2.55 nH, C3A ≅ 4.15 pF, L2A ≅ 4.22 nH, C5A ≅ 2.24 pF, and C6A ≅
200 pH. Finally, actual termination resistance is rL = 50Ω. The gain
performance of the impedance transforming filter is −0.0432 and −2.1454
dB at 2.076 GHz and 100 MHz, respectively. The average gain is given by
Taverage = −1.094 ± 1.0511 dB.

Figure 8.51 Circuit topology of transformer/filter with optimized element values.
The PCB used was Rogers 4350 with εr = 3.66 and a thickness of h =
0.762 mm. The inductors were realized using high characteristic
impedance transmission lines printed on the board like microstrip lines.
For accurate design, inductors were modeled employing the CST, in which
PCB properties were included. The Q-factor and inductance values of the
transmission line were optimized in CST to end up with a flat gain
response over the band of interest. A top metal thickness of 2 oz with
gold plating is applied in the transmission line for high-power handling
requirements beyond 30W.
Modeling for the capacitors was performed. Careful layout design with
practical considerations were taken into account. Over high-frequency
operations in particular, the diameter size of the via holes and spacing
between them require special attention. In the present case, via-hole
diameter was taken as 0.15 mm, connecting the component’s grounding
from top layer to the bottom layer, and the separation between holes was
set to 0.3 mm. Adequate numbers of via holes were placed to provide
good electrical grounding for the shunt capacitors. Using equivalent
models for inductors and capacitors, the gain performance of the
transformer/filter was simulated on ADS Momentum. The circuit layout
was imported from Cadence. Figure 8.52 depicts measured and simulated
gain performance for the transformer/filter under consideration. As
designed, port 1 is terminated in 12Ω. Port 2 is connected to 50Ω. In the
course of measurements, first, the scattering parameters of the
transformer/filter were measured between 50Ω terminations using SMA

RF connectors. To end up with accurate measurement results, each SMA
connector is regarded as a separate two-port.
However, bear in mind that the original transformer/filter is driven with
RG = 12Ω instead of 50Ω. Therefore, to end up with the actual
performance of the transformer/filter as designed, the measured
scattering parameters of port 1 must be extracted from the measured S-
parameters of the complete system. Then, the actual scattering
parameters are generated with respect to the original input port
normalization number RG = 12Ω, which in turn yields the desired
electrical performance of the system as it is driven by the distributed
amplifier. In fact, this is what we have done. First, we measured the 50 Ω
based scattering parameters of the SMA connectors used in both port 1
and port 2. At this point, measurement results were compared with those
of the model provided with Molex, Inc. It has been observed that
measured data show excellent correlation with the SMA connector model
given by Molex (as discussed in Section 5.5). Then, the measured S-
parameters of the input SMA connector were extracted from the
measured scattering parameters of the two-port, resulting in Ro = 12Ω
based S-parameters.

Figure 8.52 Simulated (thin line) versus measured (thicker line) performance of transformer/filter:
(a) insertion loss and (b) group delay within operating bandwidth.
Note that all S-parameter measurements were carried out using an HP
Network Analyzer (HP6778). All of the above computations were
automatically completed on the ADA CST/Momentum platform, which is
interfaced with the network analyzer. Results are plotted in Figure 8.52.
The 
thin 
line 
corresponds 
to 
the 
gain 
performance 
of 
the
transformer/filter, which is simulated with the equivalent models of
transmission line inductors and discrete high-Q capacitors.17 Finally, the
thicker line is the measured transducer power gain response in dB of the
actual transformer/filter implemented with transmission line inductors and
discrete capacitor. It is seen that the measured gain in the pass band is
about −1.1 dB with about ±0.9 dB fluctuations as expected. Hence,
measurements reveal excellent agreement with simulations.

Furthermore, Figure 8.53 also reveals that use of discrete lump
inductors (thick line) does not change the gain performance much within
the passband; however, their use does suppress the harmonics in the
stopband as they should do. The thick line shows the performance of the
simulation obtained with high-Q discrete inductors from Coilcraft, Inc.18
For comparison, a lumped transmission line simulation is illustrated by the
thin line.
Figure 8.53 Simulation performance harmonic filtering up beyond passband. The thick line reflects
the use of discrete high-Q inductors and the thin line is for a lumped transmission line.
8.4 Drain-Line High-Power Device Loading Compensation
Signal losses dominated by the positive FET resistances (i.e., Rgs and
Rds) increase proportionally with a bigger device periphery. If these loss
mechanisms are somehow mitigated with attenuation compensation, the
gate and drain lines can accommodate additional gate periphery and
more sections and, thus, output power can be increased. The cascode
topology is a well-known one for attenuation compensation, as shown in
Figure 8.54. Several works have been reported on high output power and
efficiency with a cascode topology in a distributed amplifier [21, 40, 70].
The motivation of this section is to provide a feasible study to achieve
high output power by employing a cascode, with a combination of
vectorially combined current sources while keeping the load termination
close to 50Ω. Clearly, the proposed topology offers an alternative to the
DPA solution of Section 8.3 for achieving high output power.

Figure 8.54 Simplified cascode topology, in which a common-source FET is coupled to the active
load with a common-gate configuration.
An explanation is given for how the loading effect of the common-
source power transistor is resolved when the transistor (e.g., GaN) is
loaded into the output transmission line network while preserving current
combining to a single load termination (~50Ω). As a result, impedance
transformation can be eliminated.
The resulting input and output impedance, Zi and Zo, respectively, of
the cascode topology shown in Figure 8.54 is given as
Zi = Rgs1 + jωCgs1 (8.45)
 (8.46)
where ZS is the output termination impedance of a common-source FET.
Note that Cgd is neglected for reasons of simplicity.
Input impedance Zi requires a similar match as conventional common-
source distributed amplifier. Expanding (8.46), the real part of Zo can be
written as

 (8.47)
where ωd = 1/Rds2Cds2 and ωg = 1/Rgs2Cgs2. Note that (8.47) as
derived above is similar to that given in [71]. The term that provides
negative resistance from (8.47) is
 (8.48)
and other terms are passive in nature. The term Znr is directly
proportional to gm2 to provide attenuation compensation to the positive
real part of Zo. For (ω/ωd)2 > 1, we can expect the Znr of (8.48) to
become positive, which has no benefit in attenuation compensation.
Similarly, the passive terms of (8.47) can be negatively resistant for
(ω/ωd)2 > 1 and (ω/ωg)2 > 1, causing oscillation. The imaginary part is
as follows:
(8.49)
With further simplification of Figure 8.54 for low frequencies, analysis
leads to the topology given in Figure 8.55. In general, Zod = 
will absorb the effective capacitance (Cds1 and Cds2)
and 
output 
line 
inductance Ld, which synthesized the artificial

transmission line. Thus, Zod is approximated to 25Ω at a low frequency
since both arms are terminated with 50Ω.
At low frequency (let ω = 0), output impedance Z′o = Rds2 + Zs(1 −
gm2Rds2) can be estimated from (8.47). The output impedance ratio
between a cascode and common-source configuration is given by Zo′/ZS,
which is factored by (Rds2 + Zs(1 − gm2Rds2))/(gm1Rds1).
Impedance Z1 seen by current generator gm1 
is Z1//Zom =
Rds1//(Rds2 + Zod)/(1 − gm2Rds2). The value of Zom is typically lower
than Rds1, and thus most current gm1Vgs1 flows in the source of the
upper FET and total transconductance Gm » gm1. Power delivered by the
lower generator is estimated as (gm1Vgs1)2Z1. The current injection of
current generator gm2 depends on the voltage drop across the first
generator. According to the power conversion law, power delivered by
current generators is equal to power absorbed by the resistive elements
as shown here:
 (8.50)
where AV ≈ Vo/Vgs1 can be deduced from (8.50).
Let’s consider two FETs that are identical and have Rdsi = 100Ω, gmi =
100 mS, and Vgsi = 1V, where i is 1, 2. From the analysis, Z1 is
approximately 11.1Ω since Zom is 12.5Ω; output current io ≈ gmVgs1.
Hence, current gain Ai ≈1 and voltage gain AV ≈ 22. The output
impedance ratio of Zo′/ZS is 2.3 at a low frequency. However, the output
impedance at a higher frequency range can be maintained as close to 2.3
(at low frequency) with a properly intermatched design between the
common-source and common-gate FET. As an example, an inductor Lp
(Figure 8.58) is introduced for this reason.

Figure 8.55 Simplified cascode topology analysis at low frequency.
From Figure 8.55, Zod will absorb the effective capacitance of the
cascode topology, from (8.49), and output line inductance Ld, which is
synthesized from the artificial transmission line to form the desired ωc. It
has been shown analytically that the output impedance of the cascode is
~2 times higher than for the common-source configuration for identical
device selection. When the loading effect is resolved, it is beneficial that
current combining to a common load will be achieved without an
additional transformation network. Figure 8.56 illustrates the multicurrent
sources (cascode configuration) that are loaded into the output drain
transmission line. It is confirmed experimentally that the real part of the
output impedance of the die model is very close to the Rds. Current gain
Ai ≈1 indicates that the current contribution is similar to a common-
source configuration; hence, the biasing condition for the common-gate is
crucial to deliver similar current injection.
Figure 8.56 Current combining to a common node R, with cascode configuration, for n sections.
Validation of the concept above for equal magnitude and in-phase
combining for n = 3 is selected, leading to {Zu(1)} = {Zu(2)} = {Zu(3)}
= 150Ω, and {Zr(1)} = 150Ω, {Zr(2)} = 75Ω, and {Zr(3)} = 50Ω, and
an imaginary part does not exist. For simplicity, a hypothetical drain
terminal of a transistor has been modeled as an ideal current source with
parallel resistance (effective real part of the cascode) [70], as shown in
Figure 8.57. The imaginary part of Zo (typically capacitance) will be
absorbed in Zr(k). An example of output impedance Zo for a cascode GaN
die model showed that the real part is increased by a factor of 2, and the
imaginary part is reduced by factor of 2. To additively combine the
currents at each junction, phase synchronization between the current

source and the transmission line is crucial. Since transmission lines delays
θd(k) vary linearly with frequency, making the current source delays also
vary with frequency would guarantee delay matching between the
sources and the transmission lines. The cascode delivers two times higher
power than the common-source topology across the frequency, where all
the sources are presented with exactly the required hypothetical optimum
impedance of 150Ω at all frequencies.
Figure 8.57 Circuit showing multicurrent sources to combine at a single load termination, where R =
50Ω.
First, a dc biasing condition is established to satisfy the analytical
presentation in the previous section. The main dc source voltage Vdrain is
fed to the cascode, and the biasing gate voltage Vg2 of the common-gate
transistor determines the effective Vd2 to allow drain current to flow
across the cascode configuration, as illustrated in Figure 8.58.
Figure 8.58 DC biasing condition for cascode topology.
Applying Kirchoff’s law (voltage loop) to Figure 8.58, dc biasing can be
deduced as
 (8.51)
where Vgs2 refers to the gate source of the common-gate transistor.
Therefore, the total voltage of Vd1 and Vd2 will determine the Vdrain

value. For example, with the GaN die model, a Vdrain value of 32V is
needed to generate a similar drain current in the cascode configuration,
wherelse 28V for the common-source configuration. As explained in [13],
in the absence of Lp, circuit bandwidth is primarily limited by the pole
associated with the internal node of the cascode cells. Therefore, the
output impedance of the cascode topology, especially at higher frequency
operation, can be improved with inclusion of Lp.
Performance results with n = 3 sections indicated a power performance
of a flat 2W from dc-7 GHz with cascode topology, and the power is
improved by factor of ~1.8 over the common-source topology (Figure
8.59).
Figure 8.59 Power performance between cascode and common-source topology.
A simplified design schematic of the cascode with the vectorially
combined current sources is presented in Figure 8.60.

Figure 8.60 Simplified design schematic of a cascode with a current combining approach to a single
load termination.
Since Copt (the effective output of common gate (CG) FET) is smaller
than Cin (the input capacitance of a common source (CS) FET), phase
synchronization between the gate and drain lines is achieved by using a
capacitively coupled technique [49] and a nonuniform gate-line design as
shown in [16].
References
[1] B. Kim, H. Q. Tserng, and H. D. Shih, “High Power Distributed Amplifier Using MBE Synthesized
Material,” IEEE Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Monolithic Integrated Circuits Symp., pp. 35–37,
1985.
[2] P. H. Ladbrooke, “Large Signal Criteria for the Design of GaAs FET Distributed Power Amplifier,”
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. ED-32, No. 9, pp. 1745–1748, Sep. 1985.
[3] B. Kim and H. Q. Tserng, “0.5W 2–21 GHz Monolithic GaAs Distributed Amplifier,” Electronics
Lett., Vol. 20, No. 7, pp. 288–289, Mar. 1984.
[4] M. J. Schindler et al., “A 15 to 45 GHz Distributed Amplifier Using 3 FETs of Varying Periphery,”
IEEE GaAs IC Symp. Technical Digest, pp. 67–70, 1986.
[5] J. B. Beyer et al., “MESFET Distributed Amplifier Design Guidelines,” IEEE Trans. Microwave
Theory and Techniques, Vol. MTT-32, No. 3, pp. 268–275, Mar. 1984.
[6] S. N. Prasad, J. B. Beyer, and I. S. Chang, “Power-Bandwidth Considerations in the Design of
MESFET Distributed Amplifiers,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Techniques , Vol. 36, pp. 1117–
1123, July 1988.
[7] Y. Ayasli et al., “2-to-20 GHz GaAs Traveling Wave Power Amplifier,” IEEE Trans. Microwave

Theory Techniques, Vol. 32, No. 3, pp. 290–295, Mar. 1984.
[8] K. B. Niclas et al., On Theory Performance of Solid-State Microwave Distributed Amplifiers, IEEE
Trans. Microwave Theory Techniques, Vol. MTT-31, No. 6, pp. 447–456, June 1983.
[9] T. McKay, J. Eisenberg, and R. E. Williams, “A High Performance 2–18.5 GHz Distributed Amplifier
Theory and Experiment,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques , Vol. 12, No. 34, pp.
1559–1568, Dec. 986.
[10] K. Narendra et al., “Cascaded Distributed Power Amplifier with Non-Identical Transistors and
Interstage Tapered Impedance,” 40th European Microwave Conf., Sep. 2010, pp. 549–522.
[11] K. Narendra et al., “Design Methodology of High Power Distributed Amplifier Employing
Broadband Impedance Transformer,” IEEE Int. Conf. of Antenna, Systems and Propagation,
Sep. 2009.
[12] K. Narendra et al., “pHEMT Distributed Power Amplifier Employing Broadband Impedance
Transformer,” Microwave J., Vol. 51, pp. 76–83, June 2013.
[13] K. Narendra et al., “High Efficiency Applying Drain Impedance Tapering for 600mW pHEMT
Distributed Power Amplifier,” IEEE Int. Conf. on Microwave and Millimeter Wave Technology , pp.
1769–1772, Apr. 2008.
[14] L. Zhao et al., “A 6 Watt LDMOS Broadband High Efficiency Distributed Power Amplifier
Fabricated Using LTCC Technology,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig. , pp. 897–900, June
2002.
[15] K. Narendra et al., “Vectorially Combined Distributed Power Amplifier with Load Pull
Determination,” Electronics Lett., Vol. 46, Issue. 16, pp. 1137–1138, Aug. 2010.
[16] K. Narendra et al., “Vectorially Combined Distributed Power Amplifiers for Software-Defined Radio
Applications,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Technique , Vol. 60, No. 10, pp. 3189–3200, Oct.
2012.
[17] K. B. Niclas, R. R. Pereira, and A. P. Chang, “On Power Distribution in Additive Amplifiers, “IEEE
Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 38, No. 3, pp. 1692–1699, Nov. 1990.
[18] C. Duperrier et al., “New Design Method of Uniform and Nonuniform Distributed Power
Amplifiers,” IEEE Microwave Theory Techniques, Vol. 49, No. 12, pp. 2494–2499, Dec. 2001.
[19] M. Campovecchio et al., “Optimum Design of Distributed Power FET Amplifiers: Application to 2–
18 GHz MMIC Module Exhibiting Improved Power Performances,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microw.
Symp. Dig., San Diego, pp. 125–128, June 1994.
[20] L. Zhao, A. Pavio, and W. Thompson, “A 1 Watt, 3.2 VDC, High Efficiency Distributed Power
PHEMT Amplifier Fabricated Using LTCC Technology,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig. ,
pp. 2201–2204, June 2003.
[21] B. M. Green et al., “High-Power Broadband AlGaN/GaN HEMT MMICs on SiC Substrates,” IEEE
Trans. Microw. Theory and Techniques, Vol. 49, No. 12, pp. 2486–2493, Dec. 2001.
[22] A. Martin et al., “Balanced AlGaN/GaN Cascode Cells: Design Method for Wideband Distributed
Amplifiers,” Electronics Lett., Vol. 44, No. 2, pp. 116–117, Jan. 2008.
[23] K. Narendra, E. Limiti, and C. Paoloni, “Dual Fed Distributed Power Amplifier with Controlled
Termination Adjustment,” Progress in Electromagnetic Research, Vol. 139, pp. 761–777, May
2013.
[24] X. Jiang and A. Mortazawi, “A Broadband Power Amplifier Design Based on the Extended
Resonance Power Combining Technique,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig. , pp. 835–838,
June 2005.
[25] J. Gassmann et al., “Wideband High Efficiency GaN Power Amplifiers Utilizing a Nonuniform
Distributed Topology,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 615–618, June 2007.
[26] S. N. Prasad and A. S. Ibrahim, “Design Guidelines for a Novel Tapered Drain Line Distributed
Power Amplifier,” Proc. 36th European Microwave Conf., pp. 1274–1277, Sep. 2006.
[27] C. S. Aitchison et al., “The Dual-Fed Distributed Amplifier,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp.

Dig., Vol. 2, pp. 911–9914, June 1988.
[28] C. S. Aitchison, N. Bukhari, and O. S. Tang, “The Enhanced Performance of the Dual-Fed
Distributed Amplifier,” 19th European Microwave Conf., pp. 439–444, Sep. 1989.
[29] J. Y. Liang and C. S. Aitchison, “ Gain Performance of Cascade of Single Stage Distributed
Amplifiers,” Electronics Lett., Vol. 31, No. 15, pp. 1260–1261, July 1995.
[30] S. D. Agostino and C. Paoloni, “Design of High Performance Power Distributed Amplifier Using
Lange Couplers,” IEEE Microwave Theory Techniques , Vol. 42, No. 12, pp. 2525–2530, Dec.
1994.
[31] S. D. Agostino and C. Paoloni, “Innovative Power Distributed Amplifier Using the Wilkinson
Combiner,” IEE Proc. Microwave Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 142, No. 2, 1995.
[32] S. D. Agostino and C. Paoloni, “Power Distributed Amplifier Based on Interdigital Combiners,”
Electron Lett., Vol. 29, No. 23, pp. 2050–2051, July 1993.
[33] K. W. Eccleston, “Compact Dual-Fed Distributed Power Amplifiers,” IEEE Trans. Microwave
Theory Techniques, Vol. 53, No. 3, pp. 825–891, Mar. 2005.
[34] K. W. Eccleston, “Output Power Performance of Dual-Fed and Single-Fed Distributed Amplifiers,”
Microwave Opt. Technology Lett., Vol. 27, No. 4, pp. 281–284, Nov. 2000.
[35] F. Noriega and P. J. Gonzalez, “Designing LC Wilkinson power splitters,” RF Design, Aug. 2002.
[36] I. Bahl, Lumped Elements for RF and Microwave Circuits, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 2003.
[37] D. Kajfez, Z. Paunovic, and S. Pavlin, “Simplified Design of Lange Coupler,” IEEE Trans.
Microwave Theory Techniques, Vol. MTT-26, No. 10, pp. 806–808, Oct. 1978.
[38] R. C. Liu et al., “Design and Analysis of DC-14-GHz and 22-GHz CMOS Cascode Distributed
Amplifiers,” IEEE J. Solid State Circuits, Vol. 39, No. 8, pp. 1370–1374, Aug. 2004.
[39] X. Guan and C. Nguyen, “Low Power Consumption and High Gain CMOS Distributed Amplifiers
Using Cascade of Inductively Coupled Common-Source Gain Cells for UWB Systems,” IEEE Trans.
Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 54, No. 8, pp. 3278–3283, Aug. 2006.
[40] J. P. Fraysse et al., “A 2W, High Efficiency, 2–8GHz, Cascode HBT MMIC Power Distributed
Amplifier,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 529–532, June 2000.
[41] J. Shohat, I. D. Robertson, and S. J. Nightingale, “10Gb/s Driver Amplifier Using a Tapered Gate
Line for Improved Input Matching,” IEEE Microwave. Theory Techniques , Vol. 53, No. 10, pp.
3115–3120, Oct. 2005.
[42] S. D. Agostino and C. Paoloni, “Design of a Matrix Amplifier Using FET Gate-Width Tapering,”
Microwave Opt. Technol. Lett., Vol. 8, pp. 118–121, Feb. 1995.
[43] P. Dueme, G. Aperce, and S. Lazar, “Advanced Design for Wideband MMIC Power Amplifiers,”
Proc. IEEE GaAs Integrated Circuits Systems, Oct. 7–10, 1990, pp.121–124.
[44] K. Narendra et al., “Adaptive LDMOS Power Amplifier with Constant Efficiency,” IEEE MTT-S Int.
Microwave and Optoelectronics Conf., pp. 861–864, Sep. 2007.
[45] M. E. V. Valkenburg, Network Analysis, 3rd ed., Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1974.
[46] J. Y. Liang and C. S. Aitchison, “Gain Performance of Cascade of Single Stage Distributed
Amplifiers,” Electronics Lett., Vol. 31, No. 15, pp. 1260–1261, July 1995.
[47] Technical Report of GaN, Fujitsu.
[48] B. Thompson and R. E. Stengel, “System and Method for Providing an Input to a Distributed
Power Amplifier System,” U.S. Patent 7,233,207, June 2007.
[49] Y. Ayasli et al., “Capacitively Coupled Traveling Wave Power Amplifier,” IEEE Microwave Theory
Techniques, Vol. MTT-32, No. 12, pp. 1704–1709, Dec. 1984.
[50] C. Xie and A. Pavio, “Development of GaN HEMT Based High Power High Efficiency Distributed
Power Amplifier for Military Applications,” IEE MILCOM 2007, pp. 1–4, Oct. 2007.
[51] R. W. Chick, “Non-Uniformly Distributed Power Amplifier,” U.S. Patent, 5,485,118, Jan. 1996.
[52] S. Lee et al., “Demonstration of a High Efficiency Nonuniform Monolithic GaN Distributed

Amplifier,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., pp. 549–522, June 2000.
[53] S. Lin, M. Eron, and A. E. Fathy, “Development of Ultra Wideband, High Efficiency, Distributed
Power Amplifiers Using Discrete GaN HEMTs,” IET Circuits Devices Systems, Vol. 3, No. 3, pp.
135–142, 2009.
[54] K. Narendra et al., “High Performance 1.5W pHEMT Distributed Power Amplifier with Adjustable
Inter-Stage Cascaded Network,” Microwave Techniques, COMITE 2008, pp. 1–4, Apr. 2008.
[55] S. C. Cripps, Power Amplifier for Wireless Communications, 2nd ed., Norwood, MA: Artech
House, 2006.
[56] M. I. Montrose, EMC and the Printed Circuit Board—Design, Theory, and Layout Made Simple,
New York: Wiley-Interscience, 1996.
[57] M. R. A. Gaffoor et al., “Simple and Efficient Full-Wave Modeling of Electromagnetic Coupling in
Realistic RF Multilayers PCB Layouts,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Techniques , Vol. 50, No. 6,
pp. 1445–1457, June 2002.
[58] A. Rumiantsev, R. Doerner, and S. Thies, “Calibration Verification Procedure Using the Calibration
Comparison Technique,” 36th European Microwave Conf., pp. 489–491, Sep. 2006.
[59] A. Aldoumani et al., “Enhanced Vector Calibration of Load-Pull Measurement Systems,” 83rd
ARFTG Microwave Measurements Conf., pp. 1–4, 2014.
[60] N. K. Aridas, K. Macwien, and L. Joshua, “Power Control Circuit and Method,” U.S. Patent
7,342,445, Mar. 2008.
[61] H. J. Carlin, “Gain-Bandwidth Limitation on Equalizers and Matching Networks,” Proc. IRE, pp.
1676–686, Nov. 1954.
[62] A. I. Zverev, Handbook of Filter Synthesis, New York: John Wiley, 1967/2005.
[63] Matthaei, G., E. M. T. Jones, and L. Young, Microwave Filters, Impedance-Matching Networks,
and Coupling Structures, Dedham, MA: Artech House, 1980.
[64] A. Williams and F. Taylor, Electronic Filter Design Handbook, 4th ed., New York: McGraw-Hill,
1988.
[65] R. Schaumann and M. E. Valkenburg, Design of Analog Filters, New York: Oxford University
Press, 2001.
[66] B. S. Yarman, Design of Ultra Wideband Power Transfer Networks , New York: John Wiley,
2010.
[67] S. Yarman, “Broadband Matching a Complex Generator to a Complex Load,” Ph.D. thesis,
Cornell University, 1982.
[68] H. J. Carlin and B. S. Yarman, “The Double Matching Problem: Analytic and Real Frequency
Solutions,” IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems, Vol. 30, pp. 15–28, Jan. 1983.
[69] H. J. Carlin, “A New Approach to Gain-Bandwidth Problems,” IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems ,
Vol. 23, pp. 170–175, Apr. 1977.
[70] P. Heydari, “Design and Analysis of a Performance-Optimized CMOS UWB Distributed LNA,”
IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 42, No. 9, pp. 1892–1905, Sep. 2007.
[71] S. Diebele and J. B. Beyer, “Attenuation Compensation in Distributed Amplifier Design,” IEEE
Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 37, No. 9, pp.1425–1433, Sep. 1989.
1 The device part number is RD01MUS1, from Mitsubishi Corp., Kanagawa, Japan.
2 The Laplace transformation F(s), where s = σ + jω, of a continuous function f(ω) over the entire time
domain(ω = 2π/t) is defined as 
 [45].
3 The inversion Laplace f(t) of a continuous function F(s) can be found in [45], where the complex
variable s = σ + jω, such that 
.
4 The high-Q ceramic 0603HP series chip inductors provided by Coilcraft, Inc., with a Q up to ~150 at 1.7

GHz were used.
5 This is a broadband high-Q capacitor, size 3060, from Murata, Inc. Details can be obtained at
www.murata.com.
6 The inductance value of the air-wound coil is approximately to 43.5 nH and is from Taito Yuden, Inc.
7 The capacitors are 600S Series ultra-low ESR, high-Q microwave capacitors, from ATC, Inc. Other
capacitors the series 545-L ultra-broadband high-Q capacitors, from Murata, Inc.
8 The indium foil is from Indium Corp., North Carolina. The thermal conductivity of the copper foil is 0.34
W/cm at 85°C. The foil part number is IN52-48SN (0.004-in. thickness).
9 The high-Q ceramic 0603HP series chip inductors were provided by Coilcraft, Inc. They have a Q up to
~150 at 1.7 GHz.
10 This is a broadband high-Q capacitor, size 3060, from Murata, Inc. Details can be obtained at
www.murata.com.
11 The capacitors are 600S Series ultra-low ESR, high-Q microwave capacitors, from ATC, Inc. Other
capacitors the series 545-L ultra-broadband high-Q capacitors, from Murata, Inc.
12 The electrical specification of the broadband choke: L = 1.3 uH ± 10%, DC resistance (DCR) = 12.6
mΩ, Irms = 4A.
13 The series of the choke is 0603CS_XNL (1008HS), from Coilcraft, Inc.
14 The Q-factor is defined by center frequency over bandwidth operation. A Q-factor of 500 is required.
15 Thru, reflect, and line (TRL) calibration is the standard type of calibration for a load pull determination
system.
16 The 22-uF tantalum capacitor is from Vishay, Inc. (part number 595D226X0050R2T). Its operating
voltage is 60 V.
17 The capacitors are 600S Series ultra-low ESR, high-Q microwave capacitors, from ATC, Inc.
18 The inductor series is 0603CS_XNL (1008HS) from Coilcraft, Inc.

About the Authors
Narendra Kumar is a senior member of IEEE and a Fellow of IET. He
received his doctorate degree in electrical engineering from RWTH
Technical University Aachen, Aachen, Germany. He has been with
Motorola Solutions since early 1999. He holds several U.S. patents, all of
which were assigned to Motorola Solutions. Since early 2011, he has been
actively involved in giving RF and microwave power amplifier courses to
many organizations in Asia and Europe. He serves as a reviewer for
several technical journals and has participated as a keynote speaker at
several IEEE and PIER conferences. He is the author or coauthor of more
than 60 papers and two books related to RF and microwave power
amplifiers. Currently, he is an associate professor at the University of
Malaya and leads microwave and terahertz research activities.
Andrei Grebennikov is a senior member of IEEE. He received his Dipl.
Eng. in radio electronics from the Moscow Institute of Physics and
Technology and Ph.D. in radio engineering from the Moscow Technical
University of Communications and Informatics in 1980 and 1991,
respectively. He gained academic and industrial experience working with
Moscow Technical University of Communications and Informatics (Russia),
Institute of Microelectronics (Singapore), M/A-COM (Ireland), Infineon
Technologies (Germany/Austria), and Bell Labs, Alcatel-Lucent (Ireland)
as an engineer, researcher, lecturer, and educator. He was guest
professor at the University of Linz (Austria) and presented short courses
and tutorials as an invited speaker at the International Microwave
Symposia, European and Asia-Pacific Microwave Conferences, Institute of
Microelectronics, Singapore, Motorola Design Centre, Malaysia, Tomsk
State University of Control Systems and Radioelectronics, Russia, and
Aachen Technical University, Germany. He is an author and coauthor of
more than 100 papers, 25 European and U.S. patents, and seven books
dedicated to RF and microwave circuit design.

Index
A
ABCD
ABCD-parameters, 1, 8–13, 23–24, 155
ABCD matrices, 1, 113
Active-device parameter, 270
Active load, 38–39, 169, 191, 310, 334
Admittance, 1, 3–4, 8–9, 11, 13, 15, 29, 33–34, 37–42, 45, 72–73, 116, 154, 160–161, 173, 212, 218,
253, 260, 268–269, 275
Admittance conjugate matching condition, 46
Amplitude response, 141, 259
Anode termination, 238
Artificial transmission line, 153–155, 157–158, 175, 184, 186, 191, 193, 195, 237, 248, 263, 275, 277,
281–282, 297, 335
Attenuation constant, 22, 246–247
Available power gain, 31, 39
B
Balanced power amplifiers, 135, 141
Balun, 82, 85, 137–141, 146, 277
Bandpass filter, 103, 107–108, 110
Bipolar junction transistors (BJT), 41, 75
BJT. See Bipolar junction transistor
Bode theory, 216
Bode-Fano criterion, 99–100
Bootstrap effect, 85
Breakdown voltage, 69, 72, 77, 149, 170–171, 196, 289, 294, 299
Broadband matching circuit, 99, 102, 119, 131, 269
Broadband power amplifiers, 99, 114–115, 130, 144–145
C
CAD. See Computer-added design
Capacitive coupling, 16, 249, 251
Capacitor self-resonant frequency, 19
Characteristic impedance, 6, 10, 15, 22, 25–27, 53–54, 81–82, 85, 87, 89, 90, 92–93, 113–114, 116–
117, 119, 121–124, 126, 131, 134, 138, 143–144, 146, 156–157, 160, 162, 166, 183, 201, 237–239,
244–245, 248, 251–255, 263, 265–266, 270–271, 274–277, 280, 290–292, 294, 299, 312, 331
Class AB operation, 65, 78, 196, 205, 230, 241
Class A bias mode, 263
CMOS. See Complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor
Commensurate line, 117
Common-mode rejection ratio, 277
Complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS), 16, 110, 277, 279–281
Computer-added design (CAD), 108, 114, 211, 227, 313, 315, 324
Coplanar waveguide (CPW), 26–27, 263, 279–280
Coupling capacitor, 172, 250
CPW. See Coplanar waveguide

Critical mode, 62
Cutoff frequency, 117, 121, 154–155, 157, 159, 166, 170, 174–175, 184, 194, 196, 222, 230, 238–241,
248, 250, 257, 259, 262, 267, 270, 277, 280–282, 289, 291, 294, 296, 298–301, 310
D
Darlington, 170, 324–326
DC Biasing, 78–79, 171, 297, 308, 337
DC bias network, 306, 315
Device stability factor, 55–58
Directional Couplers, 1, 87, 89–92, 141–142
Dissipation effects, 153
Distributed amplification, 153–155, 158, 237, 244
Drain loading effect, 196, 230, 294, 314
Drain-source resistance, 42, 72, 169, 277, 293
Dual-fed distributed power amplifier, 289–290
E
Envelope modulation, 322
Equal-delay, 82, 85
Error function, 326, 328
Extended-resonance technique, 268–269
F
Ferrite bead, 204
FET. See Field effect transistor
Field effect transistor (FET) 1, 41–42, 70, 77, 110, 121, 158, 170–172, 228, 243–255, 257–262, 293–
294, 310–311, 333–336, 338–339
First-order analysis, 170
Foster function, 328
Four-port network, 87, 117, 160
Frequency passband, 329
Frequency response, 77, 85, 105, 109, 126, 153, 166–168, 171, 218–219, 221, 227, 239–241, 249, 290,
301, 315
Full-signal conditions, 243
Full-wave simulation, 176, 196
G
Gain characteristic, 240–241, 282, 324
Gain response, 157, 166, 272–273, 296, 331, 333
Gain ripple, 99, 143–144, 279
Gain-bandwidth, 154–155, 164, 166, 237, 244, 249, 265–266, 272, 280, 315
Gate-line attenuation, 246, 249, 290
Grid-cathode capacitance, 237
Grid termination, 238
H
Harmonic balance, 179, 228, 296, 307
HB. See Harmonic Balance
HBT. See heterojunction bipolar transistor
HEMT. See High electron mobility transistor
Heterojunction bipolar transistor (HBT), 75, 77–78, 170, 265–267, 276, 289, 299, 310

HF. See High frequency
High electron mobility transistor (HEMT), 70–73, 121–122, 133, 135, 139, 146, 149, 170, 173, 248, 254–
258, 263–265, 267, 275–277, 299, 309–310
High-frequency (HF) 18, 75, 81, 85, 99, 140, 173, 228, 243, 259, 282, 331
I
Ideal transformer (IT), 102–103, 108, 122, 212, 323–324
Image impedance, 155–159, 176, 277, 294–295, 299
Image parameter, 155
Immittance, 33, 37, 40–41, 43, 45–46, 54–57, 61
Impedance, 1–4, 6–8, 10–11, 13, 15, 19, 22, 25–27, 29–33, 37–41, 43–45, 47–48, 50–51, 53–54, 57,
62–63, 71–73, 77–78, 80–82, 85–87, 89–90, 92–93, 99–100, 102–105, 107–110, 113–114, 116–117,
119, 121–35, 137–146, 149, 155–160, 162, 166–167, 169–171, 174–176, 183–187, 189–190, 192–
196, 198–201, 207, 211–212, 214–215, 218, 220–222, 230, 237–240, 244–245, 248, 250–255, 257,
259–260, 263, 265–277, 279–282, 289–295, 298–316, 319–321, 323–326, 329, 331, 334–338
Impedance conjugate matching condition, 45
Impedance matching, 37–39, 44, 82, 108, 122, 129, 137, 142, 155, 230, 277, 279, 281, 299
Impedance tapering, 183, 257, 289
Impedance transformers 50, 80, 130, 132, 323
Interstage tapered impedance, 167, 298–299, 303, 314–315
Intrinsic parasitic, 273, 311
IT. See Ideal transformer
K
K-factor, 211–212, 214–216
L
Laterally-diffused metal oxide semiconductor (LDMOSFET), 67–68, 114, 129
LDMOS, 69, 170, 227, 230–232, 294, 310
LDMOSFET. See Laterally-diffused metal oxide semiconductor
Linear mode, 62
Loading effect, 27, 168, 174, 176, 185, 188, 196, 230, 282, 294, 298, 310, 313–314, 334, 336
Lossless two-port, 323–324, 326
Lossy Matching Circuits, 125, 127, 129
Low-Voltage and High Voltage HBTs, 75
Lowpass-to-bandpass transformation, 323
Lumped Element, 15, 17–19, 21, 99, 102, 110, 115–117, 143, 154, 160, 176, 237, 243, 248, 292
M
MAG. See Maximum available gain
Matching characteristic, 257
Maximum available gain (MAG), 39–42, 125, 249, 260–262, 265
MESFET. See Metal-semiconductor field effect transistor
Metal-semiconductor field effect transistor (MESFET), 70–73, 76, 123, 125–127, 131–133, 137, 142–145,
154, 243, 248, 265, 268, 271, 274–275
Microstrip Line, 19, 25–26, 87, 92–94, 99, 112, 114, 121, 123, 125, 131–133, 135, 144–146, 149, 244,
252, 255, 258, 279, 289, 331
MMIC. See Monolithic microwave integrated circuits
Monolithic microwave integrated circuits (MMIC), 72, 80, 110, 132, 146, 149, 244, 264, 268–269, 311
MOSFET 51, 60–61, 67–68, 70, 76, 78–79, 99, 127–129, 243, 294
Multistage CSSDA, 271

N
Noise characteristics, 153
Noise factor, 31
Noise figure 28, 31–34, 125, 133, 142, 248, 263–264, 267, 275–276, 279, 281, 283
Nonlinear mode, 62, 66
Nonuniform gate-line design, 193, 198, 315, 339
Normalized incident voltage, 5–6
Nyquist criterion, 212, 217
O
Operating power gain, 38–40, 56–57, 66, 129
P
PAE. See Power added efficiency
Parasitic capacitance, 17–18, 82, 140, 165, 193, 240, 267, 279, 299, 311, 313
Parasitic coupling, 17, 169
Parasitic resistor, 258
Passband filter, 323
PCB. See Printed circuit board
Perturbation method, 260
Phase shift, 88, 158–159, 240–241, 248, 269, 295
Phase velocity, 22, 93–94, 159, 195, 198, 244, 248
pHEMT 72, 110, 132, 196, 254, 257, 262, 269, 272–273, 299, 310
Power combining, 110, 212, 257, 267–269, 289
Power-added efficiency (PAE) 66, 110, 121, 130, 134–135, 144, 183, 196–198, 204–207, 231–232, 254–
255, 257, 263, 265, 267, 269, 273, 289, 297, 310, 314, 316–317, 319, 321–322
Power-dissipating loads, 273
Power-supply rejection ratio, 281
Prefixed break frequencies, 328
Printed circuit boards (PCBs), 169, 176–179, 201, 204, 292, 308, 317, 331
Propagation factor, 158–159, 184
Q
Quarter-wave transformer, 199
R
Reflected current waves, 6
Reflection coefficient, 6–8, 24–25, 99–101, 108, 125–126, 132, 199, 201, 214–215, 266, 275
Return loss (RL), 24, 114, 122, 124, 129, 135, 139, 146, 169, 292
RF choke (RFC), 144–145
RFC. See RF choke
RL. See Return loss
S
S-parameters, 1, 6–10, 24, 71, 73, 90, 126, 139, 145, 154, 179, 202, 204–205, 213, 220, 227, 297–298,
309, 316–317, 320–321, 332
Scattering Parameters, 4, 91, 331–332
Series-inductive elements, 153
Shot noise, 28–29
Solid-state power amplifier, 257

Stability analysis, 54, 77, 211–212, 218, 221, 227–228, 231
Staggering principle, 240
Superposition theorem, 184, 186
T
Tapered distributed amplifier, 251
Tapered impedance termination, 299
Tapered termination, 298, 307
TEM. See Transverse electomagnetic
Thermionic Valve Circuits, 153
Thevenin theorem, 185, 312
Transconductance, 41–43, 69, 72–73, 75, 121, 126, 154, 158, 183, 192, 220–221, 237–239, 244–245,
250, 262, 270–271, 273, 277, 280, 293, 298, 303–305, 335
Transducer power gain, 39–42, 57, 323–324, 326, 328–330, 333
Transistor model, 154, 158, 220–221
Transmission coefficient, 7–8, 164
Transmission Lines, 1, 6, 15, 18, 20–25, 52–54, 80–83, 85–87, 89, 93–94, 112–117, 119, 121–126, 129–
130, 134, 137–138, 143–144, 153–155, 157–160, 165, 175, 177, 183–184, 186, 191–195, 199–201,
223–225, 237–240, 243–245, 248, 251, 254–255, 257, 262–263, 268–269, 273–275, 277, 280–282,
289–290, 292–293, 297, 308, 312–313, 315, 318–319, 331, 333–337
Transverse electomagnetic (TEM), 25, 27, 89, 93, 308
Traveling wave amplifier, 154, 165, 244
Tuning, 19, 54, 169, 292, 296
U
UHF. See Ultrahigh-frequency
Ultrahigh-frequency (UHF), 99
V
Vacuum-tube distributed amplifier, 237, 241, 263
VCO. See Voltage-controlled oscillator
VDMOSFET. See Vertical-double diffused metal oxide semiconductor FET
Vertical-double diffused metal oxide semiconductor FET (VDMOSFET), 51, 68
Virtual ground, 99, 137, 224, 226
Virtual grounding, 112, 137
Virtual impedance analysis, 185
Virtual impedance, 169–170, 185–187, 192, 196, 230, 311–313
Voltage standing wave ration (VSWR), 25, 51, 89, 123, 125, 133, 142–144, 265, 273, 275, 322
Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 313, 321
VSWR. See Voltage standing wave ratio
W
Wave theory, 162
WCDMA. See Wideband code division multiple access
White noise, 28
Wideband code division multiple access (WCDMA), 80
Wideband matching solution, 299, 306
Y
Y-parameters, 1, 8–9, 11–13, 37–39, 41, 45, 72–73, 77, 154, 173, 274
Z

Z-parameters, 1, 8, 11, 30, 37–38, 40–41, 45, 73–74, 212
Zero-order analysis, 170

