
Make: DIY Drone and
Quadcopter Projects
A Collection of Drone-Based 
Essays, Tutorials, and Projects
From the Editors of Make:

Make: DIY Drone and Quadcopter Projects
by The Editors of Make:
Copyright © 2016 Maker Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by Maker Media, Inc., 1160 Battery Street East, Suite 125, San
Francisco, CA 94111.
Maker Media books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales
promotional use. Online editions are also available for most titles
(http://safaribooksonline.com). For more information, contact O’Reilly
Media’s institutional
sales department: 800-998-9938 or
corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor:
Patrick Di Justo
Production Editor:
Colleen Cole
Proofreader:
Charles Roumeliotis
Indexer:
WordCo Indexing Services
Interior Designer:
David Futato
Cover Designer:
Ryland Grudzinski
Illustrator:
Rebecca Demarest
April 2016:
First Edition

Revision History for the First Edition
2016-04-05:
First Release
See http://oreilly.com/catalog/errata.csp?isbn=9781680451290
for release
details.
Make:, Maker Shed, and Maker Faire are registered trademarks of Maker
Media, Inc. The Maker Media logo is a trademark of Maker Media, Inc.
Make: DIY Drone and Quadcopter Projects
and related trade dress are
trademarks of Maker Media, Inc.
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish
their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear
in this book, and Maker Media, Inc. was aware of a trademark claim, the
designations have been printed in caps or initial caps.
While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the
publisher and authors assume no responsibility for errors or omissions, or
for damages resulting from the use of the information contained herein.
978-1-680-45129-0
[LSI]

Part I. Features
The first section of the book is a collection of feature articles from the
pages of Make:, providing an introduction to the world of drones: those
autonomous aerial vehicles that mostly (but not always) take the form of
small quad-rotor helicopters called quadcopters.
The first article looks into what exactly drones are, and more importantly,
what they are not. The second article provides a detailed breakdown of the
anatomy of a drone: from its airframe to its propellers, from its battery to its
brain. Subsequent articles look at how drones work, the positive ways
drones are being used—as a way to drop food and other supplies to refugees
in war-torn places around the world, and other uses for remote flying
vehicles. With these five articles under your belt, you’ll be in a great
position to understand and enjoy the rest of the book!


Chapter 1. Mind Your Drone
Not everybody likes the word drone—industry and military experts avoid using the “D word” in
public. They prefer the term “unmanned aerial system or vehicle” and associated acronyms
UAS or UAV. Despite plenty of misgivings about military and spy drones, the word drone has
become widespread and popular, used with great enthusiasm by hobbyists who hang out on the
DIY Drones site and by professional aerial photographers like the L.A.-based Drone Dudes. So
what is a drone?
Dale Dougherty, founder of Make: Magazine and creator of Maker Faire
The original meaning of drone is a male bee. The body of a drone is bigger
than all other bees (except the queen), but what physically distinguishes a
drone is a larger pair of compound eyes. Yet drones have no real work to do
but
reproduce. They make late afternoon flights to what is called a
congregation
area, where drones gather looking to mate with a virgin queen.
Once these bees
succeed, however (and they perform this act in midair), the
drones fall out of
the sky, having left an essential body part behind. That’s
all that drones do.
The notion that a drone doesn’t have much work of its own leads to a
secondary definition of a drone as someone who lives off the work of others
—a parasite. In fact, at the end of summer, the worker bees kick the
remaining
drones out of the hive. They eat too much and do too little. They
can be
replaced in the spring.
This helps set up the problem. We not only need to figure out a definition
for drones, we also have to figure out what they’re going to do—and not do.
While some agree that drones are unmanned, others point out that they’re
piloted,
preferring the acronym RPA for “remotely piloted aircraft.” That
wouldn’t
differentiate drones from remote-control aircraft, but it
emphasizes that a
human, who can be held responsible, is at the controls. A
drone can be operated
manually or it can be programmed to follow a fixed
flight plan.

The distinguishing feature of a drone seems to be the promise of autonomy.
Today, a typical flight consists of switching between manual flight and
autopilot. How much further might it go? Given the right instrumentation
and the
ability to process that data, could a drone be programmed to make
context-aware
decisions, particularly ones that humans are not very good
at? A drone might
detect problems before they occur, such as responding to
gusts of wind or
avoiding unexpected obstacles. A drone might also be able
to communicate with
other drones.
Can a drone be considered a robot, able to obey Asimov’s Three Laws of
Robotics? We need drones that explicitly avoid harming humans and can
act to
protect themselves from destruction. We should expect this much
from any fully
autonomous vehicle. A drone then might be said to have a
mind of its own.
Until such time, however, that responsibility falls on the person flying the
drone. When you fly a drone, you aren’t just a user—you’re a pilot. You
must
protect your equipment, yourself, and most importantly, other people.
A bad or
incompetent pilot can injure people or invade their privacy. It’s not
a lot
different from owning a pet or a car.
Good pilots, like the Drone Dudes, worry that bad or careless pilots will
garner the public’s attention, create a climate of fear, and cause
governments
to restrict or eliminate drones for commercial or recreational
use. The reason
we need better technology is that few of us are very good
pilots.
For makers, the most interesting challenge isn’t just building drones or
flying them. It’s discovering what drones are good for, what creative uses
they
have, and what tough problems they might solve. Otherwise, planes
and
quadcopters will be sold only as toys, not tools, and many people will
discard
them once they lose interest in their playthings. We’re hoping
drones become
platforms for developing compelling applications that will
push the technology
forward and adjust the balance between the light and
the dark side of drones.

Figure I-1. An example of how cool you can be with a drone.

Chapter 2. Getting Started with
Multicopters
Tips on how to build, buy, fly, and spy with multirotor R/C helicopters.
From Make:31 by Frits Lyneborg
A multicopter is a flying robot resembling a wagon wheel—without the
wheel.
It has a central hub with electronics, power, and sensors, onto
which are
mounted arms that hold propellers to provide lift. The number
of arms gives the
name: a tricopter (trirotor) has three arms, a
quadrocopter or quadcopter
(quadrotor) has four, a hexacopter six, and an octocopter eight. There are other
variations, but these are the most popular setups.
They’re also called multirotors, which arguably is the correct term,
but I’ll stick
to multicopters because that’s used more often on the
Internet, where you’ll
find the most information on the topic. Why try
multicopters? Perhaps you saw
one and you just have to own this cool new
gadget. Or you fly R/C planes and
you’d like to try a new type of
aircraft. Or you’re into DIY electronics or
robots, or you want to do
aerial photography. Whatever your motivation, there’s
an option for
you. I’ve flown a variety of multicopters and built three of my
own, so
I’ve picked up a few tips I can share.

Homebrew Pedigree
In 2003, Hong Kong-based company Silverlit Electronics read in the
newspaper about students Daniel Gurdan and Klaus M. Doth’s prize-winning
entry in Germany’s national Young Scientists competition. Gurdan and Doth’s
design was of a radio-controlled, self-leveling quadrocopter (Figure 2-1).
Figure 2-1. Gurdan and Doth
In late 2004, Silverlit began
production of their X-UFO, a simplified and
cheaper version of the
students’ design (Figure 2-2). When this product hit the
international
markets over the next few years, it seeded the idea of a small,
remote
controlled multicopter to many people throughout the world. Today
there
are dozens on the market.

Figure 2-2. The Silverlit X-UFO

How They Work
On an ordinary helicopter, the tail rotor provides
horizontal thrust to counteract
the main rotor’s torque, in order to
keep the helicopter from spinning around
with the main blades (Figure 2-3).
Figure 2-3. How a regular helicopter works

A multicopter works quite differently. Take for instance a
quadrocopter: every
second propeller spins in the opposite direction
(Figure 2-4), counteracting the
torque of the adjacent propellers.
Figure 2-4. Quadcopter propellers spin in opposite directions
More importantly, a
multicopter has an onboard computer that varies the speed
on individual
propellers, making possible every form of spin, tilt, yaw, and
rudder
control around any center and any axis, as well as flight in any
direction.

Your First Multicopter
The best starter multicopter is lightweight:
the lighter the copter, the less
damage to it and to the surroundings
when you crash. And you will crash! The
bigger they get, the more scared
you’ll be of flying them. Large multicopters
can rip through clothes
and flesh, and they cost a lot of money. The downside is
that lighter
versions carry less payload (read: cameras and extra sensors), and
flying time is usually shorter. The upside is that they’re cheaper.
Ironically, it’s
also a good thing that lighter copters are typically
harder to control, due to
fewer sensors and less-sophisticated overall
construction. Why is this good?
Because you’ll learn to fly. A heavy,
complex autonomous multicopter might
be easier to fly—or even fly by
itself—but you’ll never learn to handle a
multicopter that way.
That can be a big problem the moment something goes
wrong. And something
will go wrong.

Building Your Own Multicopter
Once you’ve played with
multicopters, you’ll realize that building one is a
project that you
could take on. Here are the basics.

Batteries and Motors
The real magic here is the combination of the
very powerful lithium polymer
(LiPo) batteries and brushless motors.
These two components, with just a
normal R/C plane propeller on the motor,
can lift themselves right off the
ground, and so this combination can
make virtually anything fly.

ESCs and Control Board
A multicopter’s flight must be controlled
and balanced in a certain way. The
motors are controlled by little units
called electronic speed controllers (ESCs),
and these need signals
telling them how much power to pass on. In a
multicopter, that signal
comes from a special control board. The control board
is hooked up to a
standard R/C plane receiver, and possibly other peripherals
such as GPS,
or whatever your imagination and wallet allow. Probably the two
most
popular control boards right now are HobbyKing’s Multi-Rotor Control
Board V2.1 (hobbyking.com) and Multi RC Shop’s KK Plus V5.5e
Multicopter
Controller (multircshop.com), both based on Atmel’s
ATmega168
microcontroller chip (Figure 2-5). Arduino-oriented makers might
prefer DIY
Drones’ ArduCopter system (http://copter.ardupilot.com/),
with its ArduPilot
Mega board based on the ATmega2560 (Figure 2-6).
Figure 2-5. The KK Plus controller

Figure 2-6. The ArduCopter

Body and R/C Gear
The body of a multicopter can be made of almost anything, including wood, so
the only “mysterious” thing is the
control board. The rest is common R/C gear:
a four-channel transmitter and receiver, and connectors to hook up your
components. A Google search on “multicopter control board” will get you
started and lead you to plenty of build instructions, and I recommend visiting
http://rcexplorer.se, http://hobbyking.com, and http://diydrones.com.

Video from a Multicopter
Filming from the sky is the most common
broken dream among multicopter
users. Unfortunately a lot of people are
spending a lot of money hoping to
make great professional video from the
air at a fraction of the cost of a real
helicopter. Many shops out there
are ready to sell this dream, which I think is
unfair. You should think
twice. Here’s a test: take your camera and put it on a
broomstick.
Hold the other end of the broomstick. Now try to get good footage
out of
that. While it may give interesting new angles and be “arty,” in
general
it’s going to look “filmed from the end of a broomstick.”
You’ll find it hard to
get the quality of shots you’re used to. The
same is the case with a multicopter.
You can find cool-looking videos
made from multicopters on YouTube, but
they’re always focused on the
flight experience (“Look, I’m flying!”), rather
than a specific
object or person being photographed. If you work hard with
your
equipment, you can get cool shots, but they’ll be lucky shots, unless
your
copter can transmit video back to the ground (see the section “Cameras and
Video Downlinking”). If you get a picture of a house, it’ll be awkwardly
framed.
If you video anything other than random treetops, the subject won’t be
well placed in the frame, and everything will be moving about. It’s
not easy.

Gimbals and Gyros
You can purchase very expensive camera mounts and
gimbals with gyroscopic
stabilization. But before you do, ask to see raw
film of at least one minute made
with the equipment—not filmed at high
speed and slowed down for a smooth
look, and not edited in short clips,
or stabilized in post-production. I don’t
recommend two-axis gyro
gimbals. In my experience they introduce more
shaking than they do good,
even the very expensive ones. (And three-axis
gimbals introduce even more.)
Since multicopters are extremely steady when it
comes to holding
direction, I don’t think these are of any benefit. Your best
mount is
something simple like a flexible plastic tube or soft foam. Just accept
that the camera is not level at all times.

Cameras and Video Downlinking
You can get really cool videos and
pictures from multicopters if you’ve
practiced flying, and if you use
the medium on its own terms: accept the ever-
moving picture, use a
lightweight camera, and focus on action shots where the
camera is moving
through the air. The best videos I’ve seen use extreme wide-
angle shots, usually made with the GoPro camera brand (Figure 2-7), which
can
also shoot at 60 frames per second (fps), giving a slow-motion feeling.
The
lighter the camera, the better the flight performance. Think eight ounces and
below. Finally, your best tool is video feedback. Actually seeing what you film,
while you’re doing it, is called first-person video (FPV). There are many
options for wireless video downlinks, depending on the following parameters.

Figure 2-7. A GoPro mounting rig for a drone
Cost, weight, and power consumption
How large an
antenna can you carry to the field? What RF bands are allowed in
your
country? Which are already used on your copter?
Transmitting power
Systems one watt or stronger may require a ham operator’s license.
Frequency
regulation information is available at
http://makezine.com/go/hamradio.

Electromagnetic pulses
Powerful transmitters
can make servos and other electronics malfunction.
These things have to
be experienced; there are no golden rules that I’m aware
of. Sometimes
things just interfere.
In general you’re looking for lighter weight,
longer range, less power
consumption, and undisturbed frequencies. You
can’t expect to use cheap,
random TV transmission gear. Get something
from a shop that has experience
with video downlinks from multicopters.
And if you get a pair of video glasses
for monitoring (Figure 2-8), you
can see what the camera in the sky sees, even
in sunlight. If nothing
else, it’s really cool to be able to elevate your field of
vision by
remote control.
Figure 2-8. Video glasses for first-person video

Going Further: Drone Multicopters
Once you’ve mastered R/C multicopters, you might want to try drone
multicopters. When most people
say drone they’re talking about flying by GPS
coordinates and
waypoints in fully autonomous mode, and that’s something
special. One
example is the ArduCopter, controlled by an Arduino-based
autopilot
developed by DIY Drones (Figure 2-9).
Figure 2-9. Some ArduCopter screens
There are also popular setups where
cameras film the drone, and a computer
calculates its flight from what
the cameras see (little dots on the copter).
Perhaps you could even set
up a drone to navigate by the sun. It’s all just
sensors. If you do
experiment with drones, never let your autonomous machine
go beyond
visual contact. Most systems I know of have a built-in maximum
range of
250 meters. Once you start playing with multicopters, you’ll notice
there’s no longer a sharp border between “autonomous” or “R/C”
flight. Any
multicopter is a robot that to some degree is autonomously
controlling its
motors (or it would crash). And even fully autonomous
drones have the option
of killing the automation and returning to R/C
control (anything else would be

hazardous). With multicopters, it’s
always some form of R/C, and it’s always
some kind of autonomous.
More DIY multicopters and kits: http://scoutuav.com, http://multiwiicopter.com
Quadcopter FPV: http://makezine.com/go/fpv
3D-printable quad: http://makezine.com/go/hugin


Chapter 3. Anatomy of a Drone
Multirotor UAV diagram by Rob Nance

Standard Prop
The same “tractor” propeller used on standard front-engine R/C airplanes. In
orange in the diagram above.

“Pusher” Prop
These contra-rotating props exactly cancel out motor torques during stationary
level flight. Opposite pitch gives downdraft. In dark grey in the diagram above.

Motor
Usually a brushless electric “outrunner” type, which is more efficient, more
reliable, and quieter than a brushed motor (Figure 3-1).
Figure 3-1. Motor

Motor Mount
Sometimes built into combination fittings with landing struts (Figure 3-2).
Figure 3-2. Close-up of motor mount

Landing Gear and Boom
Designs that need high ground clearance may adopt helicopter-style skids
mounted directly to the body, while designs with no hanging payload may omit
landing gear altogether (Figure 3-3).
Figure 3-3. Landing gear and boom

Boom
Shorter booms increase maneuverability, while longer booms increase stability.
Booms must be tough to hold up in a crash while interfering with prop
downdraft as little as possible.

Main Body
Central “hub” from which booms radiate like spokes on a wheel. Houses
battery, avionics, cameras, and sensors (Figure 3-4).
Figure 3-4. The main body of the drone

Electronic Speed Controller (ESC)
Converts DC battery power into three-phase AC for driving brushless motors
(Figure 3-5).
Figure 3-5. Electronic speed controller (H) and radio receiver (K)

Flight Controller
Interprets input from receiver, GPS module, battery monitor, and onboard
sensors. Regulates motor speeds, via ESCs, to provide steering, as well as
triggering cameras or other payloads. Controls autopilot and other autonomous
functions (Figure 3-6).
Figure 3-6. Flight controller computer

GPS Module
Often combines GPS receiver and magnetometer to provide latitude, longitude,
elevation, and compass heading from a single device (Figure 3-7).
Figure 3-7. GPS module

Receiver
Often a standard R/C radio receiver unit. The minimum number of channels
needed to control a quad is four, but five is usually recommended (as seen in
Figure 3-5).

Antenna
Depending on your receiver, may be a loose wire whip or helical “rubber
ducky” type (Figure 3-8).
Figure 3-8. Antenna

Battery
Lithium polymer (LiPo) batteries offer the best combination of energy density,
power density, and lifetime on the market (Figure 3-9).
Figure 3-9. Battery (M) and battery monitor (N)

Battery Monitor
Provides in-flight power level monitoring to flight controller.

Gimbal
Pivoting mount that rotates about one, two, or three axes to provide
stabilization and pointing of cameras or other sensors.

Gimbal Motor
Brushless DC motors can be used for direct-drive angular positioning, too,
which requires specially wound coils and dedicated control circuitry that have
only recently become commercially available.

Gimbal Controller
Allows control of direct-drive brushless gimbal motors as if they were standard
hobby servos (Figure 3-10).
Figure 3-10. Gimbal controller

Camera
GoPro or other compact HD video unit with onboard storage. Real-time
streaming is possible with special equipment (Figure 3-11).
Figure 3-11. Camera


Chapter 4. Building Drones to
Deliver Medicine and Food to
War-Torn Syria
Fixed-wing UAVs aren’t just for bombs—meet the nonprofit building drones that fly supplies to
Syria.
From Make:47 by Signe Brewster
On March 16, 2015, barrels of chlorine gas rained down on the town of Sarmin
in northern Syria, killing six and wounding many more—just one of many
horrific chemical attacks in the civil war that has consumed the country.
“Sarmin isn’t far from the border but the border is closed to all traffic,” Sasha
Ghosh-Siminoff, president of Syrian aid organization People Demand Change,
texted his Stanford University-based friend Mark Jacobsen, four hours after the
attack. “If your planes were ready, you could have flown in emergency
medicine and gear.”
The planes Ghosh-Siminoff was referring to are drones, built expressly for this
purpose. Jacobsen is the executive director of Uplift Aeronautics, a nonprofit
that hopes to deliver essential medical supplies, food, and other cargo to
Syrians via its Syria Airlift Project. Syria recently closed its border to foreign
aid, and any planes that attempt to fly over the country run a high chance of
being shot down. Uplift has a different plan: fleets of drones that could swoop
in by night, undetected by human eyes or radar.

Doing More
Jacobsen, who is pursuing a Ph.D. in political science, was in Istanbul about a
year ago with a group of academics when a heated discussion broke out about
international intervention in the Syrian war. Since 2011’s Arab Spring, when
activists came together to protest president Bashar al-Assad and his
government, at least 200,000 people have died there. More than 10,000 were
children. A lack of medical care and food are among the government’s weapons
against its own people.
Person after person at the gathering asked the same question: why isn’t more
being done? Jacobsen, a former Air Force cargo pilot, explained to one attendee
that you simply can’t fly a cargo plane into such an unpredictable place. It’s
impossible.
He went back to his hotel that night feeling guilty. It didn’t seem like a good
enough answer. While speaking with his colleagues, he became fixated on the
idea of sending in large numbers of packages—perhaps via drone. He took out
a notebook at around 2 or 3 a.m., the hope of sleep long forgotten.
“It seemed like I was onto something with the idea of swarming small packets,
but I didn’t really know what technology could do that, whether it would be
quadcopters or planes or catapults or anything else. Balloons?” Jacobsen says.
“I was just trying to lay out everything I could think of.”
Uplift Aeronautics and the Syria Airlift Project were born, and today Jacobsen
and a group of volunteers are busy flying prototype drones. Their plan is to fly
over the border from a neighboring country, on missions chosen by aid partners
such as People Demand Change. Each drone can carry only a few pounds of
supplies, but their small size makes them untrackable by radar and dispensable.
If a chlorine bomb explodes, medicine-carrying drones can be there in an hour,
as opposed to days—or never.
Uplift plans to train Syrian refugees and other people on the ground to fly and
repair the drones. Its first destination would be Aleppo, Syria’s largest city. The
war has hit it hard. Hunger and disease are common.

The drones would take about a half hour to fly to Aleppo. Instead of touching
down, they would drop their cargo in a small box attached to a parachute. Then
they would return. Back at the launch base, the location of which would likely
shift from day to day, volunteers could switch out their battery, load new cargo,
and launch again within minutes.

Complications
Flying anything, let alone hundreds of drones, into a country without
permission is a breach of international law. Current sanctions bar sending US
goods into the country. In extreme times like these, exceptions can be granted,
but they depend on various government channels.
Jacobsen isn’t exactly sure how Uplift will secure an OK from the US, though
he has initiated conversations with officials. The drones will likely have to be
approved by the US Treasury and international agreements, and will need to
comply with arms regulations and counterterrorism laws.
Uplift will also need to talk with the governments in countries bordering Syria,
such as Turkey or Jordan. They will need to prove that the drones will be safe
and beneficial. The recent election in Turkey, and the country’s air strikes
within Syria, add a new layer of complexity.

Farm Drones Take Flight
“In some ways, negotiating with the armed groups and the people inside Syria
is easier than the Turkish governments,” Ghosh-Siminoff says. “It’s really
difficult to navigate that bureaucracy and know you’re in the clear and not
running afoul of some archaic rule.”
In Syria, the groups fighting Assad would be most likely to shoot down a
drone. Currently, the resistance occupies the ground between Uplift’s launch
site and Aleppo. If Uplift can demonstrate the planes are for aid, and will not
interfere with the opposition’s efforts, Ghosh-Siminoff said there should not be
a problem convincing the locals to let them pass.
In a country strapped for resources, a scenario could arise where troops start
capturing drones to use for their own purposes. Uplift thought of that. The
drones are equipped with a self-destruct device designed to fry their navigation
system if they fly too close to the ground anywhere but at the launch site. Any
drone that gets too low will never be remotely pilotable again.
“We’re not planning to talk to them at all once they leave the takeoff area,”
says Jacobsen. “Routes will be pre-programmed. Our custom firmware on the
plane actually plugs its ears and stops listening to incoming messages while in
Syrian airspace, which should make it considerably harder to hack.”

Figure 4-1. Michael Taylor, with Uplift Aeronautics’ Waliid drone mounted on a home-
built PVC launcher

Figure 4-2. A volunteer tests the drone radio controls

A Team of Volunteers
On a hot, cloudless day in April, Jacobsen and four volunteers gathered at
Stanford University’s Lake Lagunita. Engineer Michael Taylor, a Ph.D.
candidate in electrical engineering, led two other volunteers through setting up
the drone launcher on the lake bed, which has become a grassy field thanks to
California’s drought.
On a porch overlooking the lake, Jacobsen assembled and tested the “Waliid”
drone. He ran new volunteer Stuart Ginn, a medical resident still clad in scrubs,
through the plane’s software and pre-flight protocol.

Made of foam and held together by tape, the drone is not visually impressive.
It’s shaped like a plane, as opposed to the quadcopters that have taken over the
consumer market, which allows it to fly for an hour instead of minutes. Its
wingspan measures 5′ 7″ and is decorated in black, green, and red—the colors
of the Syrian flag.

Back in the field, Taylor and aeronautics and astronautics Ph.D. student
Heather Kline had completed the launcher—a 7-foot-long PVC pipe skeleton
that guides the drone into the air. Tomoki Eto, a mechanical engineering
undergraduate and experienced drone pilot, anchors a bungee line to the ground
several hundred feet away, stretches it to the launcher, and attaches it. Upon
release, the bungee will fling the UAV into the air.
The team consists of five volunteers, but expands to 15 or 50 people, depending
on how you look at it. The engineering core resides at Stanford, but people all
over the world are contributing to its design and deployment. It’s been an
informal collaboration via email, Skype, and Dropbox, but Uplift plans to
release as much open source material as possible, probably via Github.
Like many of the volunteers, lead engineer Brandon Fetroe got involved with
the project after hearing about it through Stanford’s UAV club. While the
technical hurdles felt manageable to him as an engineer, he says, its political

challenges were things “many Americans didn’t feel capable of tackling on our
own.”
Figure 4-3. Uplift Aeronautics members Heather Kline, Tomoki Eto, Mark Jacobsen, and
Michael Taylor

“The project made it clear from the start that each individual person who was
interested in helping out has the opportunity to contribute in ways that match
their skill set and that together, as a whole, the team could do things that the
individual on their own certainly can’t,” Fetroe says.
Fetroe, a mechanical engineering Ph.D. student, has been flying R/C planes
since he was 12. He described his expertise as a little bit of everything—
something that holds true throughout the Uplift team. Ginn, for example, was
once a commercial pilot; he’s now helping reach out to medical NGOs. And
Jacobsen is leveraging his international contacts and friends in the US
government from his days in the Air Force.

Breaking New Ground
Interest in using drones for deliveries is high around the world. Syria is just one
of many regions where broken infrastructure can make supplies impossible to
deliver by land. Drones are already busy monitoring poachers and providing
aerial intelligence in disaster situations.
But Jacobsen didn’t relate the Syria Airlift Project to any of those efforts.
Instead, he looked back much further, to the Cold War when the Western Allies
airlifted supplies into West Berlin. US Air Force pilot Gail Halvorsen started a
movement when he began dropping candy attached to handkerchief parachutes
for children. Like the Candy Bomber, as Halvorsen became known, the drones
could drop symbols of hope and happiness.
“People inside Syria affiliate airplanes with death. There are no positive
memories of an airplane anymore,” Ghosh-Siminoff says. “It would be nice to
see a positive example of when a plane came to help them instead of to kill
them. It would make them feel like they’re not alone, that the world didn’t
forget them, and that there’s still someone out there trying to help them.”

Open Source
With all the parts prepped, the group clusters around the launcher on the lake
bed. The Waliid sits on top of two metal rails that will guide it out and up while
the bungee accelerates it forward.
The final verbal checks ring out while a small crowd forms to watch.
“Clear!” Jacobsen shouts.
The launcher releases and the drone springs forward. The bungee falls away as
it coasts up and begins flying rectangles over Lake Lagunita.
Uplift flies its planes with software built by 3D Robotics. Jacobsen also runs a
custom program that measures the plane’s energy consumption at different
flying speeds. Every so often, the Waliid increases its speed by 2 miles per
hour, gradually moving from 28 to 50 miles per hour.

If Uplift begins sending drones into Syria, it will run another custom program.
An app called Swarmify can take a single flight plan and turn it into as many
semi-randomized flight paths as the team needs.
“Because every flight plan is slightly different, it ensures planes don’t collide
with each other,” Jacobsen says. “It also gives you tactical survivability,
because no two planes cross the same point on the ground. If somebody sees
the first plane fly over, they won’t catch the next one.”
Much of the drone itself is made from off-the-shelf and open source
components. While Uplift could someday manufacture its own drones, right
now it works with inexpensive hobby kits. This choice has its roots in the
organization’s origins, when Jacobsen had to teach himself the basics of
building and programming a drone and fund the project inexpensively.
But even as Uplift’s volunteer ranks grew, it kept building its own drones. It
turns out that there isn’t much of an alternative.

“When we looked at different airframes, one thing became immediately clear:
the market is really polarized as far as cost and capability is concerned,” Fetroe
says. “If you tried to put all the planes in a line, and had the tiniest, cheapest
one on one end, and some huge commercial or military drone on the other end,
you notice there’s a really big gap in the middle, kind of where we are trying to
operate.”
Drones that can carry more than a few pounds of cargo for an hour and cost,
say, $1,000, didn’t exist. Fetroe said new options are emerging, but most have
yet to officially hit the market. For now, Uplift will carry on with its own
design.
The project’s current hangar of vehicles cost between $500 and $1,000 to build.
The Waliid is actually the $100 Talon kit made by X-UAV. Its autopilot system
is built by 3D Robotics. Its motors, props, and servos were all picked for their
modest price, and can be found on Hobby King.

In its belly sits the real value—the payload. A wooden box, laser cut by Fetroe,
opens to release its cargo. It floats to Earth strapped to a parachute made from
garbage bags, or whatever other cheap plastic is available (read more about this
in Chapter 13).



Syria Is Not the Finish Line
Whether or not the Syria Airlift Project succeeds, Uplift sees a future for its
drones. What will start with just a few flights this summer could scale to
hundreds or thousands of planes that can feed entire neighborhoods. Even just a
handful of planes can make rural medical deliveries and bring aid to disaster-
stricken regions where the political situation is more welcoming.


“My long term goal is to help build a world where the use of starvation and
medical deprivation are impossible—they just don’t work anymore; you can
always find a way to get humanitarian aid through. That’s a lifelong ambition,”
Jacobsen said. “If we can get the first steps done, we can scale from there.”


Chapter 5. Quad Squad
These expert pilots and developers are working to make quadrotors cooler
and
more useful than ever.
Everyone loves a flying machine. Since launching just over a decade ago,
DIY
quadrotors and other autonomous aerial platforms have matured
rapidly, thanks
to an obsessive community and access to technology
advancements like
lithium-polymer batteries, brushless motors, and
increasingly small, high-
powered processors and sensors. With these
components, drones are now
incredibly strong, stable, and capable of
doing most if not all of the piloting
themselves.
So if these machines fly themselves, what do enthusiasts do to stay
involved
and excited? To help answer that question, we assembled a
diverse gathering of
top UAV flyers, including Hollywood filmmakers,
smash-proof airframe
builders, and aerial software and component
creators, to discuss and
demonstrate some of the newest tools and
techniques involved in the pursuit of
quadrotor aerial excellence. Their
reports promise an exciting future in flight.

Going from 0-60 with APM
Figure 5-1. Jason Short, Design Director, 3D Robotics, http://3drobotics.com

APM:Copter was born on October 10, 2010. The date is indelibly etched in my
memory, since it was the same day my son Lukas was born. We spent the
week
at the hospital while the Blue Angels flew overhead during Fleet
Week in San
Francisco. I knew my days of flying UAVs at the airfield
were likely over, so I
set about designing one I could fly in my
backyard while my son napped.
Adapting APM:Plane to fly multicopter drones was simple at first, but
engineering full autonomy turned out to be a wicked problem.
Multicopters
stress the flight controller system. There are over 100,000
lines of code running
on the Arduino-based processor, and almost nothing
can go wrong that doesn’t
end in a bad outcome, often culminating in a
crash. Producing a rock-solid
flight control system and ironing out the
details took a small army of volunteer
developers and years of
collaborative work, but the results have been
astounding.
Today, the 3DR development team is focused on key features that will
make it
easier for new users to install and configure APM on any
airframe.
Our latest software release of APM:Copter brings some new and very
helpful
capabilities. Setup wizards walk you through the configuration
process, and a
new auto-tune function learns how the drone flies,
maximizing flight
performance and removing the burden of manual tuning.
A new, highly
advanced inertial navigation controller fuses GPS and
internal sensors to
empower a pilot of any skill level to fly the drone
right out of the box, without
the challenges inherent to manual flight.
Software-defined “geo-fences”
prevent you from flying too far or too
low. If the drone breaks the fence, APM
automatically takes control and
flies back home on its own.
A new flight mode called “drift” relies on the intelligence of the
autopilot to
simplify flight control to a single stick. The end result
is a drone that flies and
corners more like a race car than a typical
multicopter. If you lose orientation,
just let go of the stick and the
brakes will be automatically applied, bringing
your drone to a safe
landing.
The most exciting improvement is our new, full-featured Android tablet
interface, which enables you to plan and control a drone in the air.
Community-
developed apps like DroidPlanner and Andropilot allow you to
command the
drone with a simple Google Maps-like interface.

Advanced features, such as the “Follow Me” function, allow the tablet’s
position to be sent to the drone, creating your own personal flying camera,
ready to capture your next hike up Kilimanjaro, surf in Maui or
your son’s first
successful bike ride in the local park.

Building the World’s Toughest Drone
Figure 5-2. Marque Cornblatt, Cofounder, Game of Drones, http://gameofdrones.biz

Deep in a huge Oakland, California warehouse filled with fire-breathing
robots,
monster machines, and other implements of destruction, a
not-too-secret cabal
of inventors, engineers, and artists meets late at night. This group gathers, first,
to show off their latest custom-built drones, UAVs, and robots.
And, second, of course, to pit them against each other in one-on-one
airborne
“fights to the deck.”
The crucible of destruction is known, somewhat informally, as “Flight
Club.”
The first rule of Flight Club is that all commercially available
drones and drone
kits are far too fragile and expensive for heavy-duty
use—especially if that use
is dogfighting. But a number of
innovative and perhaps even groundbreaking
design concepts have evolved
here, including many clever DIY methods for
making drones cheaper,
tougher, faster, and easier to repair.
Flight Club competition led me to team up with industrial designer (and
long-
time aerial-dogfighting nemesis) Eli Delia. Together we began
researching
highperformance materials and manufacturing methods from
tough-duty
industries including aerospace, military/law enforcement, and
even medical
manufacturing.
That research led us to thermoformed polymers, and we soon began
designing
and prototyping airframes using various sheet plastics
including styrene,
polycarbonate, PET, and Kydex 100, the supertough
plastic “alloy” we
ultimately settled on. Launching a Kickstarter let us
test the market and get
direct feedback from UAV pilots of all skill
levels and needs, and this spark of
user insight has already ignited
several ideas for our next project.
My personal UAV—the one I fly every day—is one of our
company’s first
prototypes. It’s been crashed and/or dropped from
hundreds of feet too many
times to count. It has been flown through
fires and landed in (and launched
from) stagnant water. We’ve
(deliberately) flown it through plate glass
windows and shot it out of
the sky with a 12-gauge shotgun. It keeps coming
back for more.
Sure, it’s scuffed, scratched, torn, and beat, but it still flies
straight and true as
the day we first launched it. The magic is in the
airframe construction, and it’s
hard to imagine any other type that
could withstand such abuse without
becoming unflyable.

Besides the super-tough construction, we like to strip our airframes
down to the
bare necessities. For example, rather than using four ESCs
on separate boards,
we favor a four-in-one ESC board for motor speed
control. This reduces the
number of failure points significantly. The
end result is a super-tough, super-
simple airframe that can survive an
entire day of flying, fighting, and crashing
without a single repair.
Because most pilots go to great lengths to avoid collisions and crashes,
most
airframes—though they may be carefully designed to optimize
other factors—
are mechanically fragile. This has created a culture
of expectation in which
airframes that break when they crash are an
accepted norm. Thus many amateur
pilots are rightly afraid to take risks
and really hone their flying skills for fear
of damaging their frail,
expensive gear.
At Game of Drones, our approach flies directly in the face of this
culture. Our
motto is “Fly ‘em hard and put ‘em away wet.
They’re only drones.” It’s my
hope that this approach will not
only make it easier for beginners to enter the
hobby, but will also
inspire more people to design, build, and fly drones for
aerial combat
games, business, research, and more.

Drones as Aerial Access Points
WiFi technology will make drones simpler to control and provide the
opportunity, eventually, for Internet-controlled drones.
While the
vision for drones is that they operate fully autonomously taking off,
flying a mission and landing without human intervention, of course we
will
want to be able to find out where our drones are located, know
whether they are
functioning properly (or not), and be able to change
the mission or take over
manual control at any time. Achieving these
ends will require maintaining
wireless connectivity throughout the
majority of each flight.

Figure 5-3. Adam Conway, VP Product Management, Aerohive Networks,
http://aerohive.com
Wireless communications for hobbyist and
pro-level UAVs today primarily
consist of three connection uses.

Control
Steering a drone in manual mode, or switching into autonomous
mode, is
typically accomplished with a traditional R/C transmitter and
receiver

Telemetry
As a drone is flying around it has the ability
to send telemetry data back to a
ground station. Telemetry data
typically consists of onboard sensor inputs
including GPS location and
diagnostic data, but it can also be used to change
settings on the drone
mid-flight and provide new mission waypoints. Telemetry
data is
typically sent over a long-range serial link like IEEE 802.15.4.

Video
This is what gets most drone users excited—the idea of
sending back real-time
video so someone on the ground can experience what
it is like to fly. For most
hobbyists the only option for getting video
from a drone is an analog wireless
video transmitter/receiver. Analog
video systems offer the advantages of being
reasonably low-cost and
having very low latency or lag.
With all three of these systems running
at the same time there is a risk for
interference (with potentially
disastrous consequences), so most operators use
different frequency bands
for each system. Typically drone operators use 900
MHz for telemetry (at
least in the US; 433 MHz is standard in Europe), 2.4
GHz for control,
and 5 GHz for video. Since higher frequency means shorter
range, video
typically is the weakest link and will go out before an operator
loses
control or telemetry.
A better solution, however, may be to combine all three systems under a
single
wireless technology, one that has the range for flight but also
the bandwidth to
be able to deliver video, control, and telemetry with a
single radio. For this,
WiFi is the obvious choice: it’s fast,
inexpensive, and (if set up properly) has
the necessary long range.
In the long view, WiFi and other TCP/IP-based networking technologies
are
going to be foundational for creating drones that are
Internet-controlled.
Today there are already consumer drones, like the Parrot AR, that use
WiFi for
video and control signals. But among the more flexible
open source autopilot
software and hardware, support tends to fall off.
However, a few eager
engineers and hackers have already begun
experimenting with adapting
ArduPilot for WiFi telemetry and control,
and I think it’s only a matter of time
until all drones move to WiFi.

Figure 5-4. Jeffrey Blank and Andrew Petersen, Drone Dudes, http://dronedudes.com
We are a unique collective of filmmakers, designers, and flying robots.
Using a
fleet of custom multirotor UAVs and custom camera gimbals, we
offer our
services as aerial cinematographers for feature films,
commercials, music

videos, and sporting events around the world. We feel
fortunate to be supported
by a network of amazing people and look
forward to seeing where this exciting
new technology will take our
business and our art.
Our systems provide a cost-effective, safe, dynamic alternative to
traditional
aerial videography, making them an attractive substitute for
producers
considering conventional methods like manned helicopters and
cranes.
Each UAV is designed with a different camera weight class in mind. Our
heavy
lifting octocopter was built to mount high-end cameras (like the
RED Epic) that
can produce the super high-resolution imagery the film
industry now expects
from professional camera operators. The RED camera,
in fact, is the industry
standard and flying it was our first big goal.
Now, with pro-quality HD cameras getting smaller and cheaper every day,
we
believe that the future of cinema drone technology is in a more
compact
system. Our new UAV design (the D2) comes equipped with
everything a
professional aerial video team would ever need for a shoot:
onboard GPS, a
custom three-axis brushless gimbal, full HD video
downlink, wireless follow
focus, and even dual parachutes for those “oh
sh*t” situations. With great
agility and response time, we expect the D2
to find a comfy spot at the top of
the cinema-drone food chain.
We originally got into flying drones because they can capture shots that
are not
practical using any other camera platform. Now we’ve had a
glimpse of what’s
possible, and are striving to constantly develop our
technology. The complex,
rapidly evolving intersection between technical
development and artistic
expression is what makes this business so much
fun.

Part II. Tutorials
How can you do some of the amazing things people are doing with drones?
The tutorial section contains four articles that can get you started.
The first two articles explain how drones are used to create beautiful
examples of aerial photography and video—images that only a few years
ago would have been impossible for the casual hobbyist to create. The third
article shows how some enthusiasts are putting drones to work, creating
aerial maps of historic buildings in Cuba. And finally, we learn some of the
most important rules of flight, to keep drone use safe.


Chapter 6. Getting Started with
Aerial Video
How to make fantastic videos from your multicopter or drone.
From Make:37 by Eric Cheng
The first aerial photograph was taken in 1858 by French photographer
Gaspard-
Félix Tournachon, from a hot air balloon. Since then, aerial
perspectives in
imaging have remained elusive to those without astronomical
budgets.
Historically, photographers have used just about everything to get
cameras up
in the air, including balloons, birds, kites, rockets, airplanes,
and helicopters. In
the last few years, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) have
improved so much in
performance and reliability that they have started to creep
into the mainstream
as the best way for (most) people to capture aerial images
and video. These five
tips will help you to get the best aerial videos you can.

Figure 6-1. An Aerial view of Tonga, where most of this article took place

Choose the Right UAV
The vast majority of people getting into aerial videography choose a
quadcopter
as their first UAV. Quadcopters’ electronic flight controllers,
sensors, and
GPS automatically stabilize flight, and in some instances, allow
autonomous
“mission” flying via waypoint programming, allowing for steady
video platforms
that can maneuver themselves into precise locations. They’re
simpler to operate
than tricopters, and more affordable than hexacopters.
The most popular quadcopter for aerial filming is the $679 DJI Phantom,
because
it’s ready-to-fly (RTF) out of the box and is designed to hold a GoPro
camera.
The Phantom is a great platform, even for beginning hobbyists,
because it’s
easily hackable. There is a vibrant third-party accessories market,
mostly made
up of enterprising individuals selling personally developed mods
online.
Multirotors from 3D Robotics are also a great choice. They offer kits and RTF
models
(including a new Phantom competitor called the Iris), all running their
open source, open hardware flight platform for the ultimate in hackability.

Figure 6-2. The 3D Robotics Iris
Adventurous makers will likely want to build their own multirotor aircraft,
which have the
advantages of being (potentially) more budget friendly (see
Chapter 11) and
allowing you to tailor components to your specific needs. A
DIY quadcopter or hexacopter consists
of an airframe, flight controller,
electronic speed controller (ESC), motors,
propellers, batteries, radio, and
receiver. Entire kits are available for less than $200. Of course, to do
videography, you’ll also need a camera, which leads us to…

Choose the Right Camera
Although large cameras can easily be put into the air if you configure and make
your own multirotor aircraft, my favorite cameras for aerial videography are
GoPros, which provide the best image quality for their size and weight. The
GoPro Hero3 Black Edition weighs only 73 grams and can record video at
2.7K (2,704×1,524 pixels) at 45Mbps (or 30fps). And it’s got built-in WiFi for
downloading your footage.
GoPros are also pretty much the standard in aerial videography, which means
maximum compatibility with OEM and third-party accessories for aerial
imaging,
such as vibration isolators and gimbals (covered in the next tip).
Figure 6-3. RotorPixel gimbals are matched to the DJI Phantom and also pretuned to
match the GoPro Hero3 camera
Finally, GoPros are easily protected while airborne using their branded
underwater housing or third-party lens protectors.

Stabilize Your Camera
The smoothness of aerial video is directly correlated to its perceived quality.
But multirotor motion isn’t smooth. As a multirotor flies around, the flight
controller automatically stabilizes the aircraft by sending power to its
multiple
motors. During flight maneuvers or in gusts of wind, a multirotor might
pivot
violently on multiple axes, which may keep the aircraft itself stabilized
in
space, but can wreak havoc on footage from onboard cameras. In the past,
hobbyists used servomotors to correct for this sort of movement, but servos are
slow and sloppy, unable to correct quickly enough.

Gimbals and Aircraft Motion
These days, stabilized aerial video is made possible by the incorporation of
gimbals that use brushless motors. A gimbal is simply a support that allows the
rotation of an object around an axis, and brushless motors are the same motors
that revolutionized R/C model aircraft due to their great power-to-weight ratio
(rewound for higher torque in gimbal use).
Figure 6-4. Author’s gimbal mount, showing the blue rubber vibration isolator
A typical camera gimbal allows rotation around two axes: roll and pitch. A
sensor on the camera mount tells the gimbal controller, “I want to be level,”
and the gimbal controller sends the appropriate signals to the brushless motors
that control pitch and roll. In practice, brushless gimbals yield footage from
quadcopters that looks like it was taken using a flying Steadicam
(see
http://ech.cc/aerialvid for some of my footage). Gimbals for GoPro cameras
are
available for as little as $150, and can simply be bolted to the bottom of any
aerial platform.

Figure 6-5. The aircraft is crooked but the camera is level, controlled by a brushless
gimbal

Prop vibration and “jello”
The second image-quality problem that needs to be solved is the removal of
“rolling shutter” artifacts. CMOS image sensors, which are used in most digital
cameras, scan the image in rows from top to bottom as they read data for each
frame. If a camera is moved around during shutter sweeps, it results in
horizontal spatial artifacts, more commonly known as “jello.”
Jello is caused in UAV footage by high-frequency vibrations introduced by
rotating motors and propellers. The best way to remove it is by balancing
propellers, which can come from the factory with one side heavier than the
other. Balancing is facilitated by inexpensive prop balancers, and is achieved
by applying clear tape to the lighter side and/or sanding the heavier side.
(Sand
the flats, not the leading or trailing edges—YouTube has great tutorial
videos.)
Balanced props, combined with the vibration isolators that are commonly used
to
mount gimbals, should yield beautiful, jello-free, stabilized video.

Figure 6-6. Inexpensive prop balancers help you reduce propeller vibration

Assemble an FPV System
It’s difficult to get good video if you can’t see what you’re recording. With
first-person view (FPV), an analog transmitter is used on the UAV to broadcast
real-time video from the camera. The pilot uses a receiver and either a monitor
or LCD glasses to see what the UAV is seeing. Experienced pilots can fly 100%
using FPV without needing a line-of-sight view of the aircraft.
An entry-level FPV system can be purchased for around $250. You can read
my full
deconstruction of the Ready Made RC 5.8 GHz starter kit at
http://ech.cc/quadfpv —it
taps into the GoPro to use it as the FPV camera as
well. (For more details on
using first-person view, see Chapter 8.)
Figure 6-7. The author pilots his video Phantom over the waters of Tonga via an FPR
(first-person view) system from Ready Made RC

Practice, Practice, Practice
The most important thing you can do to improve your aerial video footage is
to
become a skilled pilot. There is no substitute for stick time, and spending
all
your time at a workbench instead of flying your UAV in an open field will
never yield great footage.
Figure 6-8. Practice your skills with toys like the Blade Nano QX and the Syma X1

I recommend honing your flying skills using inexpensive off-the-shelf toys.
The
Syma X1 and Blade Nano QX or mQX are all great toy quadcopters that
cost between
$36 and $90. They fly using the same controls, and do not offer
the luxury of
GPS location hold. If you can master a small quadcopter, the
skills you learn
will translate directly to larger aircraft.

Figure 6-9. More stick time = better video, so fly as much as you can


Chapter 7. Quadcopter
Photogrammetry
How a trip to Cuba and my love of R/C aircraft aided in the restoration
of historic buildings.
From Make:37 by William Grassie
Nearing the end of my graduate program in media arts and computer science, I
found myself stuck working on a thesis I no longer had much interest in. I had
lost my motivation and feared I would end up in grad limbo with a project I
couldn’t bring myself to complete and expectations, including my own, unmet.
About this time a friend of mine had signed up for a class that was going to
Cuba. This was an opportunity I couldn’t miss, so I signed up. This adventure
led me to many others, including the genesis of what would become my new
thesis.
I’ve long been an R/C flying enthusiast. In my boyhood, my dad and I built a
small, gas-powered balsa wood plane. It was tethered to a string, and you could
only fly in a circle. The poor plane didn’t survive its maiden flight. That
concluded my R/C experience for many years, as we couldn’t afford to rebuild
it.
The price of all things R/C at that time made it cost-prohibitive for many.
A couple of years ago I discovered the hobby anew. I purchased a little R/C
helicopter for my brother, and was surprised by the quality, flight time, and
maneuverability. I started doing some research and found a whole new, more
affordable world of R/C. This revolution was mainly due to the advent and
proliferation of lithium polymer batteries and brushless motors, which replaced
expensive, messy gas motors and made electric models a more realistic
proposition. And so my obsession began.

Figure 7-1. Grassie’s first photogrammetry drone rig
It started with small helicopters. Then larger helicopters built from parts.
This
led to airplanes, which was how I began doing FPV (first-person view)
flying.
Soon after came tricopters and quadcopters, which provided full
three-
dimensional freedom of movement and a very stable platform for cameras.
Then came Cuba, photogrammetry, and liberation from my uninspired thesis.
Photogrammetry is a method for creating 3D models of objects by taking a
series
(usually hundreds) of photographs. The concept is as old as modern
photography.
What has changed is the use of digital photos and software. The
software takes
all of the photographs and compares them to find matching
points. Then the
software uses these points to calculate depth.
Through my graduate program in media arts at New Mexico Highlands
University, I
traveled to Cuba for photography, photogrammetry, and an
exchange of ideas. One
goal was to make contact with the Office of the
Historian, which is responsible
for restoring the buildings of Old Havana.

Highlands University had been working with the Georgia O’Keeffe Museum
for about
a year developing the use of photogrammetry as a tool for
conservation and
preservation. We hoped to share these simple and inexpensive
techniques with
members of the Office of the Historian. We contacted them,
learned more about
what they do, and demonstrated the methods we had
developed for documenting
historic objects and sites using photogrammetry.
They were very excited and
offered us the opportunity to create
photogrammetric models of several buildings
and structures.
This was my first real opportunity to use photogrammetry in the field, and I
too
was impressed with what was possible. However, while working on
documenting
several structures, it became apparent that we were limited by
taking photos at
ground level, which created gaps in the images. Once we had
rendered a
preliminary model of Hotel Santa Isabel, I found that anything
above the field
of view would inevitably show up in the data as black holes
rather than a solid
3D model.
I started thinking of different ways to get a complete view of the building. One
obvious method would be to rent a hydraulic lift, but that could be costly and
impractical in tight spaces. Helicopters might work, but would also be cost-
prohibitive. Then it hit me: I could use multirotor R/C aircraft to photograph
the inaccessible areas. My passion for photography and the R/C world came
together in a beautiful way.

Figure 7-2. Photogramming the Hotel Santa Isobel
Photogrammetry Tips
1. A digital camera with fixed focal length is best.
2. Make sure your photos overlap 60% to 80%.
3.
Take the photos horizontal to your object and at a uniform distance.
4. Uniform lighting is important
for creating good models.
5. Process the images in Agisoft PhotoScan.
6. Low-quality models can be
generated on a laptop. High-quality models require multi-GPU systems
with 128GB of RAM.
7. For
small models you can get away with 30 to 60 photos. Larger models (like buildings) may
require
several thousand images. The more photos,
the better detail you can achieve.
When I returned from Cuba I immediately got to work. I had only recently
started
experimenting with building quadcopters, and the one I owned had seen
better
days. But I went ahead and started modifying it to carry a camera for my
proof-of-concept build. My initial test used a GoPro Hero HD set for time-lapse
and
my house as the subject. I shot 200 pictures, and the results, though not
beautiful, were very encouraging. I set out to create a purpose-built quadcopter
as a stabilized camera platform to create photogrammetric models of large-
scale
structures.

From the outset, I was determined it would be affordable and accessible, and I
hoped my idea could inspire and educate others. In its simplest form,
photogrammetry can be done with a compact digital camera and a laptop with
surprisingly good results. But as the desired quality of the finished model goes
up, the hardware requirements and processing time rise dramatically.
Figure 7-3. The resulting 3D model of Hotel Santa Isobel
Once I had built the new quadcopter, I began testing and collecting data. It
worked flawlessly. I collected hundreds of photos to be processed and turned
into a complete 3D model of the historic multistory building that was my
subject. When the photos had been processed and a complete model had been
created in software, I concluded that my methodology was sound and
completely
viable as a useful tool for photogrammetry of large-scale structures.
In association with the field-testing, I created a blog to help anyone who might
be interested in getting started with their own quadcopter. The blog UAV 3-D
(http://uav3-d.info) has articles on just about every concept of quadcopter flight
so that this technology can be accessed by even the most uninitiated.

My Setup
MULTIROTOR: Custom built using parts largely from http://rctimer.com with an APM 2.5
controller board from http://www.diydrones.com. It has 30-amp SimonK ESCs
(electronic speed
controls) and 900kV motors with 10×4.7” carbon-fiber props.
CAMERA: Canon PowerShot running CHDK custom firmware, which lets the camera
take RAW
photos automatically.


Chapter 8. FPV Fundamentals
Put a camera on your ‘copter and yourself in the pilot seat.
From Make:37 by Steve Lodefink
Watching your rotorcraft or fixed-wing R/C plane fly is always fun, but the
experience really comes to life when you get to peer directly through the
“eyes”
of your aircraft, as if riding along inside it.
In R/C circles, this is called “first-person view,” or more commonly, FPV. It
refers to piloting a model aircraft from the perspective of the aircraft itself,
via an onboard video camera, wirelessly linked to a ground station,
streaming real-time video to be displayed on goggles worn by the pilot.
There are several ways to set up FPV on your rig; this guide should help
you understand the general requirements and get you quickly up to speed.

Camera
The most popular cameras for FPV are small security-type “board
cameras,” which
typically come as caseless circuit boards, with lens
assemblies screwed right
to the PCBs. It may be tempting to use a cheap,
480-line camera, but for a
really satisfying experience, it’s best to spend a
bit more. $50 will get you a
600-line board camera from a trusted brand like
Sony.
Not only will the higher resolution greatly improve visibility, but these
slightly pricier cameras have dynamic exposure features that cheaper
models
often lack. Most importantly, “Wide Dynamic Range” (WDR)
exposure compensation
will allow you to see skies and shadowed ground
features at the same time,
without blown-out highlights or underresolved
shadows. This is more than just
an aesthetic concern; these features can
make a big difference in your ability
to navigate.
Besides “board” types, any number of small lightweight commercial video
cameras
could potentially be adapted for FPV drone use. As long as you
can figure out
power and signal connections, the only really critical
requirement is low
weight.

Mounting the Camera
As with shooting photos and video from your drone, it is especially
important
to keep airframe vibrations to a minimum when flying FPV.
Vibrations cause
blurry, nearly useless image transmissions. Balance all
props, and if necessary,
the bells of brushless motors. Mount cameras using
foam, elastic bands, rubber
standoffs, and/or other shock-absorbing means
to soak up the shakes from the
motors and props.

Ground Station
Your ground-based equipment is collectively referred to as a “ground
station,”
and includes the video receiver, antenna, monitor or goggles,
battery, and
often a tripod, case, or backpack to house everything.
Ground station designs vary greatly. A good one will be easy to transport,
quick
to set up and take down, and difficult to trip over.

Frequency
A variety of low-cost miniature video transmitters and receivers are
marketed
with FPV in mind. Common frequencies include 5.8 GHz, 2.4
GHz, 1.2 GHz, and 900 MHz.
There are several factors to consider when
choosing a frequency.
1) Where do you live? Different countries regulate the radio spectrum in
different ways. You may want to research your area’s laws to avoid legal
issues.
900 MHz has great obstacle penetration, for example, but may be
reserved for
phones, as in the US.
2) Where do you fly? Different frequencies have different characteristics.
5.8 GHz seems to have good range per watt, but is essentially line-of-sight
and
will not penetrate buildings or even trees. If you fly exclusively in open
areas, 5.8 GHz might be a good choice.
3) What frequency do your controls use? Most R/C radios now operate at
2.4 GHz;
to prevent interference, you may want to avoid that band for your
video
equipment.

Power
Most entry-level video transmitters radiate 100-500 mW. If you want to fly
long-range flights, you may have to get a more expensive, higher power
unit.
Unlike airplanes, FPV multirotors tend to fly shorter-ranged missions,
so you
can still have lots of fun, even without a 10-mile range.

Antennae
The last thing you need when flying FPV is an unreliable video link. The
little
“whip” antenna that came with your video transmitter is useless. You
will want
to build or buy a better one. Three- or four-lobe omnidirectional
“cloverleaf”
or “egg-beater” antennas are a good choice and are easy to
build and cheap to
buy.
Figure 8-1. A true heads-up display: video from drone, overlaid with flight
information
Many people also choose high-gain (but also highly directional) planar
“patch”
antennas for ground station use, and the best-equipped systems
employ
“diversity” setups that consist of two or more separate antennas, to
get the
best of both worlds. Special switching circuitry sends you the best
available
signal at any given time.

On-Screen Display
An on-screen display (OSD) is a little video processor installed in the signal
path between the camera and the video transmitter. It takes information
from
its sensors and injects a graphical data display into the video stream.
OSDs
range in capability and cost, with the fancy ones featuring compass,
GPS,
barometers, telemetry, multiple battery voltage monitors, etc. While
usually
considered an “advanced” FPV system component, you can get a
simple OSD for
about $10 that does one very important thing: monitor and
display the battery
voltage. Knowing when you are about to run out of juice
is pretty important for
any FPV rotorcraft pilot.

Video Display
Some FPV pilots use an LCD monitor. I’ve found that piloting through
video
goggles makes for a much better, more immersive experience. There
are video
goggles made specifically for the FPV hobby, notably those by
Fat Shark. Some
models even have a video receiver built right into the
goggles. I use a pair of
MyVu Crystal goggles, which are general-use video
glasses intended for watching
video from an iPod, etc. I modified them by
adding top and bottom shades of
rigid foam, and a strap from a pair of
sports goggles. As with cameras, you
need to pay attention to resolution
when goggleshopping. There’s no sense using
a 600-line camera with cheap
400-line goggles. As a rule of thumb, you’ll want
a pair with at least
640×480 resolution. If you use an OSD, chances are you
won’t be able to
read the text on the display at a lower resolution.


Chapter 9. Rules of Flight
Flying a UAV makes you a pilot, and
like any pilot, you are responsible for
the safe operation of your aircraft.
The Drone Dudes, Jeffrey Blank and
Andrew Petersen, share their rules of
engagement.
Know your equipment inside and out, and always double-check that
everything is in perfect working order before each flight.
Charge those LiPo batteries inside fireproof bags in a safe location
with
proper ventilation. Understand the hazards and science of LiPo
battery
charging, and keep an eye on the cell voltages yourself as you
charge or
discharge your batteries.
Choose a safe fly zone away from buildings and highly populated areas.
Think about what could happen if your aircraft fails mid-flight.
Understand how changing weather conditions like temperature, altitude
and wind will affect your overall flight performance.
Check your onboard fail-safes and have a coordinated emergency plan
with everyone in the flight area.
Keep a safe distance from subjects and onlookers and always allow for
unexpected drift from your plan.
Keep a clear, safe zone for takeoff and landing.
Make sure your payload is perfectly balanced on your airframe.
Fly safe and stay alert. Listen to your gut and fly within your means.
Do
not let distractions divert your attention and don’t hand the
controls to
anyone without proper training.
Always fly line-of-sight so you can see what’s going on. Do not solely
rely on your GPS or flight controller to do the work for you. These
tools
can fail and you need to be prepared for that. If you are flying
in an FPV
mode (first-person view), use a spotter with binoculars to keep
visual
orientation of your aircraft for you.

It’s a good idea to always fly with a telemetry module that can relay
live
info about your aircraft. Watch your battery voltages for any
irregular
performance and keep your flight times modest, always flying
on the
safe side.
Clear communication is essential. Make sure you have a reliable team
supporting you and that everyone knows the predetermined flight.

Part III. Projects
Nothing helps humans to understand a topic better than doing hands-on
projects about it. We close this book with a collection of project
articles
designed to help you get your hands around the reality of
building and
flying your own drones.
The first article shows how to create the Noodle Copter, a flyable
quadcopter that is about as cheap and as sturdy as possible, since it is made
out of foam! The second article shows how to build a completely
autonomous drone, for approximately $1000. The third article covers the
creation of the WAVECopter, a drone specialized for flying over water! The
fourth project links back to Part One of this book—it shows how to create a
payload mechanism to drop humanitarian supplies from a drone. And we
end the book with an entirely new type of drone: a tricopter, which flies
quite a bit differently from a quadcopter.


Chapter 10. Noodle Copter
Here’s a quadcopter that I designed and built in response to a CrashCast challenge to build a flyable
quadcopter as cheap and as sturdy as possible.
From Make:44 by Mark Harrison

Figure 10-1. Structural supports for this drone are made from styrofoal pool noodles
From a construction standpoint multicopters are interesting because (unlike
helicopters) they have no moving parts and (unlike airplanes) do not depend on
an aerodynamic body to fly. As a result, we see multicopters made from a wide
variety of materials and construction techniques.

I had seen photos of a pool noodle unit previously and wanted to try one for
myself for a few reasons:
Pool noodles are cheap.
It would be a good training unit when friends wanted to try flying. I can’t
imagine much you can to do break a pool noodle!
It would be highly visible. My main quadcopter has really thin arms and is
hard to see at a distance.
It would be easy to light up for night and evening flying.
I wanted to see how simply a working frame could be built. For example,
the motors are simply taped to the frame.
Let’s face it, it’s just funny to think of flying pool noodles!
If you build something like this, I encourage you to keep to the original spirit of
the thing: improvise, have fun, and don’t be afraid to try out new ideas!
Figure 10-2. Pool noodle copter lit up with internal LEDs
In keeping with the spirit of a pool noodle quadcopter, I wanted the
construction to be as simple as possible (for example, the motors are taped to
the arms). I bodged it together in an evening with materials that were at hand.
While originally done as an experiment in minimal design and construction, I

was happy enough with the results that I fly it regularly and use it as a trainer
when somebody wants to try flying.

Step #1: Cut the Arms to Length
Cut four pieces to 15.5 inches, and one piece to 5.5 inches. The four pieces
will be the front and back arms (yellow in the picture) and the left and right
side arms (red and green in the picture). The small piece will be the battery
mount.

Step #2: Trim the Side Arms
The side arms will be glued to the front and back arms, so we need the ends
of these pieces to be curved. It will be easiest to do this with a jig. Get a
piece of thin scrap plywood and cut a two-inch circle, using either a hole
saw or coping saw. Cut across this hole so you have a semicircle at the edge
of the wood.

Take each of the side arms and the battery mount, and cut a semicircle out of
the end of each piece. Be sure the ends of each piece are lined up. You
should be able to dry fit the frame together with no gaps. I had to cut a
couple of scrap pieces in order to get the feel for cutting the curve just right.
You can compensate for small gaps while gluing, but if the gaps are too big
try recutting the piece.


Step #3: Reinforce the Arms
Make a 1/4-inch slit along the top of each of the four arms. Be careful not to
cut through to the center. Insert the 12-inch carbon-fiber rods into the slits
on the left and right arms, and the 15-inch carbon-fiber rods into the slits on
the front and back arms. I originally wanted to try 3/16-inch fiberglass kite
rods, but I couldn’t find a place to get them conveniently. Some pieces of
split bamboo would probably work as well.

Squeeze glue into the slits so that there are no dry areas in the slit or around
the rod. This is important, as gaps in the slit will allow the arms to flex.
Allow the glue to dry.
I used Beacon Foam-Tac glue, and it worked really well. The only
requirement for the glue is that it not melt the foam. Try gluing some scraps
together if you’re not sure.

Step #4: Attach the Arms
Make marks on the front and back arms, five inches from each side. Glue
the left and right arms to the front and back arms, centering the left and right
arms on the marks you made on the front and back arms. Be sure you’ve got
glue over the entire curved mating surfaces. Try to eliminate all gaps, but if
you’ve got some small gaps it will be fine. Check your alignment, and
secure with blue tape while the glue dries.
Do the same with the battery mount. It fits centered between the left and
right arms.

The frame is complete after all the glue has dried. Check your joints, and
make sure they’re tight and strong. The frame should be relatively rigid (by
pool noodle standards, at least).
Run a length of strapping tape along the bottoms of all four arms: front and
back, and left and right. Make sure it’s tight and smooth. This, in
conjunction with the rods in the top of the arms, will eliminate flex.

Step #5: Mount the Motors
Cut four plywood scraps to a size that allows you to conveniently tape your
motors to the arm. With my roll of tape, a dimension of 1 inch by 3.5 inches
worked well. I originally tried zip ties, but they cut into the arm and didn’t
keep the motors level. Strapping tape works perfectly.
Tape the four motors to each end of the front and back arms. Use strapping
tape on each side of the motor. Run the tape all around the arm so it overlaps
with itself. Make sure it’s smooth and that the motors are flat on top of the
arms. You can adjust the motor position by wiggling them a bit.

Step #6: Configure the Center Mount
Cut out some of the bottom battery mount. There should be just enough room
for a 3S 2200 mAh battery to fit. I bodged the flight control board mount by hot
gluing the electronics to a piece of scrap coroplast plastic (just about anything
flat will work), and then attaching the coroplast to the top of the battery mount
with two velcro straps, one on each side. A third velcro strap holds the battery
in place.

Step #7: Flight Electronics
Configuring the flight electronics is the same as for any other quadcopter.
You can follow Chad Kapper’s excellent instructions here. The Ardupilot
Mega is my preferred flight controller board, but I’ve tested the KK2 and
Flip controllers and they also worked well. Note that everything is taped,
hot-glued, or zip-tied to the top of the unit. I did this because I wanted to
finish it quickly, and I honestly thought I would recycle the parts after my
friends and flying buddies had gotten a good laugh.

If I make another frame, I’ll try running some of the wires, etc., either through
the arm or embedding them like the rods. Interestingly, while it’s incredibly
ugly viewed from the top, it looks quite nice from the air since you’re mainly
viewing the bottom. The farther away it is, the nicer it looks.

I didn’t have a power distribution board handy, so I used Wago connectors
to do this. Here are some notes on doing this: http://eastbay-
rc.blogspot.com/2011/03/update-wago-connector-for-power.html.

Step #8: Adding Lights
Lights were simple to add. LED strip lights fit perfectly into the hollow pool
noodles. I used a separate battery for the lights so I wouldn’t have to run an
extra wire to the main battery.

I make a big mistake though. I cut a slot in the arms for the LED batteries.
They were a perfect fit, but the cut in the arm allows the arms to twist,
reducing the rigidity of the frame. I taped a couple of extra carbon-fiber rods
to the plywood motor mounts in an X shape to counteract this, but if you
don’t cut into the arms that won’t be necessary.

At night the yellow arms were quite a lot brighter than the red and green
arms. I arranged it so that the yellow arms were powered by a 2S battery and
the red and green arms were powered by a 3S battery.

Step #9: Test Flights and More Information
The Noodle Copter flies quite well. The fat arms catch the wind more than
other copters, but it’s stable even in pretty high winds. We maidened it with
gust of wind up to about 15 MPH: http://bit.ly/1WO7qSI.

Here’s a few more articles on the Noodle Copter. You can get more
information on the Noodle Copter here: http://bit.ly/1q5S3e0,
http://bit.ly/1T9mhrQ, and http://bit.ly/1pLSV7T. You can
follow the
progress of the Noodle Copter and other East Bay RC projects
here:
http://eastbay-rc.blogspot.com and http://bit.ly/1pLT6zS.
There are a lot of
tutorials on making and flying RC craft of various
sorts, and on using the
various electronic bits that make model aircraft
fly these days.



Chapter 11. The Handycopter
UAV
There are essentially two configurations for a quadcopter: the “+” frame and
the “X” frame. Here
we’ve chosen to build an X frame so your onboard camera can
have a clear forward view.
From Make:37 by Chad Kapper
We’ll take you all the way from building the airframe to adding autonomous
flight capability with ArduPilot. Once you’ve got it working, you could
program this drone, for instance, to automatically visit a series of landmarks or
other waypoints and take pictures of them.
Time Required
A weekend
Cost
Airframe
$30–$60
Avionics
$500–$800

Materials
For the airframe:
Conduit clamps, 1 1/2” (4)
Square dowels, wood, 1/2"×36” (2)
Machine screws: flat-head M3×6mm (8); M3×20mm (12); M3×25mm (4)
Hex nuts, M3 (8)
Flat washers, M3 (4)
Thread-locking compound
Liquid electrical tape
Polycarbonate sheet, 0.093"×8"×10”
Zip ties, 4” (100-pack)
Flexible PVC coupler, 1¼” to 1¼”
Aluminum bar, 1/8"×3/4"×36”
Hook/loop strap, 1/2"×8” (2)
Hook/loop tape, 3/4"×18”
Weatherstrip tape, foam, 3⁄8"×12”
Double-sided tape, 1"×5’
Wire, stranded insulated, 12 AWG, 12” red and 12” black
For the avionics:
Copper pipe reducer, 1” to 1/2”
Gimbal motors (2), iPower 2208-80
Gimbal controller, iFlight V3.0
Flight controller, 3D Robotics ArduPilot Mega 2.6
GPS module, 3D Robotics LEA-6H
R/C transmitter, 5+ channels
R/C receiver, 5+ channels

Motors, 850kV (4) AC2830
Propellers, Turnigy 9047R SF (2)
Propellers, Turnigy 9047L SF (2)
Electronic speed controllers (4)
M/M servo leads, 10cm (5)
Camera, GoPro Hero3 White Edition
LiPo battery, 2,200mAh, 3S 20C
Battery monitor, APM Power Module with XT60 connectors

Tools
Computer with printer
Straightedge
Plastic scoring knife
Drill and bits: 1⁄8”, 3⁄16”, 1/4”, 5⁄16”, 3⁄8”
Wood saw
Phillips screwdrivers: #1 and #2
Pliers
Wire cutters / strippers
Hacksaw
Soldering iron and solder
Scissors
Pencil
File
Hobby knife
Figure 11-1 is a look at the overall wiring diagram for the Handycopter UAV.
We’ll then take you step-by-step through the process of creating it.

Figure 11-1. Wiring diagram for the Handycopter UAV

Step #1: Fabricate the Body
The copter’s central hub consists of two polycarbonate plates. Download the
cutting and drilling templates from http://makezine.com/the-handycopter-
uav, print them
full-size, and affix them temporarily to your polycarbonate
sheet.

Use a plastic cutter to score and snap each plate to shape, then drill out the
holes with a 1/8” bit.


Step #2: Cut and Drill the Booms
Saw four square dowel booms to 10"–11” each. Shorter booms will make
your quad more
agile, and longer booms will make it more stable.

Drill two 3mm holes, one 6mm and one 26mm (on-centers) from the end of
each
boom.


Step #3: Assemble the Frame
Secure the booms between the hub plates using four M3×25mm screws
through the
inner holes and four M3×20mm screws through the outer holes.

Once the booms are in place and you’re happy with the fit, apply thread-
locking
compound to the outer screws only, add nuts, and tighten them
down.

Thread the inner nuts on just loosely, for now.

Step #4: Wire the Power Hub
Six components will connect to the power hub—the four electronic speed
controllers (ESCs), the power module, and the gimbal controller board.
First, cut off the male XT60 connector from the APM power module cable.
Then strip about 1/4” of the insulation from each wire, red and black, on all
six components, and tin the stripped ends. Saw a 3/8” ring from each end of
the copper reducer, and file off any rough edges.
Solder each of the six red positive leads to the smaller ring, and the
corresponding six black negative leads to the larger ring. Wrap the smaller
ring
in 3/8” foam weatherstripping tape and slip the outer ring over it.

Finally, paint the entire hub with liquid electrical tape for
insulation.
Wiring the motors and electronic speed controllers together is tedious.
Store-bought distribution boards are convenient, but cost space and weight. I
prefer this homemade distribution hub made of rings of nested copper pipe
to keep things lean and tidy.

Step #5: Drill Motor Shaft Clearances
Here we’ll show you how to make your own landing struts from ordinary
conduit
clamps. You can also use inexpensive prefab combination landing
gear / motor
mounts that simplify the process quite a bit, and look better to
boot. Please
check out our product line at http://www.flitetest.com if you’re
interested in the prefab
option.

If you go the homemade route, you’ll be mounting the motors directly
to the
booms. Mark and drill a shallow blind recess in each, so the shaft can
spin
freely. A 5⁄16” bit works well for this.


Step #6: Mount the Motors
Cut down the bracket that came bundled with each motor and use two
M3×20mm screws to clamp a motor to the end of each boom.

Figure 11-2. Only two screws are used on each motor for mounting, and the factory
brackets are cut down to save weight
Verify that each motor shaft spins freely when the screws are fully
tightened. If not,
double-check that its boom is properly recessed
underneath.

Smooth any rough edges on the bracket with a file.

Step #7: Add the Landing Gear
Slip the power hub between the top and bottom body plates and route the
ESC
power leads out along the four booms. If you bought motors and ESCs
from the same
manufacturer, there’s a good chance they came with
preinstalled “bullet”
connectors. In this case, simply plug the motor leads
into the ESC leads and
coil any slack under the boom. Or you can solder the
motor wires directly to the
ESC boards for a cleaner build. Secure the motor
leads, the ESC power leads,
and any leftover slack tightly against the booms
with zip ties.

Use wire cutters to snip off one side of each of four conduit clamps, leaving
a J-shaped foot behind. Smooth the cut end with a file, then file or grind two
small notches beside the remaining mounting hole as shown. Attach a foot
to the
end of each boom, just inside the motor mount, using a zip tie run
through these
notches.


Step #8: Install the Shock Mounts
Remove the hose clamps from the flexible PVC coupler and save them for
another
project. Cut two 3/4” rings from the coupler’s rubber body with a
sharp hobby
knife. Align each ring across two of the frame’s protruding
inner screws and
press down hard with your thumbs to mark two drilling
spots.

Drill 1/8"-diameter
holes on the dents, through one side of the ring only.
Install the rings over
the frame screws with M3 flat washers and nuts.
Secure with thread-locking
compound when you’re happy with the fit.
The gimbal and battery shelf are attached via two shock mounts cut from
thick flexible rubber tubing, which helps isolate the camera from propeller
vibrations and adds a bit of space, above, to mount the gimbal controller
board.


Step #9: Build the Camera/ Battery Mount
The gimbal and battery shelf are assembled from three simple L-shaped
brackets.
We refer to these as the shelf, roll, and pitch brackets.
Saw a 36” length of 1/8"×3/4” aluminum bar stock into two 18” sections,
then
saw one of those into two 9” sections, giving three pieces total. Make a
right-angle
bend in each section as indicated on the templates, working over
a piece of wood
or other scrap with a beveled edge to increase the bend
radius to about 3/8”.
(Too sharp a bend can overstress and weaken the
aluminum.) After you’ve made the
bends, cut each bracket to final size per
the templates.

Accurately locate, mark, and drill a centered row of three 1/8"-diameter
holes on the short leg of the shelf and pitch brackets, and on both legs of the
roll bracket. In each case, the outermost hole should be 3mm from the
bracket
end on-center, and the holes themselves 9.5mm apart on-centers.
Finally,
step-drill the center hole in each row up to 3/8” to provide clearance
for the
motor shaft.

Use two M3×6mm screws to attach the bottom of a gimbal motor to the
shelf
bracket, and then two more to attach the top of the motor to the longer
arm of the
roll bracket.
Attach the bottom of the second motor to the free arm of the roll bracket,
and its top to the pitch bracket, in just the same way.

Step #10: Mount the Camera and Battery
I designed this quad to balance properly with a 3S 2,200mAh LiPo battery and
a
GoPro Hero3 White. If you use other equipment be sure you keep the CG
(center of
gravity) in the middle of your airframe. Here’s how to get it
balanced.
With the frame upside-down, balance the camera, brackets, and battery
across
the two shock mounts on the underside of the frame. Adjust the
position of the
whole assembly forward and backward along the frame until
the entire quad
balances evenly between your fingertips, centered on either
side of the body.

For the gimbal motors to operate smoothly, the camera must be balanced
along
both axes. Weaken the adhesive on a piece of double-sided tape by
sticking it to
your shirt and peeling it off. Remove the backing and apply the
exposed side to
the pitch bracket, then use the weakened side to hold your
GoPro in place while
you adjust it to find the balance point. Once you’ve
got it, use an elastic band
or a velcro strap, in addition to the tape, to hold
the camera securely in place.

Once you’ve got the CG right, fix the shelf bracket to the shock mounts with
two sets of crossed zip ties. Apply hook-and-loop tape on top of the shelf
bracket and on the underside of the battery, and fix the battery in place. Add
a hook-and-loop strap around both bracket and battery as an added
precaution.

TIP
Though the GoPro is a tough camera, you may want to build a “dummy” version
having the
same weight, and approximately the same size, to mount during your
maiden and subsequent
shakedown flights.

Step #11: Install the Avionics
Arrange your flight controller, receiver and other modules before attaching
them to the airframe. Once you’re happy with the layout, use double-sided
tape to secure everything to the frame. Download the wiring diagram for a
detailed list of all connections.
Attach the flight controller. In this build we use 3D Robotics’ ArduPilot
Mega (APM) 2.6, which contains an accelerometer and must be oriented
correctly with respect to the frame. Align the arrow on the APM case toward
the front of the quad and fix it in place with double-sided tape.

Add the GPS/compass module, which fits neatly on the rear extension of the
bottom frame plate, and also must be aligned with the arrow forward. Tape
the module in place and connect the cable to the APM’s “GPS” port.
Starting from the starboard-front position and proceeding clockwise (viewed
from above), connect the ESC signal cables to APM outputs 1, 4, 2, and 3.
Mount the receiver alongside the APM with double-sided tape, and connect
channels 1–5 to the corresponding inputs on the APM.


Step #12: Install the Gimbal Controller
The gimbal controller consists of two boards: the larger controller board and
the smaller IMU sensor unit. The controller board goes above the shelf bracket,
in the space provided by the shock mounts.

Cover the top surface of the bracket with foam weatherstripping to keep the
solder points from shorting against the bare aluminum, then fix the controller
board to it with zip ties. The IMU detects the orientation of the camera and
needs to be mounted in the same plane; fix it to the underside of the pitch
bracket with double-sided tape, and run the connector cable back to the control
board. Connect the three wires from each gimbal motor to the ports on the
controller. Secure all wires with zip ties, leaving plenty of slack for the gimbal
to rotate freely.

Step #13: Configure the Software
The flight controller, ESCs, and gimbal controller all need to be calibrated
and configured before flight. Refer to the bundled or online instructions that
came with your equipment. Specific tutorials are available through
http://makezine.com/the-handycopter-uav.

Step #14: Add the Props
Before you install the propellers, put bits of masking tape on the motor
shafts to make it easy to see which way they are spinning. From above,
motors 3 and 4 should spin clockwise, and motors 1 and 2 counterclockwise
(see Chapter 3). If a motor is reversed, simply swap any two of the three
leads connecting it to the ESC.
The most important factor for steady flight is balanced props! There are lots
of tricks for doing this, but the simplest involves sanding the heavier side of
each blade until the prop balances level on a horizontal shaft. (Sand only the
flat, not the leading or trailing edges.)

Once the props are balanced, install them on the shafts and tighten the nuts.
You’ll use two conventional airplane “tractor” props and two reverse-
pitched “pusher” props. Motors 1 and 2 take tractor props, and motors 3 and
4 take pusher props. (If you’re not using the APM flight controller, your
prop configuration may be different.) Once you’ve got it right, mark the
number and direction of rotation for each motor on its boom for easy
reference.
Make sure the props are balanced, the parts are securely fastened, and none
of the props, gyros, or controls are reversed.


WARNING
If you need to reverse a motor, be sure to swap the motor control leads only, not the ESC
power hub leads. Don’t ever reverse the power connections on an ESC!

The Maiden Flight
Verify that all your radio trim settings are at zero (if you have to trim, do
it
through the APM, not the radio). Wait for wind-free conditions to actually
make the first flight.

Conclusion
Don’t expect your quad to fly perfectly the first time. You’ll likely need to
make some tweaks and adjustments before it flies well. If you’ve never flown a
quad before, remember to work the controls gently, as most beginners tend to
oversteer. Your first goal should be to hover about 24” off the ground for 1-2
seconds and then immediately land. Once you can do that consistently, try to
take off, rise above the “ground effect” zone (3'-4’), and then land gently.
Work
your way up gradually to longer and higher flights.
It is likely that you will crash at some point, especially if this is your first
multirotor. Keep a positive attitude, pay attention, and try to learn something
every time. Crashing, learning, repairing, and improving your skills and your
machine is part of the fun and challenge of the hobby.


Chapter 12. WAVEcopter: A
Waterproof Quadcopter
WAVEcopter is a fully waterproof multicopter frame that I have constructed
mostly from readily
available and cheap electrical parts. My reasons for
building it were to gain a new perspective on
surfing photography, to do
aerial surveying of event sites, and to satisfy my general fascination
with
robotics and aviation.
From Make:44 by Alec Short
I rebuilt the copter after it suffered a serious collision into a cliff
on the south
coast of Cornwall, England. (I believe it was a pilot error
after relying too
much on a GPS fix and moving the copter from its initial
takeoff point.)
Although this was a serious collision—full throttle
into a granite cliff face at
about 60 feet—all of the electronics and
camera equipment were unscathed.
This was testament to the ruggedness of
the airframe; damage was limited to

broken props, a cracked hub, and
severed motor wires, all easily replaced for
minimal cost.
The copter is now on build 2 as I’m planning on replacing the Naza M flight
controller with an ArduCopter control board to enable mission planning
with
waypoints.
There are lots of different setups for copter electronics, so I’ve skimmed
over
some of that detail as I think there are better setups than mine (like
the
ArduCopter). The most important part of this project is being able to
waterproof the frame while housing an optimum balance of battery power
and
weight.
The drone has made successful flights of over 10 minutes with no apparent
overheating of speed controllers or motors, which was a big initial
concern in a
airtight/waterproof frame. I’m new to multirotors and I’ve
read a lot about this,
so it’s either a myth or I’ve been lucky so far.
You can add heatsinks for the
electronics on the underneath of the main
housing if you’re overly concerned.
I hope you enjoy the project!

Step #1: Prepare the Hub
Place the 4-way PVC intersection facedown inside the weatherproof
electrical socket box. You’ll have to trim the ends with a hacksaw to
ensure
a snug fit.

Remove the hinged lid from the main box to make things easily accessible.
Pop out the center lugs and make sure the 4-way intersection aligns with the
holes. It should do perfectly.

You can see I cut out holes in the base of the box to attach heatsinks, but I
ended up not using them in the next build as they didn’t seem to get hot.

Step #2: Prepare the Rotor Arms
Cut the 1000mm tube into four equal lengths of 250mm. I used a hacksaw.
Take all four conduit reducers and grind away the little lip you can feel on
the inside, so it’s flush with the internal diameter. I just held them in my
hand and used a Dremel with a drum sander attachment. Make sure you can
now slide the carbon tube through the reducer.
NOTE
You might find you have sanded too much—if so, use another reducer. The tube needs to
slide through with a good push and no less.

Now lightly tap the reducer into the 25mm thread adapter until it stops.
Unscrew the lock ring from the adapter and poke the threads through the
main box, then screw the lock ring back on to form a tight connection. Do
this for all four connections.

Now take the carbon tubes and push them/tap them with a rubber mallet
through the thread adapters and into the 4-way hub as far as you can. Make
sure each arm protrudes from the box an equal distance as the opposite arm
(within 1mm–2mm).

Step #3: Make the Motor Mounts
Cut both ends off the 3-way inspection tees, as far back as you can. Make
sure the cuts are square. Depending on your motors you might have to glue
a tap (faucet) washer on top of the inspection cover to give the motor screws
enough clearance. (I trashed a motor here by screwing into the windings, so
be careful.) The washer also acts as a vibration cushion for the motor.
It’s very important to upgrade the screws that come with the inspection
cover as the motors will pull them free. I used some M4 machine bolts and
just drove (forced!) them through the threads. It’s probably smarter to use
smaller bolts (M3) with nuts.

Attach the rubber grommets to blank off the cuts you made earlier. This is a
bit fiddly but they do fit; use a small flat-blade screwdriver to pry them in.
They make an excellent seal once in.
Attach the motor mounts to your rotor arms by tapping slightly until they
are level and tight. You may have some slight movement or twist on the
mounts that may seem alarming but we can fix this later with some PVC
pipe welding cement.

Make a hole in the inspection cover just big enough to thread the motor
wires through. You can seal this later with Sugru.
Now that everything is fitting together and you’re happy—take it all apart,
as you’re about to install the electronics.

Step #4: Install the Power Electronics
As there are many different ESC/motor/flight controller options out there, I
will assume the reader has a basic understanding of how these are wired up.
It’s pretty simple.
For the wiring harness of the 30A Naza ESC, measure the distance from the
motor mounts to the center of the box and add 300mm. Cut your silicone
wire and begin soldering the bullet connectors that you’ll use to connect the
power distribution board. (You don’t have to use one of these boards, but I
found it saved a lot of time.)

It’s a good idea to number or color-code the ESCs at this stage because
you’re going to be stuffing a lot of wires and you can easily get confused
when you’re calibrating the flight controller. I used little coloured stickers
for a reference.
Reattach your rotor arms and motor mounts and drill a 25mm hole on top of
the 4-way hub. Thread the wires through the rotor arms—you’ll want about
150mm of cable to play with at either end of the arms.

Insert four 50mm M3 machine screws through the underside of the PDB
(power distribution board) and secure on the topside with lock nuts. (These
will form part of your standoff for the flight controller.) Attach the PDB
where you drilled the 25mm hole, with the battery connectors facing the
hinge of the lid. I used sticky velcro tape because I knew I might need to
take it off. As you are attaching the power board, pull through the wires
three at a time and attach a small cable tie.
You’ll have great fun now squeezing all this in and making it look tidy and
safe! It’s worth adding some hot glue to the PDB connections as they are not
very well insulated. Once you’re confident it’s all connected correctly, it’s
time to install the flight controller.

Step #5: Install the Flight Controller
Cut out a scrap of plastic that will fit inside your box and support your flight
controller (FC). Drill four holes in the plastic that will align with the
machine screw standoffs on your PDB.

Attach your ESC control wires to the FC. Slide some 10mm round spacers
on the machine screws on the PDB. Fix the FC to the plastic support (I used
double-sided tape as indicated by DJI) and gently push it down onto the
spacers, then attach lock nuts and screw them tight.

Step #6: Prepare the Batteries
It’s very important to get the specified battery size that will fit under the lid
of the box. Each battery’s dimensions are: 102mm × 37mm × 24mm.

I just used gaffer’s tape to bind the two batteries together and then used a
XT60 harness battery splitter to wire them into the PDB.

Step #7: Install the GPS Puck
Drill a 50mm hole in the center of the hinged lid. Then glue the 63.5mm
plastic dished head on the top of the lid with superglue or PVC pipe weld.
Key the surface lightly with sandpaper to help the glue.

Install the GPS puck in the hole in the lid and secure it with strips of velcro
tape. These will do double duty to secure the battery pack as well.

Step #8: Install Undercarriage and Floats
Prepare your undercarriage. The landing gear kit I bought had two trays that
attach to the frame, where you can easily attach camera accessories, FPV
kit, etc.


Now attach the floats. I used velcro straps to attach them to the
undercarriage. Your installation may vary.

Step #9: Flight Check and Calibration
I won’t go into great detail here because there are many different flight
controllers. Also, you’ll notice I only have a six-channel TX/RX system and
this isn’t ideal when using GPS and RTH functions on the Naza. I’ll be
upgrading the drone to an ArduCopter flight system in the near future and
let you know how I get on.
If you’re using the DJI Naza-M Lite setup, you’ll find instructions online for
calibrating the controller with your computer via USB:
http://bit.ly/21KzqYT.

One nice thing about the Naza is how perfectly snug the VU fits under the
clip of the main box.
Install your motors, without props. As long as they’re brushless, which most
are, then no waterproofing is necessary. It’s worthwhile spraying them after
water takeoffs and landings with silicone spray to dry them out. (I’ve also
heard great things about Liquipel; if you try it, let us know how it works for
you.

Connect the batteries and test all your flight control systems on the drone
before attaching the props to the motors.

Step #10: Final Checks and Sealing
It’s now time to double-check that all seals are good. If any of the motor
mounts or reducers are twisting in the frame, detach them and add a small
amount of PVC weld to secure them.
Don’t add any PVC weld to the round 4-way junction box. If (and when) an
arm breaks, you’ll easily be able to remove and replace that one arm rather
than remove the entire hub.
Happy flying!


Chapter 13. Payload Box and Drop
Mechanism for Drones and R/C
Planes
When Uplift Aeronautics founder Mark Jacobsen envisioned using a fleet of drones to drop food and
medical supplies on war-torn regions, he needed a device to make that happen. The answer was to modify
fixed-wing foam UAVs, and the result was five different designs, including the Waliid, pictured here.
By Michael Thomas Taylor
Figure 13-1. Photo by Hep Svadja (all other photos courtesy of Uplift Aeronautics)
This project is a set of instructions for building and installing a payload box and drop
mechanism for the X-UAV Talon R/C airplane. Design credit goes to Brandon Fetroe
of Uplift Aeronautics.
The files for the custom parts can be found on Uplift’s Github at
https://github.com/upliftaero/waliid.

Figure 13-2. Bottom view of aircraft with payload box and drop mechanism installed

Parts/Tools
Wood, 1/8” sheets
Nylon bolts, four 1”, four 1.25”, 20 threads per inch (8)
Nylon nuts, 20 threads per inch (8)
Metal washer
Servo, 9g (micro size) analog metal
Metal pin/control rod
Metal tube, 1/2” long, 1/4” diameter guide hole for pin
Bungee cord
X-UAV Talon kit
The system consists of three major components:
The payload box provides a space to store and secure the payload in the fuselage
of the X-UAV Talon. It is recessed into the body of the aircraft through a hole cut
in the bottom of the fuselage.
The payload box is secured to four mounting brackets glued into the sides of the
airframe. Four nylon bolts attach from the outside to hold it in place.
The drop mechanism is a servo that extends and retracts a metal pin poking
through the side of the body. A bungee cord wraps around the bottom of the
payload and attaches to the pin to hold it in place.

Figure 13-3. The bungee secures to the pin of the drop mechanism; the servo retracts the pin to
release the bungee and drop the payload
The package is secured inside the airplane by a bungee cord tied at one end to the
wooden plate in the nose of the aircraft. It is then stretched across the payload box
opening to a pin on the opposite side. When the servo retracts the pin, the bungee
will release and drop the payload.
Most of the custom parts were laser cut out of 1/8″ or 1/16″ plywood, with files
provided in the Git repository. In the absence of access to a laser cutter, most parts
can be cut with hand tools, omitting the grid of holes in the box (done to save
weight). SolidWorks part drawings are also available to work from in the repository.

Step #1: Construct Payload Box
1. The payload box provides a space to hold the payload inside the aircraft. It is
designed to hold a single 3"×7.5"×6” cardboard box.
2. Assemble the front, back, top and two side plates to make an open-sided box as
shown. Secure the parts with wood glue or superglue. The taller side will face
towards the front of the aircraft, and will be referred to as the “front” of the
box.
3. Attach the bolt plate to the front and rear of the box. The plate must be aligned
with the large holes in the front facing side. The plate serves as a mounting
point for a pair of 1/4” 20 nylon bolts that will secure the payload box to the
mounting bracket.

4. Align the plate so the bolts slot through perpendicular to the box as shown. DO
NOT GLUE THE BOLTS TO THE PLATE—the bolts are meant to be inserted
after the box has been placed in the airframe.
5. Attach the second bolt plate to the rear of the payload box.

6. (Optional) Strengthen the corners of the payload box with segments of balsa
wood.

Step #2: Build Mounting Bolt Assembly
1. The payload box is held inside the aircraft by four nylon bolts that attach from
the outside. To give these bolts somewhere to attach to, a mounting assembly
attaches to the end of the box.
2. The payload box (1) is attached to the mounting assembly (2), which is
attached to the airframe by the bolts (3).

3. Each assembly has two nylon nuts that will hold the external bolts, securing the
whole payload assembly to the airframe. Use superglue to assemble three sides
of the wooden parts, then glue the nylon nuts inside each end. Then glue the
last wooden piece to complete the assembly.

Step #3: Construct Mounting Brackets
1. These brackets give the nylon bolts a place to slot into the side of the airframe.
They are long enough to allow some flexibility in how far forward/aft the
payload box can be placed. Each bracket is 3” long by 3/4” tall.
2. Assemble the mounting brackets by stacking three of the laser cut pieces as
shown and gluing them together.


Step #4: Assemble Front Brace
1. The final custom part is a new front brace for the wooden frame in the center of
the fuselage. The new front brace replaces the stock front brace in order to
provide enough room to fully insert the payload box into the airplane.
2. Glue the main piece (center) and two of the supports (outsides) together. Install
in place of the original kit part. The middle piece fits into the slots for the stock
kit front brace.


Step #5: Modify Airframe
1. Cut the payload box hole in the bottom of the airframe. The hole should be
along the centerline. The 5.5” from the rear lip is approximate. The hole can be
moved more fore/aft to shift the center of gravity. It may be necessary to cut
notches for the bolt plate and edges of the box to fit.
2. Then cut the mounting bracket holes. It is important that the mounting brackets
are in line with the mounting assembly when the payload box is installed.

3. It is a good idea to install the payload box and take note of the mounting
assembly locations before cutting the holes for the mounting brackets. (See
Steps 1 and 2.)
4. Cut two 3"× 3/4” rectangular holes in the side of the fuselage to fit the
mounting brackets. Adjust the location of the holes fore/aft depending on
where the box will finally sit in the airframe.

5. If you are modifying a new airframe, the top of the holes for the mounting
braces align with the interior foam molding as shown.

Step #6: Install Front Brace
1. Install the new front brace for the wooden frame. If the kit has not been
assembled yet, simply replace the old front brace with the new part when
building the wooden frame for the center of the fuselage. If modifying an
already built kit, cut the old X brace and glue on the outside pieces from Step 4
to strengthen it.

Step #7: Install Bungee and Payload Box
1. Tie a length of bungee cord to the front plate in the nose. It should be long
enough to reach out one front mounting bracket and across the hole cut for the
payload to the other side rear mounting bracket (see photo in intro). Feed the
other end through one of the front mounting brackets and tie a metal washer on
the end.
2. Insert the payload box into the hole cut in the bottom of the fuselage. The tall
end faces the front of the aircraft. It should be nearly completely recessed into

the airframe.

Step #8: Bolt It In
1. Place two 1” long 1/4” nylon bolts through the holes in the bolt plate on the
front and back of the box once it is in the airframe.
2. Note: The bolt plates in the photo are from an older design; see Step 1 for an
updated design.

3. Place the mounting assembly over the bolts on the box. Secure with nuts.
Secure the payload box with 1.5” long nylon bolts through the mounting
brackets into the nuts (as seen in Step 2) in the mounting assembly. 4X: Front
and back, and on both sides.


Chapter 14. Build Your First
Tricopter
They fly smoother and make better videos than quads. Build the Maker Hangar Tricopter and see for
yourself!
From Make:44 by Lucas Weakley
Quadcopters are a little easier to build, but tricopters have advantages that
make them more exciting to fly—especially for shooting aerial video. I built
my first one in 2010, inspired by David Windestal’s beautiful aerial GoPro
videos. I didn’t get many flights out of that first build, but I learned a lot. After
building several more, I’ve developed an affordable kit that anyone can build—
the Maker Hangar Tricopter.

Why Fly Tri?
A tricopter’s three motors are usually separated by 120°, not 90° like a
quadcopter’s. This makes them great for video because you can place the
camera really close to the body and still have no propellers in view. And where
quads must rely on counter-rotating propellers to handle torque and balance the
aircraft, a tricopter can use identical props because it has a special servo in the
back—a yaw servo—that twists the tail motor to counter torque.
Tricopters fly differently, too. With their dedicated motor for yaw (turning),
they fly with more fluid, natural-looking movements—they can bank, pitch,
and yaw like an airplane, but still hover like a helicopter. A quadcopter’s flight
is more robotic, as the controller board calculates the precise rotation for all
four motors to create the proper torque and balance to yaw the aircraft. If you
let go of the stick, a quad stops turning abruptly; for video work, this can be
obvious and distracting. Let go of a tricopter’s stick and the tilted tail motor
takes a moment to return to a hovering position; this gives you a slow stop and
even a little overshoot, as though a person were moving the camera.
Finally, tricopters are a lot of fun to fly, especially for stunts and acrobatics.
The tilting motor also gives you much higher yaw speeds—that means they
turn faster.

A Tricopter for Makers
The Maker Hangar Tricopter is made of wood—hackable, easy to drill and cut,
and a natural absorber of vibration, the enemy of aerial video. The airframe is
big, with plenty of room for large controller boards, video transmitters, drop
mechanisms, or whatever you can imagine. And we widened the front arms to
about 150° so our tricopter is more agile.
The kit includes a 3D-printed tail assembly and all the hardware you’ll need,
plus a wire rope vibration absorber that will pretty much erase camera
vibrations even if your propellers are unbalanced. A carbon-fiber hinge
provides a strong, smooth connection between the tail motor and airframe.
Finally, like most tricopters, the two front arms lock in place for flight, then
fold back neatly for transportation and storage.

Parts
Maker Hangar Tricopter Kit—$85 from http://bit.ly/1D9wNWU
The kit includes:
Laser-cut plywood airframe parts (download the files from Dropbox)
3D-printed tail assembly (download the files from Dropbox)
Carbon-fiber hinge pieces
Oak square dowels, 7/16"×7/16"×12” (3) for the arms
Bolts, stainless steel, M3: 25mm (8), 6mm (4), 10mm (16), and 22mm (8)
Lock nuts, M3 (25)
Washers, M3 (16) and M4 (2)
Bolts, nylon, 6-32×3/8” (4)
Nuts, nylon 6-32 (4)
Standoffs, 6-32×1-1/2” (4)
Cable ties (20)
Push rods, 2-1/2"×0.047” (2)
Push rod connectors (2)
Velcro straps (2)
Wire rope, 3” lengths (4)
Electronics (not included)—see the kit web page for complete
recommendations:
Flight controller board (see Step 12 below)
R/C receiver to match your R/C transmitter
Motors, brushless outrunner, 900kV (3) Emax GT2215/12
ESCs, 20A (3) Emax Simon
Props, 10×4.7 (3)
Batteries, LiPo, 3,300mAh (2)

Servo, micro
Servo extension, 6”
Wire, 16 gauge stranded
Heat-shrink tubing
Servo cable, male to male
JST connector (optional)

Tools
Drill and bits
Pliers, needlenose
Pliers, side cutting
Wire cutters/strippers
Hot glue gun
Cyanoacrylate (CA) glue
Screwdriver
Hex driver set
Adjustable wrench
Sandpaper
File
Hobby knife
Soldering iron and solder
Heat gun or hair dryer
Helping hands (optional)
It’s a great kit for anyone wanting to get into multicopters or aerial
photography. You can also build it totally from scratch: download the PDF
plans, laser cutter layouts, 3D files for printing, flight controller settings, and
watch the how-to video series in this Dropbox folder.

Specs
Flight time: 12 minutes
Frame weight: 325g
Flight weight: 1kg
Compatible with 8″–10″ props
Wire rope vibration absorber
22mm motor mounts

Step #1: Sand and Paint
Sand down any burrs or splinters on the wooden parts. If you wish, paint with a
couple of light coats.

Step #2: Assemble the Hinged Tail
To build the hinge, glue the 2-1/2” carbon rod flush into the 3/4” carbon tube
using CA glue. Hot-glue this end into the 3D-printed motor mount. Also hot-
glue the 1” carbon tube into the 3D-printed tail piece.
Now put it together: slide an M4 washer on the hinge rod, then the tail piece,
then another washer. Finally, glue the 1/2” carbon tube to the end of the rod to
capture the whole assembly.

Hot-glue the servo into the tail piece and install two “easy connectors” in 1/16”
holes on the servo arm. You can glue the hardwood tail arm into the tail piece
now as well.


Step #3: Assemble the Hinged Tail (Cont’d)
Bolt the tail motor into the motor mount with M3 washers.
Finally, connect the servo linkages. Use pliers to create a tiny “Z-bend” on the
end of each push rod. Hook the bent ends into the motor mount, and slide the
unbent ends into the easy connectors on the servo arm.


Step #4: Assemble the Front Arms
Drill each front arm using the two templates provided: at one end for the motor
mounts, and at the other end for the rotation bolts for folding the copter arms.

Note that the motor template has two different spacing patterns; use each
pattern on only one arm, so your motors will end up being mounted

symmetrically.

Step #5: Assemble the Front Arms (Cont’d)
Then mount the remaining two motors using the four round plywood motor
mount pieces—the ones with the larger center holes go up against the motors—
and M3×22mm bolts with washers.

Step #6: Prepare the Body Plates
Install the nylon standoffs on the upper body plate, but don’t mount the small
top plate yet.
Bolt four of the small plywood brackets to the lower body plate, and four to the
camera/battery tray, using M3×10mm bolts and nuts.

This tray is optional (you could just velcro the battery to the bottom of the
copter) but it’s highly recommended for video because it’s isolated from
vibrations by short wire ropes. Clamp the four wire ropes into the brackets on
the bottom plate, but don’t connect the camera tray yet.


Step #7: Install the ESCs
Connect the three electronic speed controllers (ESCs) to the motors and zip-tie
them to the arms.
Arrange the three arms in their folded configuration, then measure out enough
wire to extend all the power and ground wires to meet at the back of the body.
Solder the extension wires and insulate connections with heat-shrink tubing.
Strip the free ends and solder them into your battery connector.

NOTE
Now’s also the time to splice in a JST connector (optional) if you want to power an onboard
FPV (first-person video) system and watch live video from the tricopter. Learn more about
batteries, FPV, and other flight components in the first season of Maker Hangar videos.


Step #8: Attach the Arms
Bolt the two front arms to the lower body plate through the outer mounting
holes, using M3×25mm bolts and lock nuts. Place the upper body plate on top,
then pass two more bolts through the locking slots and the inner arm holes, and
secure with washers and lock nuts. Finally, clamp the tail arm between the body
plates using four bolts.
Test the folding action and loosen or tighten bolts until the arms fold smoothly
and lock forward securely.

Step #9: Mount the Landing Gear
Zip-tie the two plywood landing struts to the front arms.

Step #10: Suspend the Camera Tray
Clamp the free ends of the wire ropes into the brackets on the camera tray.
Make sure the camera platform faces forward and the bolt heads face outward;
you’ll need access to them to adjust the tray later. Strap the battery to the tray
with the velcro strap.

Step #11: Mount the Receiver and Flight
Controller
Attach your flight controller to the upper body plate using hot glue, double-
sided tape, or bolts through the mounting slots. (We used the Flip 1.5 MWC
controller. You can download the settings at the Maker Hangar project page.)
Bind your R/C receiver to your transmitter (see Maker Hangar Season One,
Episode 12), and then set the throttle ranges by plugging each of your ESCs, in
turn, into the receiver’s Throttle port (Season 2, Episode 4). Mount the receiver
and plug it into the flight controller. Center the yaw servo and tighten the
linkages.

Finally, screw the top plate to the standoffs to protect your electronics, and your
Maker Hangar Tricopter is complete!


Step #12: About Flight Controllers
The flight controller board converts the signals from your transmitter into the
motor speeds that move your tricopter. It also reads the aircraft’s position and
movements with its onboard gyros and accelerometers, and makes tiny changes
to motor speeds to counter the wind, torque, and other forces that are trying to
tip the copter over.
These are the boards I recommend for the Maker Hangar Tricopter:
OpenPilot CC3D
The best flight experience, easy setup, but tuning takes time
HobbyKing KK2

OK flight experience, fast tuning with onboard display, best for beginners
ArduPilot APM 2.6
Most powerful and expensive; programmable waypoint capabilities with
GPS, compass, and barometer
Flip 1.5 Multi Wii Controller (MWC)
Small, simple, and affordable, but powerful and flies well; optional
barometer and compass



 
    

Colophon
The cover photo is by Mark Harrison. The cover and heading font is Benton
Sans; the body font is Myriad Pro.

