

DIY 
HYDROPONIC 
GARDENS 

© 2018 Quarto Publishing Group USA Inc. Text © 2018 Tyler Baras
 
First published in 2018 by Cool Springs Press, an imprint of The Quarto Group,  
401 Second Avenue North, Suite 310, Minneapolis, MN 55401 USA. T (612) 344-8100  
F (612) 344-8692  www.QuartoKnows.com 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form without written 
permission of the copyright owners. All images in this book have been reproduced with the 
knowledge and prior consent of the artists concerned, and no responsibility is accepted 
by producer, publisher, or printer for any infringement of copyright or otherwise, arising 
from the contents of this publication. Every effort has been made to ensure that credits 
accurately comply with information supplied. We apologize for any inaccuracies that 
may have occurred and will resolve inaccurate or missing information in a subsequent 
reprinting of the book.
Cool Springs Press titles are also available at discount for retail, wholesale, promotional, 
and bulk purchase. For details, contact the Special Sales Manager by email at 
specialsales@quarto.com or by mail at The Quarto Group, Attn: Special Sales Manager,  
401 Second Avenue North, Suite 310, Minneapolis, MN 55401 USA.
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
ISBN: 978-0-7603-5759-0
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Baras, Tyler, author. 
Title: DIY hydroponic gardens / Tyler Baras. 
Other titles: Do-it-yourself hydroponic gardens 
Description: Minneapolis, MN : Cool Springs Press, 2018. | Includes index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2017051567 | ISBN 9780760357590 (pb) 
Subjects: LCSH: Hydroponics. | Gardening. 
Classification: LCC SB126.5 .B37 2018 | DDC 631.5/85--dc23 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017051567
Acquiring Editor: Mark Johanson
Project Manager: Alyssa Bluhm
Art Director: Brad Springer
Cover Design: Percolator/Mark Reis
Interior Design and Layout: Diana Boger
Photographer: Cyrus Moshrefi
Printed in China
Digital edition: 978-0-76036-358-4
Softcover edition: 978-0-76035-759-0


1 
INTRODUCTION    6
What Is Hydroponics?    7
Advantages of Hydroponic Growing    8
Key Features of a Hydroponic System    13
2 
EQUIPMENT    18
Irrigation    19
Pots and Trays    22
Substrates and Growing Media    24
Equipment for Growing Indoors    28
Grow Lights    29
Pest-Management Products  
and Equipment    32
Meters     35
3
HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    38
How to Choose a System     39
Bottle Hydroponics    42
Floating Rafts    50
Wicking Bed    60
Nutrient Film Technique (NFT)    69
Top Drip System    83
Media Beds    92
Flood and Drain    99
Aeroponics    106
Vertical Gardens    115
CONTENTS

4 
STARTING SEEDS and CUTTINGS    136
Starting Seeds in Stone Wool    138
Rooting Cuttings in Stone Wool    142
Rooting Cuttings in a Hydroponic Cloner    146
Transplanting Plants Started in Soil    148
5 
PLANT NUTRITION     150
Plant Nutrient Uptake    151
Fertilizers    152
Measuring Fertilizer Concentration    154
6
SYSTEM MAINTENANCE    156
Managing the Nutrient Solution    157
Flushing    160
Cleaning    161
7 
COMMON PROBLEMS  
and TROUBLESHOOTING    162
Nutrient Deficiencies    163
Infestations    166
Seedling Problems    168
Glossary    170
Appendix: Crop Selection Charts    172
Metric Conversions    186
Bibliography and Photo Credits    187
Index    188
About the Author    192


7
THIS BOOK MAKES HYDROPONICS ACCESSIBLE to gardeners of any experience 
level. You'll learn both the science of hydroponics and its practical applications 
and see that DIY hydroponics is not just a way to avoid purchasing expensive 
hydroponic systems; it's also a way to create a beautiful garden better suited to 
your needs. Offering build guides for hydroponic gardens that range from simple 
to complex, this book shows systems suitable for nearly any environment or 
application. The build guides include many options for customizing the design 
so you can create a garden catered to your space, crop selection, and budget. 
Additionally, this book offers invaluable seed variety recommendations that 
can save new hydroponic gardeners time and money that could have easily 
been wasted on poorly suited crop selections. Learn from Farmer Tyler's vast 
experience and avoid the costly mistakes commonly made by new hydroponic 
growers. The more you know, the better you grow!
WHAT IS HYDROPONICS?
Put simply, hydroponics is growing plants without soil. Most people assume that soil 
is indispensable for plant growth, but if you have this book, you probably already know 
that isn't so. The various functions of soil can be recreated using other materials. Soil 
provides support for the plant because it creates a physical structure for the roots to 
grasp. Tall trees would be unable to hold themselves upright on a windy day without a 
firm grip in the soil. In a hydroponic system, the physical support provided by soil can 
be replicated with a variety of materials and trellis structures. 
Soil also provides essential nutrients for plant growth. These same nutrients 
can be supplied using alternative methods, however. Hydroponic systems 
dispense water-soluble nutrients derived from both organic and conventional 
sources. Soil can also provide a home for essential microbial populations that 
INTRODUCTION
1

8    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
create beneficial relationships with plant roots. These same microbes can live and 
thrive in a hydroponic environment. So, if hydroponics is simply recreating the role of 
soil, why not just use soil?
ADVANTAGES OF HYDROPONIC GROWING
1 Doesn't require quality soil 
Gardening is often thought of as an activity limited to those fortunate enough to 
have a lawn. Hydroponics greatly increases gardening options for those in homes 
without lawns or those with lawns that have soil poorly suited for edible crops. 
Hydroponics combined with indoor growing techniques gives gardeners even more 
options by expanding the potential garden space to nearly anywhere in the home.
2 Potential for faster crop growth 
Plants rarely maximize their full growth potential in soil. There is almost 
always some limiting factor slowing down their growth. In soil, the plant roots 
need to search for nutrients that are often unevenly distributed and possibly 
inaccessible because they are bound to various soil particles. Some nutrients 
are inaccessible because the microbes in the soil have yet to break down 
the nutrient source (for example, manure) into a form that is available to the 
plant's roots. It is also possible for the plant growth to be constrained by a 
lack of water or too much water. Too much water can reduce the amount of 
oxygen available to the roots and inhibit biological processes necessary for the 
roots to uptake nutrients and water. Hydroponics bathes the roots in a precise 
blend of essential nutrients with a balance of water and oxygen. Many of the 
constraints on a plant's potential growth can be eliminated or reduced using 
hydroponics and indoor growing techniques.
3 Requires less space 
A plant must spread its roots far and wide in the process of searching for 
water and nutrients. By eliminating the need for the plant roots to find water 
and nutrients, the spacing of plants is only limited by the area needed for the 
plant canopy.
4 Less constraint on growing season 
Obviously, growing indoors permits gardeners to extend the growing season. 
Less obviously, hydroponics specifically can extend the growing season even 
when placed outdoors. Often the temperature of a plant's roots is more critical 
to its health than the leaf temperature. It is possible to grow winter crops in 
100°F if the root temperature is kept in an optimal range closer to 65° to 75°F. 
It is also possible to grow crops that prefer warm temperatures in cold climates 
by increasing the root zone temperature. Hydroponics increases the ability to 
precisely adjust the root zone temperature. Through use of heaters, chillers, or 
simple practices like burying a hydroponic reservoir, a hydroponic gardener can 
increase or decrease water temperature and improve crop growth.

INTRODUCTION    9
5 Can be used in any location 
Hydroponics allows gardeners to grow in areas that do not possess quality  
soil. Hydroponics also allows gardeners to grow in locations that would be 
unsuited for crops due to inhospitable climate or limited water access. One of the 
biggest opportunities for hydroponics is growing in deserts. Deserts often have a 
wonderful climate for growing crops, with lots of light and little pest presence, but 
they are limited in access to water. Hydroponics uses substantially less water than 
traditional methods and can make farming in deserts a viable option. Hydroponics 
is also the primary method used to grow plants in space. Many crops, including 
lettuce, have been grown in space using hydroponic methods. 
6 Uses less water 
Hydroponics uses less water because you may reuse any irrigation water not 
directly taken up by the crop. In soil, much of the water is lost to evaporation and 
drainage. In hydroponics, evaporation can be reduced or eliminated by covering 
the water reservoir, and all drainage water is collected to be reused. 
7 No weeding and no herbicides 
No weeding. It may seem like a small point at first, but after a season of 
pulling garden weeds, most traditional soil gardeners would love to have 
spent that time doing something more fun, like preparing dishes from their 
harvest. Hydroponic growers also have no need to purchase herbicides. 
Furthermore, hydroponic growers never have to face the potential crop 
damage of herbicide drift when a breeze accidentally blows herbicide onto 
your garden and injures or kills your precious plants.
Leafy vegetables can 
be grown hydroponically 
in outer space. Photo 
courtesy of NASA.

10    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
8 
Can reduce or eliminate need for pesticides 
Hydroponic gardens, especially those outdoors and in greenhouses, are rarely pest 
free, but hydroponics does have the potential to reduce pest pressure. Hydroponic 
gardens present fewer hiding places for pests that will burrow into soil or hide 
in decaying plant debris. When hydroponics is combined with indoor growing 
techniques it is possible to have a completely pest-free garden if the gardener 
practices preventive pest control techniques. Preventive pest control techniques are 
covered in the Equipment for Growing Indoors section of the Equipment chapter.
9 Can reduce or eliminate agricultural runoff 
It is difficult to manage runoff in a traditional garden. The gardener may fertilize 
the garden and the next week a rainstorm washes away much of the nutrients. 
It is also possible that the nutrients will be carried away by normal irrigation. 
Using advanced hydroponic techniques it is possible to have zero runoff. This is a 
practice best suited for professional hydroponic growers as it involves advanced 
water testing, chemistry, and an extensive knowledge of a crop's specific nutrient 
requirements. For home hydroponic gardeners, it is common to flush or dump out 
the nutrient solution in the hydroponic system every few weeks to avoid potential 
nutrient disorders in the crop created by an imbalance in nutrients. Plants do not 
consume all nutrients at the same rate, so over time some accumulate and some 
become deficient. Periodic flushes, or changes of the nutrient solution, help reset 
the system and ensure the crop has access to the correct balance of nutrients. This 
wastewater does not have to be simply flushed down, though; most hydroponic 
gardeners use this water for their outdoor garden or potted plants. A traditional 
soil-based garden is a great companion to a hydroponic garden.
10 Ability to manipulate nutrient content 
One of the most common misconceptions surrounding hydroponics is that 
hydroponic produce has a lower nutrient density than soil-grown produce  
because hydroponic crops are grown in water. There have been many studies 
comparing the nutrient density of hydroponic and soil-grown produce and the 
results are evenly mixed. There are so many factors that affect the nutrient density 
of a crop, and although fertilizer does play a role in which nutrients are present, 
the environment has a huge role in which nutrients the plant actually uptakes. 
Light intensity and specific colors of light can affect antioxidant content. Stress 
due to irrigation practices can affect antioxidant content. Temperature can affect 
sugar concentration. There is a long list of factors that affect the nutrients present 
in a crop but, overall, these vegetables are nutritious. The differences are very 
minute and it is difficult to go wrong when eating a vegetable. Nearly all plants 
will show visible signs of nutrient deficiency if their nutrient density is significantly 
off from normal levels, so if the plant looks good it more than likely is going to 
have a nutrient profile comparable to a similar-looking plant regardless of the 
environment in which it was grown.

INTRODUCTION    11
That said, there are some unique methods that hydroponic growers are  
using to manipulate their crop. Many commercial hydroponic tomato growers 
purposely stress their plants with high nutrient levels at key stages in their 
development to induce an increase in sugar content in the tomatoes. The growers 
can spike the nutrients to induce the sugar increase and then reduce the nutrients 
to a normal level to maintain healthy growth. For lettuce, the Oizumi Yasaikobo  
Co., Ltd., in Chichibu City, Japan, has developed a method for growing low-
potassium lettuce using hydroponic methods. The farm grows these specialty 
lettuces for customers suffering from kidney disease who are getting treated 
with dialysis and are restricted from consuming vegetables with a high potassium 
content. This effort to grow produce with a custom nutrient content is one of many 
similar projects being developed around the world as growers gain the ability to 
precisely control every aspect of a crop's growing environment.
11 Increased ability to direct crop growth for specific characteristics 
Not only can nutrient content be manipulated, but other characteristics, such as 
leaf size, leaf color, root size, and plant height, can also be manipulated when 
hydroponics is combined with indoor growing. Indoor gardeners can use various 
colors of light to induce specific characteristics. A popular practice is the use 
of blue light to grow more compact plants indoors to reduce the vertical space 
required for a crop.
12 Clean and low mess 
Soil gardening can be messy. This is not bad, but not always ideal. The most 
extreme example is the International Space Station. A floating cloud of soil 
would be a disaster around that sensitive equipment. For those of us not growing 

12    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
plants in space, the benefit of soilless growing is a cleaner crop. Crops grown 
hydroponically often require little or no washing. Hydroponic gardens can be a 
great way to expose kids to plants in a classroom or home without bringing in 
the potential of a big muddy mess. One of my favorite kid-friendly systems is the 
hydroponic fairy garden described in the Media Beds section of the Hydroponic 
Growing Systems chapter. 
13 Can be easier and less work than growing in soil 
Easy to use fertilizers, easy to automate, and no weeding are just a few of the 
reasons hydroponic gardening can be far simpler than traditional methods. 
Hydroponics may seem intimidating to beginners, but after a crop or two most 
hydroponic gardeners are hooked.
14 Easy to master and replicate results 
Hydroponic crops grow quickly, allowing growers to get more experience in 
a shorter period of time. The best teacher is experience, and faster-growing 
crops allow hydroponic growers to learn quickly. Once a grower figures out 
the right recipe for that environment and selected crop, it is easy to replicate 
the process. Hydroponics gives the grower the power to replicate the exact 
nutrients available and irrigation frequency. When hydroponics is paired with 
indoor growing techniques, growers increase their control even further. Indoor 
gardeners can replicate light intensity, light duration, temperature, humidity, 
carbon dioxide levels, and airflow to grow consistent crops year-round without 
the seasonal and yearly fluctuations experienced by traditional gardeners.
15 Increases ability to manage soilborne pathogens like root rots and  
bacterial wilts   
Some of the most aggressive plant pathogens are soilborne. Any grower who 
has battled root rot or bacterial wilt in a traditional garden knows that is it very 
difficult to eradicate the problem. Many of these pathogens hide in the soil until 
the conditions are right, and then they spring into action. In hydroponics, the 
gardener can completely clean out the hydroponic system if there is a case of 
a soilborne pathogen. This allows the gardener to quickly remove the old crop, 
clean and sterilize the system, and then start up a new crop.
16 Reduces potential of contaminating crops 
Several of the national foodborne disease outbreaks have been traced back 
to manure. Animal manure, one of the primary nutrient inputs on traditional 
farms, is a potential source of harmful pathogens, including E. coli, Listeria, 
and Salmonella, if not properly prepared before application. The problem is that 
not all manures present in agricultural fields are applied by the farmer. In 2011, 
an E. coli outbreak in Oregon was believed to be due to deer feces found on the 
suspected farm. It is rare to see any manure-derived fertilizers in hydroponics, 
and contamination from wildlife is very uncommon, as most hydroponic farms 
are in controlled environments that exclude wildlife. Another potential source 

INTRODUCTION    13
of contamination is heavy metals present in soil or irrigation sources. Hydroponic 
growers can easily filter their water source to reduce heavy metals, but removing 
heavy metals from soil can be very difficult. There is research indicating that edible 
crops can uptake heavy metals that could lead to slow heavy metal poisoning if 
they are grown using contaminated soil or contaminated water sources.
KEY FEATURES OF A HYDROPONIC SYSTEM
Hydroponic systems are quite simple. To create one, you will need some kind of 
waterproof reservoir to contain the nutrient solution and, in some cases, the plants 
themselves. You'll also need a growing area, which is the place the plants will live. The 
size and type of growing area defines the kinds of plants you can grow and how much 
they will yield. You will also need, in most cases, lighting and ventilation systems. 
Finally, growing medium is needed to store and release nutrients to the plant roots.
The Reservoir
Most hydroponic systems have a reservoir that is filled with a nutrient solution, a mix 
of fertilizer and water. There are many options for nutrient sources in hydroponic 
gardens. Most nutrient solutions can be used for a wide variety of plants or they can be 
catered to specific crops. Feeding plants in a hydroponic garden is as easy as making 
iced tea from concentrate. Simply mix in the powder or liquid concentrate, stir, and 
done! Reservoirs can be created by repurposing common household items like storage 
totes; they can be constructed with wood and a plastic liner; or they can be purchased. 
Reservoirs can be as simple as a plastic or glass bottle.
History of Modern Hydroponics
There are historic records of crops grown in floating rafts made of reeds and other modes of 
farming with hints of hydroponics that date back thousands of years; however, the fundamentals 
of modern hydroponics started to take shape around the 1920s at the University of California 
with Dr. William Frederick Gericke. Dr. Gericke developed some of the original hydroponic 
nutrient recipes and growing methods that laid the foundation for further development by other 
hydroponic researchers. Dennis Hoagland and Daniel Arnon continued to develop Gericke's 
recipes at the University of California. Versions of their recipes are still used today under the 
name “Hoagland solution.”

14    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
The Growing Area
The growing area in a hydroponic garden can be adjusted to grow nearly any plant. By 
adjusting irrigation frequency, pot/tray size, substrate, and environment, hydroponic 
gardeners can create optimal growing conditions for any crop they desire. Some crops 
are more practical than others; for example, hydroponic wheat and corn are possible 
but they often require large areas for proper pollination, and the economic value 
of their yield is low and difficult to justify with a capital-intensive growing method. 
Most hydroponic gardeners, however, find many advantages over traditional growing 
methods when they devote their growing area to vegetables and flowers. The growing 
area design is the biggest difference between the various hydroponic growing methods 
covered in this book. Recirculating hydroponic systems, like those described in this 
book, have a growing area that drains back into the reservoir. The reuse of irrigation 
water in hydroponics can greatly reduce the water required to grow a crop compared to 
the water use required in traditional growing methods.
The Crop
Plants grown in hydroponic systems can grow faster and yield more. Hydroponics 
eliminates the need for herbicides and can reduce or eliminate the need for pesticides 
when combined with indoor growing methods. With reduced sprays and no dirt, 
hydroponic produce is often cleaner than produce grown with traditional methods. 
Many people know that hydroponics can reduce water use during the growing cycle, 
but it is less commonly known that some produce, like lettuce, often uses more water 
for washing than the entire water requirement to grow the crop. 
The Reservoir

INTRODUCTION    15
The Lights
Hydroponics is a popular growing technique indoors because it is clean and very 
productive. When gardeners decide to grow indoors they often want to maximize 
the yield in their limited growing area, and this goal is generally accomplished with 
hydroponic growing techniques. The primary equipment required to grow indoors 
is a grow light. There are many options for indoor lighting and each option has 
its advantages. Depending on light intensity, duration, and color, a grow light can 
stimulate a wide range of desirable plant traits, including enhanced flavor, increased 
nutrient content, increased plant pigmentation, reduced or increased plant height, 
earlier or delayed flowering, and increased yield. Nearly all the systems in this book 
can be used indoors when paired with an appropriate grow light.
The Growing Medium
Soil gardening and soilless hydroponic gardening are not enemies; each has its 
strengths and weaknesses. Blindly stating that one is better than the other may be 
tempting for those deeply invested in one method or the other, but doing so ignores 
the fact that both of these methods are very diverse.
The fertilizers used for hydroponics are usually very different from those used by 
soil gardeners. Hydroponic fertilizers need to provide everything required for healthy 
plant growth, whereas fertilizers intended for use in soil will just focus on a few of 
the major nutrients because it is assumed most of the other nutrients will already be 
present in the soil. Hydroponic fertilizers will work in soil, but fertilizers intended for 
use in soil will rarely work in hydroponic gardens. Not only would the fertilizer intended 
The Growing Area
The Crop

16    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
for soil not have all the required nutrients, but the nutrients are usually derived from 
sources that can foul the water in a hydroponic garden. For example, manure is 
commonly used for soil-based gardening but is almost never used in hydroponics. Most 
animal-derived fertilizer sources like manure, blood meal, bone meal, fish meal, and 
feather meal will create horrible odors when used in a hydroponic garden. One of the 
major advantages of soil gardening is the ability to use these animal-derived fertilizers, 
which are generally by-products of the meat industry. Soil gardening provides a great 
opportunity to use these by-products for a great purpose (growing plants) instead of 
going straight to a landfill. 
Most hydroponic fertilizers, and fertilizers in general, are created using mined 
minerals and products from energy-intensive methods, such as the Haber-Bosch 
process, which converts atmospheric nitrogen gas (N2) into ammonia (NH3). This 
ammonia is used to create fertilizers like urea (CO(NH2)2) and ammonium nitrate 
(NH4NO3). Modern agriculture heavily relies on mined and synthetic fertilizers. It is 
estimated that half of the nitrogen fertilizer applied to crops comes from chemical 
sources. These fertilizers are growing crops that feed billions of humans. 
The pros and cons of synthetic versus natural fertilizers are incredibly nuanced. 
When focusing on one attribute, it can appear that one fertilizer source is far 
superior to another, but the whole picture is far more complicated. For example, the 
manufacturing of synthetic fertilizers has a significant carbon footprint. Synthetic 
fertilizers, however, are far more concentrated than natural fertilizers and can be 
shipped more efficiently. Synthetic fertilizers are very clean and precise, which is 
great for hydroponics. The use of synthetic fertilizers makes it possible for some 
Many Hydroponics Methods
It is hard to make blanket statements about 
hydroponics because there are so many dif-
ferent growing techniques that are considered 
hydroponic. Let's start with a few definitions:
True hydroponics: Hydroponic methods 
that use no substrate. Deep water culture 
(DWC), nutrient film technique (NFT), and 
aeroponics are a few techniques that can be 
classified as true hydroponics.
Recirculating: A hydroponic system that 
reuses irrigation water. Every DIY garden in 
this book is a recirculating system.
Drain-to-waste: A hydroponic system 
that does not reuse irrigation water after 
it is delivered to the crop. This method is 
sometimes used in top drip hydroponics.
It may seem strange that a drain-to-waste 
garden would be classified as hydroponic, but 
the only characteristic of a hydroponic system 
is that it does not use soil and receives its 
food through a nutrient solution. Drain-to-
waste hydroponics can be as simple as a 
traditional garden pot filled with coco coir, 
peat, and/or perlite that is hand watered with 
a nutrient solution. Drain-to-waste hydroponic 
systems are great for certain situations, 
but the benefits that many associate with 
hydroponics, like water savings, may not be 
so great. Hydroponics is diverse and there 
are pros and cons to each method.

INTRODUCTION    17
farms to never dump any wastewater, resulting in huge water savings compared to 
traditional soil farming. The back and forth of advantages and disadvantages proves 
to me that no one has it perfect yet. There is plenty of opportunity to learn from 
other growing methods and pool their advantages to create increasingly sustainable 
methods of farming. 
The Lights


19
THE EQUIPMENT YOU’LL NEED FOR a hydroponic growing system depends, 
of course, on what kind of system you want to create. Except for the most basic 
systems, hydroponics usually includes a pump to recirculate the mixture of 
water and fertilizer. The recirculating water is important because it is through 
movement, and in some cases an airstone with tubing, that oxygen from the 
ambient air is supplied to the liquid and then to the plants. These pumps, along 
with the tubing and joining connectors, are the heart of the system and probably 
the most important equipment you will buy.
IRRIGATION
Irrigation is just a fancy word for watering, but when you are talking about a 
hydroponic growing system, defining it can get tricky. Whether you think of 
irrigation as providing nourishment or providing an infrastructure, the equipment 
you need to create the irrigation function really boils down to a couple basic items: 
a pump (with or without a filter) to propel and circulate the water through the 
system, and a series of tubes to convey the liquid.
Water Pumps
The major factors to consider when selecting a water pump are delivery height, 
target flow rate, and output tube size. Most systems simply need a pump powerful 
enough to deliver water to a specific height. For example, a grower selecting a 
pump for a flood and drain system can primarily focus on whether that pump has 
a maximum delivery height greater than the distance from pump outlet to flood 
tray. Some systems perform best when water is delivered at a target flow rate.  
A couple systems that depend on target flow rates are NFT and aeroponics. For 
these systems it is important to consider how delivery height will impact flow 
EQUIPMENT
2

20    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
This exploded view of a 400 GPH pump shows the mesh filter, adjustable intake, impeller, suction cups, and two outlet attachments.
Two-outlet air pump
rate. A pump that delivers 600 gallons per hour (GPH) at 4 feet high only delivers 200 
GPH at 10 feet high. The number of emitters will also impact flow rate. It is generally 
better to select a pump that may be slightly overpowered than a pump that could 
be underpowered. It is possible to reduce flow using valves, but it is not possible to 
increase flow.
Air Pumps
Air pumps are primarily used to aerate but they can also be effective for keeping 
nutrients evenly mixed in a reservoir. Aerating the nutrient solution can increase the 
dissolved oxygen. Although plants produce oxygen, they also use oxygen to perform a 
variety of tasks. One of these tasks is moving water through a filtration process in the 
roots. If a plant does not have adequate oxygen around its roots, then the plant will 
begin to wilt because it cannot perform the task of moving water through the filtration 
process and up to the leaves. Increasing oxygen in the root zone often increases crop 
yield and improves plant health. 
A 2' flexible air stone
Adding a check valve between the air pump and 
the air stone is an inexpensive way to protect your 
system from a potentially expensive failure. In the 
event of a pump failure, generally due to a power 
outage, water may siphon out of the reservoir 
down through the ¼" tubing to the air pump. 
This can destroy the air pump and flood the area 
around the pump.
Many large pumps have multiple outlet sizes. 
Small pumps are very useful in DIY hydroponic 
gardens but they may only have one outlet size. 
This small pump only connects to 5∕16" tubing.

EQUIPMENT    21
Venturi Pumps
A venturi attachment is a simple way to aerate a 
hydroponic system without adding an air pump and 
air stones. A venturi can attach directly to a pump 
or be installed inline in a section of tubing. Venturis 
take advantage of a phenomenon called the Venturi 
effect, which occurs when a liquid or gas flowing 
through a pipe moves through a constricted section, 
resulting in increased velocity and decreased static 
pressure. The venturi pump attachments have an 
intake tube positioned in the area of lower pressure. 
The decreased pressure creates a suction, which is 
used to pull air into the pipe. A pump with a venturi 
attachment can be placed on a reservoir wall to both 
circulate and aerate the nutrient solution.
A 100' roll of ½"  
black vinyl tubing
A sample of ¼"  
clear vinyl tubing
Air pumps are rated by airflow measured in liters per minute (L/min). The target 
liters per minute for each hydroponic system depends on many factors, including 
reservoir size, water temperature, crop, and crop age. In my experience, 1 L/min per  
5 gallons is generally sufficient for most applications.
Air Stones  
Air pumps deliver air through air stones, which come in a variety of shapes and sizes. 
Air stone preferences vary greatly by grower. I personally prefer flexible air stones and 
round air stones with bottom suctions. There are other ways to aerate a nutrient solution 
besides air pumps with air stones or water pumps with venturi attachments. Cascades 
or waterfalls are often the sole method of aerating nutrient solutions in NFT systems. 
Other more advanced methods include ozone generation and liquid oxygen injections. 
Tubing
Not all irrigation tubing is the same. Traditional irrigation tubing used in landscaping 
is often very stiff and difficult to use in most hydroponic applications. Black vinyl 
tubing is generally the standard choice for hydroponic irrigation because it is flexible, 
is strong, and easily connects to the standard fittings used in hydroponic gardens. The 
most common sizes for black vinyl tubing are ¼, 5⁄16, ½, ¾, and 1 inch.  
Clear tubing is not recommended for irrigation lines. There is always the potential 
for algae growth when the nutrient solution is exposed to light. Clear tubing can 
be a hot spot for algae and is difficult to clean once algae develops. Clear tubing is 
popular in aquariums because it is nearly invisible and is more aesthetically pleasing. 
If aesthetics are not a major concern, ¼-inch black tubing will work just as well as 
¼-inch clear tubing. 

22    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
Fittings
Flood and drain fittings allow DIY gardeners to create their own flood trays 
from household materials like plastic storage totes. Generally, these fittings come 
in a set that includes a ½-inch fill fitting, a ¾-inch drain fitting, extensions, and two 
screen fittings.  
Grommets are one of the most useful irrigation fittings in DIY hydroponics. 
Grommets create a watertight seal around irrigation fittings. They can transform 
PVC pipes, plastic totes, buckets, and more into hydroponic growing areas or 
reservoirs. Commonly available in ½ or ¾ inch. 
Tubing connectors function and look very much like the plumbing connectors  
that anyone with experience doing home plumbing is accustomed to using (except,  
of course, that they are much smaller).
POTS AND TRAYS
Net pots can be square or circular and generally range from 2 to 10 inches wide. 
This book focuses on uses for 2- and 3-inch net pots, the most commonly used net pot 
sizes in DIY hydroponic systems.
An irrigation line hole punch is used to create 
small holes in ½" or ¾" vinyl tubing for the 
insertion of ¼" barbed connectors.
Ball valves (or shutoff valves) restrict or 
stop flow. They are useful for balancing 
flow in NFT and vertical hydroponic gardens 
that may have multiple irrigation zones with 
various flow rates.
A ½" stopper
A ½" rubber grommet
Flood and drain combo kit
A ½" tee connector
A ½" elbow connector

EQUIPMENT    23
Low-cost grow bag
Flexible fabric pot
A 12" circular pot
Square pots are great for 
using space efficiently.
Classic terracotta pots
Circular plastic pots are generally the easiest to find. 
Square plastic pots can help maximize the space in a hydroponic garden by 
removing all gaps between pots. Square pots are a popular option in grow trays 
because they can be packed in tightly. 
Grow bags have been used in commercial farms for a long time and are starting 
to make their way into home gardens. They can be difficult to reuse, but they are 
definitely one of the cheapest options for a pot. The side walls of grow bags can be 
rolled down to adjust the volume of the pot. Although the bag may look square when 
empty, it fills out to be a cylinder.
Fabric pots are great for hydroponics because they are quick draining but don't 
have large holes that can possibly let out substrate. They are perfect for flood and 
drain systems because it is easy for the water to soak into the substrate and then drain 
quickly. Fabric pots are easy to reuse too! Simply empty out the substrate, turn the 
bag inside out, let it dry, and brush off any remaining debris. They can even be put in a 
washing machine for a deep clean.
Terracotta pots are not commonly seen in hydroponics, but that doesn't mean they 
can't be used. Terracotta pots used in gardens are porous, allowing air and water to 
pass through the walls, traits similar to a fabric pot. Unlike a fabric pot, terracotta is 
heavy and fragile.

24    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
A 20-gallon reservoir kit with lid 
and porthole cover 
Shallow 4' × 4' tray. Shallow trays are 
generally about 3" to 4¼" deep. This is 
deep enough for top-drip gardens but may 
not be deep enough for other hydroponic 
garden designs.
Deep 2' × 4' flood tray. Deep trays 
are generally between 7" and 8" 
deep. They are great for top drip, 
flood and drain, media beds, and 
floating raft gardens.
Pot Color
Indoor growers often prefer 
white pots because they are 
reflective. White surfaces 
can help reflect light back 
into the plant canopy. 
White pots are also popular 
outdoors in warm climates 
because they tend to stay 
cooler than black pots. In 
cold environments, black 
pots may be advantageous 
to increase the temperature 
of the roots.
Trays 
Grow trays come in a various 
sizes, depths, and colors.  
The standard size options are 
1' × 3½', 2' × 2', 2' × 4',  
3' × 3', 4' × 4', 3' × 6',  
4' × 6', 2' × 8', and 4' × 8'.
Reservoirs 
Prefabricated reservoirs 
typically range from 20 to 
115 gallons. Prefabricated 
plastic reservoirs are 
generally lightweight, 
lightproof, and available in 
kits that include lids and 
porthole covers.
Right: A 2' × 4' tray stand 
with an attachable light 
support bar
SUBSTRATES AND GROWING MEDIA
Hydroponic gardeners have a choice between high risk with fast growth and low risk 
with slower growth. The decision is primarily based on the porosity of the substrate 
and the ability of the roots to breathe. One of the most common mistakes made by new 
gardeners is overwatering. In a heavy soil or a poor-draining pot, an excess of water 
can drown the plant. Even though plants create oxygen, they also require oxygen. 
The roots especially need oxygen to perform a critical step in the uptake of water and 
nutrients. Without oxygen in the root zone, the plant cannot uptake water and the top 
of the plant starts to wilt. It is very counterintuitive to see a plant wilting when sitting 
in water. Excess water can also increase the chance of root disease. 

EQUIPMENT    25
Stone wool blocks
Stone wool seedling sheets
Polymer bound plug made of 
peat moss and coco coir fiber
Hydroponic gardeners can select substrates that hold very little water to increase 
the oxygen available to the roots, but this requires frequent or continuous irrigation. 
Some gardeners prefer to reduce the number of irrigation cycles required by using a 
substrate that holds more water. A substrate that holds more water adds some safety 
from power outages, pump failures, and other potential sources of delays in irrigation. 
A plant grown in a very porous substrate like clay pellets may be damaged or die after 
a couple of hours of no irrigation when grown in a warm, sunny environment. That 
same plant grown in coco coir, a substrate that holds a lot more water, may be able to 
go a couple of days without irrigation. Usually the trade-off for this increase in safety is 
slightly slower growth.
Substrates for Starting Seed 
This book focuses on stone wool and polymer bound plugs made from peat moss and 
coco coir. There are many other options for start substrates, but these are two of the 
most beginner-friendly options because they have a good water-holding capacity yet 
are difficult to overwater.
Stone Wool  Commonly called rock wool in the United States, stone wool is made 
by melting basaltic rocks and spinning the “rock lava” into fibers . . . similar to cotton 
candy but far less tasty. Disclaimer: Do not eat stone wool! Stone wool is one of the 
most popular hydroponic substrates in both commercial and hobby hydroponics. 
It has a nice balance of water retention and porosity, which makes it great for new 
hydroponic gardeners, who often tend to overwater plants. Some substrates are 
not very forgiving to overwatering, but stone wool in general will still function when 
overwatered—it might not have the best growth, but it usually won't kill the crop.  
Stone wool is available in blocks, slabs, and loose. 
Coconut Coir  Also called “coco” coir, coconut coir is a growing substrate made 
from the husks of coconuts. It is a popular substrate for both conventional and 
organic hydroponic growers. If coco is not properly washed during processing it can 
have high levels of salt, which may damage salt-sensitive crops. It is a good practice 
to wash any coco before using in a hydroponic garden to remove any remaining  
salts and wash out any tannins that may stain the reservoir or growing area.

26    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
Coco Peat  A very fine coco, sometimes called coco pith or coco dust, coco peat can 
hold a lot of water. It is often used as a substitute for or mixed with peat moss. Coco 
peat, unlike peat moss, has a starting pH that is acceptable to most vegetables without 
needing to add lime. Coco peat, like peat moss, is often mixed with perlite or another 
porous substrate to lighten the mix and improve drainage.
Coco Chips  A chunky coco, sometimes called coco croutons, coco chips have 
a good balance of water retention and drainage. They can be used as a standalone 
substrate or incorporated into a mix. When used as a standalone substrate, coco chips 
may need to be irrigated frequently, similar to growing in expanded clay pellets.
Perlite  Perlite is made by heating volcanic rock until it pops like popcorn. This 
expanded rock is very lightweight and has many commercial applications, primarily in 
construction. Perlite is used in horticulture because it is cheap, organic, lightweight, 
and great for aerating heavy substrates like coco and peat. It comes in many sizes, 
from very fine to chunky, and can be used as a standalone hydroponic substrate.
Fine coco peat
Coco chips
Perlite
Expanded clay pellets

EQUIPMENT    27
Peat  Often called sphagnum peat or sphagnum peat moss, peat is partially 
decayed plant matter harvested from bogs. It has the ability to hold a lot of water yet is 
lightweight when dry, perfect for shipping. Peat generally has a very low pH around 4. 
It is often mixed with lime to raise the pH to a more acceptable range for vegetables. 
Peat can be used as a standalone substrate but it is more commonly used in a mix 
with perlite. Its availability is largely limited to North America, as the harvesting of this 
nonrenewable resource is severely restricted in most of the world.
Expanded Clay Pellets  Sometimes called Hydroton after one of the original 
manufacturers, and also called LECA (which stands for light expanded clay aggregate), 
expanded clay pellets are pH neutral, inert, and one of the most popular substrates for 
both hydroponic and aquaponic media beds. The pores in the pellets can retain some 
water, yet it is difficult to overwater clay pellets because they are very quick to drain. 
Always rinse clay pellets before using them in a hydroponic garden. 
Reusing Substrates
River rocks and clay pellets can be washed and reused, but other substrates are 
usually difficult to reuse in a hydroponic garden. Most hydroponic gardeners will mix 
used coco, peat, and perlite into their compost or directly into a traditional soil garden 
to improve water retention and drainage. Some hydroponic gardeners will also break 
up their used stone wool cubes and slabs into small pieces to mix into their traditional 
soil garden.
Peat/perlite mix
Alternative Substrates 
New hydroponic substrates are 
introduced every year. Some of these 
substrates are manufactured and some 
are repurposed by-products from other 
industries. The following substrates 
may not be as beginner friendly as the 
previously mentioned options but you 
may be able to find them for free. Each 
substrate has pros and cons along with 
specific best practices for their use; 
sometimes these best practices need to 
be developed for your specific crop and 
environment through trial and error.
Gravel: Performs similarly to expanded 
clay pellets.
Phenolic Foam: Oasis is one of 
the most popular brands for this 
substrate, which is a great alternative 
to stone wool seedling sheets.
Rice Hulls: Performs similarly to perlite. 
River Rock: Performs similarly to 
expanded clay pellets.
Sawdust: Used as a substitute for 
peat and coco but can be very 
challenging.
Sand: Has a low water holding capacity 
and is heavy. Coarse builders' sand 
is the most commonly used sand for 
hydroponics.
Wood Bark: Popular in regions where 
it is easily accessible, but its 
successful use is very dependent on 
source and crop selection.

28    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
EQUIPMENT FOR  
GROWING INDOORS
Although hydroponic gardens do not need to be 
indoors, they are generally associated with indoor 
growing. Indoor growing may sound easier because 
there are fewer unpredictable events like bad 
weather and bugs, but indoor gardeners find there 
is a whole new list of challenges. Some of the most 
common mistakes for beginner indoor growers are 
lack of adequate airflow, poor temperature control, 
poor humidity control, and insufficient light. The 
proper equipment is essential to have a successful 
indoor garden.
Grow Tents
Grow tents provide an enclosed space for 
environmental controls, lights, and growing 
systems. Sometimes it can be difficult to create 
the proper growing climate indoors, or the ideal 
growing climate may not be the same climate you 
wish to have in the rest of your indoor space. Plants 
may like humidity ratios around 50 to 80 percent, 
but people often prefer to be in a humidity outside of 
that range. Grow tents are a great way to isolate the plants 
in an indoor environment. Besides keeping a separate climate 
from the rest of the indoor space, a grow tent can keep in the bright 
light required for plant growth. It is sometimes advantageous to run grow lights for 
20 hours or more per day, but I imagine people living in a small studio apartment 
might not be too happy having a bright light on for 20 hours a day when they're trying 
to sleep. Grow tents can also allow gardeners to contain their pest-management 
strategies, whether that is spraying or releasing beneficial predator insects to protect 
the crop. Grow tents are perfect for renters who do not have the ability to modify a 
room for growing. I have lost a couple of security deposits through the years due to my 
excitement to create a grow room without considering that all the modifications I was 
making to the room might not make the landlord very happy. A grow tent can pay for 
itself when you consider the possible loss of a security deposit.
Grow tents come in a range  
of sizes, from 2' × 2' up 
to 10' × 20' (and bigger!). 
Ducting ports on grow tents 
make it easy to set up climate 
control and to hang lights. 
The tents’ solid bottoms 
contain any possible leaks.

EQUIPMENT    29
Inline fans can be placed 
inside or outside a grow room.
A HEPA filter is capable of 
preventing insects, bacteria, 
fungi, and pollen from 
entering a grow tent.
Climate Control
Depending on the climate outside of a grow tent, a gardener may be able to control the 
inside climate with inline fans. Inline fans can be placed on the inside or outside of the 
grow tent. There are advantages to both of these setups. An exhaust fan placed inside 
a grow tent is great for containing crop odors because it makes sure any air leaving the 
grow tent passes through a carbon filter, which traps all odors. This setup is sometimes 
called a negative pressure grow room. Air passively flows into the grow room from ducting 
ports as the exhaust fan pushes air out. 
Intake Fans  An intake fan placed on the outside can save valuable grow space 
in the grow tent. In this setup, air is pushed into the grow tent and the exhaust 
passively escapes from ducting ports. This positive pressure grow room is great for 
pest management because the exhausting air makes it difficult for pests to get into 
the grow tent. A negative pressure grow tent can sometimes suck in pests near any 
possible openings, but a positive pressure grow tent will create an outward airflow that 
makes it difficult for pests to enter the grow tent from anywhere but the intake fan. 
There are many heavy-duty air intake filters, like the HEPA filter shown at left, that can 
prevent insects, bacteria, fungi, and pollen from entering a grow room. 
Note: Grow lights can generate a lot of heat and it may be difficult to manage that 
heat with just ventilation fans. Air-conditioning units dedicated solely to the grow 
room are sometimes necessary for indoor gardeners using very powerful lights, using 
multiple lights, growing in warm climates, or growing temperature-sensitive crops.
Airflow
Inadequate airflow is one of the most common mistakes made by beginner indoor 
gardeners. Luckily, it is one of the easiest to remedy. Inadequate airflow may result 
in spindly, lanky plants, weak stems, tip burn, and an increased likelihood of fungal 
issues in the crop (i.e., powdery mildew). An easy trick to check whether a grow room 
has sufficient airflow is to look closely at the leaves to see if they are visibly moving. 
Visibly moving leaves is a sign that there should be sufficient airflow in that location, 
but there is always the potential for “dead air” spots in a grow room. Oscillating fans 
can help reduce the potential of these dead air spots.
GROW LIGHTS
Use of artificial light to grow plants can be traced back to the 1800s. Grow lights were 
not always a practical option, but in the past few decades there have been advances 
in lighting technology that have made the use of grow lights accessible to hobby 
gardeners with gardens of any size. There are many lighting options, but not all are 
well suited for your specific growing area; please review the many options before 
purchasing a grow light to avoid a potentially costly mistake.
Fluorescent  These are probably the most beginner-friendly grow lights.  
They are also widely available and relatively cheap compared to other grow lights.  
Compact fluorescent  
grow light

30    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
They consume minimal electricity and are available in several spectrums, so you 
can grow a wide range of crops. They may not be ideal for crops that require intense 
light, such as peppers. Because they emit only small amounts of heat, they can be 
placed very close to the crop—within a couple of inches—which makes them great for 
seedlings and young plants.
High Pressure Sodium (HPS)  These are one of the cheapest options for high-
intensity lighting. HPS lights can generate a lot of heat, which is good in cold 
environments but difficult to manage indoors without proper ventilation and/or 
air-conditioning. They often are used for flowering crops indoors and are great for 
providing supplemental light in greenhouses. Usually they are positioned a few feet 
above a crop.
Metal Halide (MH) and Ceramic Metal Halide (CMH)  MH and CMH are high-
intensity lighting options often used for vegetative stages but are also capable of 
growing flowering crops. Light from MH bulbs appears blue and many gardeners 
find it pleasant to work under. The blue dominant light is also good for encouraging 
A 315-watt ceramic MH grow light
A 150-watt HPS light is great for grow tents and 
small growing areas that require high light levels.
T5 fluorescent grow light
A powerful 1000-watt double-ended (DE) 
HPS light is great for greenhouses and 
grow rooms with high ceilings.

EQUIPMENT    31
compact growth. Most grow light manufacturers are focusing production on the newer, 
more efficient CMH bulbs instead of the traditional MH bulbs.
Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs)  LEDs are very efficient, using minimal electricity 
to generate a lot of light. They produce very little heat relative to their light output 
and are available in many different configurations, some suitable for mounting high 
above the crop and some suitable for placing very close to the crop. LEDs come in 
many different colors, which can greatly affect plant growth. The white LEDs are less 
efficient but more pleasant to work under than red and blue LEDS, which cast a purple 
light that is great for growing plants but some growers find aesthetically displeasing.
Additional Light Options  Other options include induction lights, plasma lights, 
and lasers, as well as many other lighting technologies besides the ones listed 
above. Some of these newer lighting options can be very expensive and may not be 
well suited for the beginning hydroponic gardener. Lighting technology advances 
quickly, however, and many of these options may soon be the standard, just as 
LED lighting is quickly moving to the forefront among the traditional HPS, MH, and 
fluorescent lighting options.
Lighting Accessories
Hangers Lights can be hung with rope, cable, or chain or mounted directly to 
a crossbeam or the ceiling. Rope ratchets are very popular with indoor gardeners 
because they make moving lights up and down very easy.
Grow Room Glasses Some gardeners find it unpleasant to work under the orange 
light of HPS or the purple light of LED grow lights. Glasses with tinted lenses designed 
specifically for these light sources are a great way to make it more pleasant to work 
with these grow lights. 
LED light bars in  
1', 2', and 4' lengths
Rope ratchet for hanging 
grow lights
Grow room glasses made specifically  
to reduce the orange color produced  
by HPS grow lights

32    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
PEST-MANAGEMENT PRODUCTS  
AND EQUIPMENT
Hydroponics can have some impact on pest pressure but the bigger factor on 
pest pressure is environment. Hydroponic systems are often used in controlled 
environments like greenhouses or indoors. Growing in a controlled environment 
gives the gardener the potential to completely exclude pests from the crop, but 
achieving this can be very difficult. Generally, there are some pests that get into 
the garden and once they get in they can quickly multiply. A controlled environment 
garden is great for both plants and pests. When a bug gets into an indoor garden 
it finds itself in an environment with perfect weather and no predators . . . pretty 
much pest heaven. There are several tactics for controlling pests, but often the best 
defense is prevention. Most of the methods for pest management can be used in a 
controlled environment or outdoors.
Preventive Methods
Preventive methods include pest-exclusion techniques like positive pressure grow 
rooms and HEPA intake filters, described earlier in the Equipment for Growing Indoors 
section. Another exclusion practice is wearing clean clothes before entering an indoor 
grow room to avoid carrying in pests from outside. Preventive methods also include 
selecting plant varieties that are appropriate for the growing environment and have 
disease resistance, and giving these plants the water and nutrients they need to be 
healthy enough to resist diseases. 
Physical If preventive practices don't keep pests out and a pest is found in 
the garden, physical pest-management practices are a great, nontoxic method 
for controlling pests. My favorite physical pest-management technique is using a 
vacuum to remove any bugs I spot. Additional physical pest-management techniques 
are removing entire plants and using sticky traps. Sticky traps are also used for 
monitoring pest levels.
Biological Biological pest management involves the use of predators, 
parasites, and diseases to control pest populations. One of the most popular 
biological pest-management strategies for gardeners is the release of  
ladybugs. Biological pest-management may not completely eradicate a pest 
population, but it usually can keep the pest population in check.
Organic Pesticides Organic pesticides are generally considered less toxic than 
conventional/synthetic pesticides, but they still should be used cautiously. Always 
check the label on pesticides, even organic ones, to see whether there is any 
recommended personal protection equipment like gloves, goggles, or a respirator. 
Most farms are able to completely manage pests using only organic pesticides. 
Conventional Pesticides Conventional, or synthetic, pesticides are rarely required 
by home gardeners. Even commercial farms that are not certified organic will very 

EQUIPMENT    33
Small portable vacuum
often solely use organic pesticides because they are very effective. Most of the 
conventional pesticides available to gardeners are just as safe as organic pesticides 
when used properly. 
Pest-Management Tools
This is by no means a comprehensive list of pest-management tools, just a few of my 
favorite methods for managing pests in my garden.
Vacuum This is a pesticide-free method of removing insects. 
Sticky Traps Yellow sticky traps are generally used to trap and monitor aphids, 
whiteflies, and fungus gnats. Blue sticky traps are generally used to trap and 
monitor thrips.
Beneficial Insects Successfully managing pests with natural predators can be 
tricky. There are many beneficial insect options; the following are a few of the most 
commonly used predators in home hydroponic gardens. Grow room climate and the 
presence of spray residues can impact the effectiveness of beneficial insects.
• Lacewing (Chrysoperla carnea): Primarily used to control aphids but also may be 
effective for controlling whiteflies and thrips.
• Ladybug (Coccinella septempunctata): Used to control aphids.
• Praying mantis (Tenodera sinensis): Eats a wide range of insects, including aphids.
• Predatory mite (Neoseiulus cucumeris): Used to control thrips and spider mites.
• Swirski mite (Amblyseius swirskii): Used to control thrips.
Essential Oils Essential oils can be very effective for killing or repelling pests like 
mites, thrips, and aphids. A few of the more commonly used essential oils are garlic, 
clove, mint, thyme, rosemary, and cinnamon.
Neem Oil An organic pesticide derived from the neem tree, this oil can repel 
insects and potentially kill them if applied directly onto the pest.
Praying mantis eggs
Yellow and blue sticky traps

34    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
Azadirachtin An extract made from Neem seeds that concentrates one of 
the most potent insecticidal compounds found in Neem oil. Azadirachtin repels 
insects similar to Neem oil, but it also disrupts the molting process in many pests. 
Azadirachtin keeps pests in their juvenile stage, preventing them from reaching 
adulthood and reproducing.
Organic Pyrethrins An organic pesticide derived from the chrysanthemum 
flower. One of the most powerful organic pesticides, it is capable of quickly killing 
most insects when applied at a strong concentration. Pyrethrins may potentially kill 
beneficial insects too. 
Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) A beneficial microbe primarily used to manage 
caterpillars.
Bacillus thuringiensis subspecies israelensis (Bti)  A subspecies of Bt that  
can provide some biological control of fungus gnats.
Soap Insecticidal soaps, or even dish soap, can be very effective for controlling 
whiteflies and aphids. 
Spinosad An organic pesticide derived from the bacterium Saccharopolyspora 
spinosa. Effective for controlling thrips and caterpillars.
Streptomyces lydicus A beneficial microbe effective against root rot and  
foliar fungi.
Potassium Bicarbonate A very effective organic fungicide capable of quickly 
knocking down powdery mildew issues. May also be used to raise pH in hydroponic 
systems.
Sodium Bicarbonate (baking soda) Very similar to potassium bicarbonate in 
effectiveness against powdery mildew. Plants can tolerate some sodium, but they will 
show nutrient toxicity or deficiency symptoms when exposed to excessive amounts. 
Many gardeners are able to use sodium bicarbonate to effectively control powdery 
mildew and other foliar fungi.
Organic pesticide that 
includes garlic and clove oil
An organic pesticide 
containing azadirachtin
Insecticidal soap
Bti can be used to control 
fungus gnats in hydroponic 
systems.

EQUIPMENT    35
A pH control kit with pH 
indicator solution, pH up  
and pH down
Bluelab truncheon meter (left) 
and Bluelab pH Pen (right)
METERS 
A variety of meters are employed in most hydroponic systems to monitor and help 
regulate the growing environment. The meters measure levels such as nutrient 
concentration and balance, pH balance, temperature, and light intensity. Some work 
automatically and others require the hydroponic gardener to create and uphold a 
regular monitoring program.
Electrical Conductivity (EC) 
EC meters are used to estimate the fertilizer concentration in a nutrient solution. EC 
meters are not critical for growing hydroponically but they are definitely one of the 
most helpful tools. They are available in many shapes from many companies and in 
many price ranges. There are some very low-cost options available that I've seen work 
for growers and hold up for years. I personally am not always the most gentle with 
my equipment and prefer a robust meter that can tolerate some abuse. A truncheon 
EC meter is currently my go-to choice because it does not require calibration, is 
waterproof, and can handle abuse.
pH
Although pH meters are not critical for growing hydroponically, they are great 
for helping hydroponic gardeners understand the state of their nutrient solution. 
Understanding the pH of the nutrient solution is also useful when trying to diagnose 
potential nutrient deficiencies. However, pH meters are a bit more temperamental 
than EC meters and should be handled with care and well maintained or they can 
quickly become inaccurate or simply break. Always read the instructions on a pH probe 
to ensure you correctly calibrate it and perform the regular maintenance required to 
keep the probe accurate. There is a lot of variation between pH probes on the market 
and they are not all equal. I've tested many pH meters and currently my favorite is the 
Bluelab pH Pen.
The pH can also be tested with an indicator solution. These indicator solutions 
often come as part of a pH control kit that includes pH up and pH down solutions. A 
pH indicator solution can give an approximate pH but it will never be as accurate as a 
pH meter. Many new hydroponic growers start with a pH control kit with a pH indicator 
solution because it is an affordable option that can get the job done. 
Light Intensity
Guessing light intensity is incredibly difficult, if not impossible. There are many meters 
available to help gardeners monitor their light levels to determine whether they are 
sufficient, adequate, or too intense for their specific crop.
Lux Meter Lux meters are generally the most affordable meter for measuring 
light intensity but not the most ideal. Lux meters measure light on a scale specific to 

36    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
how light is perceived by the human eye. The human eye is most sensitive to green 
and yellow, whereas plants are most sensitive to blue and red. Most of the light level 
recommendations for crops are not based on lux; they instead use photosynthetic 
photon flux density (PPFD), which is measured by photosynthetically active radiation 
(PAR) meters.
PAR Meter PAR is an acronym for photosynthetically active radiation. PAR light 
falls within a wavelength range that is visible to plants and that plants can use to 
power photosynthesis. PPFD is an acronym for photosynthetic photon flux density. 
PPFD measures how many photosynthetically active photons, measured in μmol, 
are landing in a square meter (m2) each second (s); the unit used is μmol/m2/s. 
PAR meters are the preferred meter for measuring light intensity in a horticultural 
environment but they tend to be more expensive than lux meters.
Daily Light Integral (DLI) Meter A PPFD measurement shows light intensity per 
square meter per second. A DLI measurement shows the light intensity delivered 
per square meter per day. DLI is a total of all the PPFD readings for each second 
throughout the day. The unit used is mol/m2/d. DLI does not use μmol because the 
number would be huge: 1 mol is 1,000,000 μmol. DLI is useful because it measures 
the light a plant has access to throughout the day, not just at a single moment. Indoors 
it is fairly easy to calculate the DLI with a single PPFD measurement because the light 
levels do not fluctuate throughout the day as they do outdoors. For example, a PPFD 
reading indoors of 100 μmol/m2/s is converted to DLI with the following steps:
1 Multiply PPFD by 60 seconds to get total μmol per m2 per minute. 
Example: 100 μmol/m2/s × 60 seconds = 6000 μmol/m2/minute
2 Multiply this number by 60 minutes to get μmol per m2 per hour. 
Example: 6000 μmol/m2/minute × 60 minutes = 360,000 μmol/m2/hour
3 Multiply this number by the number of hours the lights are on; in this example, the 
lights are on for 20 hours a day.  
Example: 360,000 μmol/m2/hour × 20 hours = 7,200,000 μmol/m2/day
4 Lastly, divide by 1,000,000 to convert μmol to mol. 
Example: 7,200,000/1,000,000 = 7.2 mol/m2/day
Converting from Lux to PPFD
Multiply a lux reading by the following conversion factors to obtain an approximate PPFD (μmol/m2/s):
Light Source
SE HPS
DE HPS
Fluorescent
MH
CMH (4200K)
CMH (3100K)
Sunlight
Conversion Factor
0.012
0.013
0.014
0.014
0.015
0.017
0.019
Example: A reading of 10,000 lux measured under a metal halide (MH) lamp would be converted to PPFD by multiplying  
10,000 lux by the conversion factor 0.014 to get an approximate PPFD of 140 μmol/m2/s.
DLI meter that measures total 
light delivered in 24 hours 
using mol/m2/day

EQUIPMENT    37
Outdoors a DLI can be measured using a DLI meter. A DLI meter is designed  
to total the PPFD measurements throughout the day to generate a DLI reading in  
mol/m2/day.
The reference chart below is based on personal observations and should only be 
considered a general recommendation.
Crop
Target DLI Range
Microgreens
6–12 mol/m2/day
Leafy Greens
12–30 (generally 17–25) mol/m2/day
Flowering Crops
17–45 (generally 25–35) mol/m2/day
Temperature and Humidity Monitoring Equipment
A simple aquarium thermometer is often sufficient for monitoring temperature in a 
hydroponic reservoir. The target water temperature for most hydroponic crops is 65° 
to 70°F but it is definitely possible to grow healthy crops outside of this range. Most pH 
and EC meters also measure water temperature. Water temperature affects the EC 
and pH readings, so these meters must factor in the water temperature before giving 
an accurate reading. 
A thermometer with a hygrometer that records daily high and low points is great 
for monitoring conditions in a greenhouse or grow room. Gardeners may spend a lot of 
time with their plants, but they can't be there all the time; a thermometer/hygrometer 
that monitors the high and low points enables gardeners to make adjustments to day 
or night temperatures that they might not see when they're in the garden. 
Floating thermometer for 
monitoring water temperature


39
DIY HYDROPONIC SYSTEMS ARE A great way to create a custom garden catered 
to your location, crop, and desired aesthetics. Many beginning hydroponic growers 
decide to build their own systems because of the cost of retail systems, but from 
personal experience, I have found building DIY systems may not always be the 
cheapest option, especially if there are mistakes in the system design. I love 
creating original systems built for specific locations, but creating original systems 
can often involve a lot of expensive mistakes. I've purchased items that don't fit, 
or wouldn't hold after I glued them into place, or broke, or didn't provide enough 
light, or didn't provide enough drainage . . .
In the end, I learned a lot from my mistakes and I'm thankful for that, but I 
also spent a lot of money learning and making those mistakes. The following 
systems pull from my experience, and my mistakes, to save you time and money.
HOW TO CHOOSE A SYSTEM 
Choosing which hydroponic system to install in your home requires you to take 
many variables into account and to decide which matters most to you. Among 
them are crop selection, preferred location of the hydroponic garden, maintenance 
demands, ease of use, and the amount of maintenance and upkeep each requires. 
Initial cost is important too, of course, as is the cost for energy consumption, 
inputs, and other ongoing maintenance expenses.
Choosing a System by Crop
Knowing what you want to grow should be the first consideration when choosing 
a hydroponic system. There are systems that can grow a wide range of crops 
(i.e., flood and drain) and there are some systems that work best for crops with 
specific growth habits. One of the first systems in this chapter is a hydroponic 
HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS
3

40    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
bottle garden. This system works great for leafy green crops like lettuce and basil, 
but is horrible for larger crops like tomatoes. You should also consider the diversity 
of crops you want to grow. Do you want to grow crops with a wide range of nutrient 
requirements and desired pH ranges? The best option sometimes is to have multiple 
systems. The best part about growing plants is that they are generally easy to replace!  
Experiment with new crops and learn from experience. I offer a lot of guidelines in this 
chapter and useful crop selection notes in the appendix, but these guidelines are not 
meant to prevent you from experimenting. Many crops will grow in conditions outside 
of their ideal range. Plants are far more tolerant than we give them credit for. Don't be 
afraid to fail; there are always more seeds to plant!
Choosing a System by Location
There are hydroponic systems for growing lettuce in space! No matter your location, 
there is potential to grow plants hydroponically. I even have a hydroponic garden in my 
RV. For each of the systems listed in this chapter I give location suggestions. Many of 
these systems can be modified for indoors, outdoors, small spaces, or large ones.
Choosing a System by Maintenance Requirements
The ratio of plants to volume of water is generally the biggest factor for estimating 
maintenance requirements. A system with a small reservoir and a lot of plants will 
need frequent maintenance because the grower will need to add water and amend the 
reservoir with fertilizer as the plants quickly reduce the water level in the reservoir. 
Degree of difficulty is a 
primary consideration when 
choosing a hydroponic 
system. This recirculating 
trough system is relatively 
simple to make but requires 
regular monitoring and 
maintenance.

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    41
Systems with a high plant-to-water ratio also tend to accumulate an imbalanced ratio 
of nutrients and require frequent full system flushes. Another factor that will influence 
maintenance requirement is crop selection. Crops like tomatoes, peppers, and 
cucumbers may require trellising and pruning depending on variety. Some crops grow 
very quickly and need to be replaced often, like microgreens, and they'll require a lot of 
work because they need to be seeded and harvested weekly. 
Choosing a System by Difficulty
Although I would never stop someone from starting with an advanced hydroponic 
system, I am aware that many gardeners want to succeed from the start. Difficult-to-
use systems may have a learning curve. I love learning! You might too. But you also 
might value simplicity and using a hydroponic system that has minimal moving parts 
and few opportunities for failure. 
Bottle Hydroponics, Floating Rafts, and Wicking Beds are great beginner-friendly 
systems that don’t require electricity. Media Beds and Flood and Drain are also 
beginner friendly, but they have some moving parts that require electricity. Nutrient 
Film Technique, Top Drip, Aeroponics, and Vertical Gardens are not terribly difficult, 
but they might not be the best option for a first-time hydroponic gardener. The 
difficulty of using a system is a personal opinion and it’s possible you might find some 
of the less beginner-friendly systems easiest to use . . . The only way to find out is to 
build them all!
Featured DIY Hydroponic Systems
On the following pages you will see many of my favorite DIY hydroponic systems explained and 
built before your eyes. Along the way I have tried to give reasons why you might choose one 
system over another. Before you decide which one (or ones) you want to make for yourself, I 
suggest that you read through all the builds so you fully understand the pluses, minuses, and 
degree of difficulty of each system.
• BOTTLE HYDROPONICS
• FLOATING RAFTS
• WICKING BED 
• NUTRIENT FILM  
TECHNIQUE (NFT)
• TOP DRIP SYSTEM
• MEDIA BEDS
• FLOOD AND DRAIN
• AEROPONICS
• VERTICAL GARDENS

42    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
BOTTLE HYDROPONICS
A QUICK GOOGLE SEARCH OF “bottle hydroponics” will reveal the many ways to use 
bottles in hydroponics. Unfortunately, most of these are either complicated, ugly, or 
both. These simple hydroponic bottles are easy to build, low cost, low maintenance, 
require no electricity, and look great.
• Suitable Locations: Indoors, outdoors, or greenhouse
• Size: Small
• Growing Media: Stone wool
• Electrical: Not required
• Crops: Leafy greens and herbs
Kratky Method and Aeration
The Kratky method is the easiest hydroponic growing technique. No pumps, 
no complex irrigation systems . . . just plants sitting in water. Most of the early 
hydroponic research focused on static water systems like the Kratky method. These 
systems worked, but, as scientists tend to do, they kept experimenting and eventually 
found there was an increase in plant growth rate when the nutrient solution was 
aerated. This discovery spurred the development of circulating hydroponic systems 
with increased aeration, like nutrient film technique (NFT) and top drip irrigation. 
Hydroponic systems don't 
get much simpler than bottle 
hydroponics.
GROWING SYSTEM

Hydroponic GrowinG SyStemS    43
Now most of the hydroponic research is focused on these circulating systems, but 
there are still horticulturists experimenting with static noncirculating hydroponics. 
One of the most vocal proponents of noncirculating hydroponics is Dr. Bernard 
Kratky of the University of Hawaii. He has done so much to continue the development 
of noncirculating hydroponics that his name has become synonymous with the 
technique . . . the Kratky method. 
Crops 
The Kratky method has been successfully used to grow a wide range of crops, 
from leafy greens like lettuce to flowering crops like tomatoes and potatoes. Most 
hydroponic gardeners prefer to grow leafy greens and herbs with the Kratky method 
because the larger crops may struggle with inadequate oxygen levels in their root 
Red butterhead lettuce, Italian 
basil, and Thai basil grown in 
a hydroponic bottle garden.

44    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
zone. The root zone oxygen demand for crops like lettuce is far less than it is  
for tomatoes. 
The crops that are best for bottle hydroponics stay short or grow upright to 
mitigate the possibility of the system getting too top-heavy and falling over. Basil,  
kale, Swiss chard, and lettuce are my favorites for bottle hydroponics, but I've also  
had success with cilantro, dill, and other herbs.
Locations
The Kratky method can be used outdoors, indoors, or in a greenhouse. It may be 
difficult to use a Kratky-style garden outdoors in areas with heavy rainfall because 
the nutrient solution may be quickly diluted or washed away. Kratky-style gardens are 
great for off-grid gardens that do not have access to electricity. 
The appropriate locations for bottle hydroponics are more limited. The black paint 
used in this build could lead to excessive heat buildup in the root zone. If you want to 
use bottle hydroponics outdoors you'll want to use a light-colored paint for areas with 
warm climates. My favorite way to use bottle hydroponic systems outdoors is with a 
wall-mounted bottle holder on a porch. This keeps the bottles in a semi-shaded area 
and it looks awesome. Indoors, bottle hydroponics can be placed nearly anywhere—a 
kitchen counter, desk, windowsill, or even wall mounted in a hallway with a grow light 
above . . . the only limiting factor when placing a bottle hydroponic system indoors is 
access to light.
It is possible to grow in 
a clear, unpainted bottle, 
but it may require frequent 
cleaning to remove algae 
buildup.

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    45
This hydroponic bottle is the easiest hydroponic garden 
in this book and a great first step into hydroponics. I love 
building this system with kids from ages 8 to 18 when I 
do school visits. There are so many ways to customize 
the bottle with different paints and decorations, so it is 
easy to make this garden your own. To simplify the as-
sembly of this system, you may wish to find a bottle with 
an opaque exterior to skip the painting process. 
HOW TO BUILD A BOTTLE HYDROPONIC GARDEN
MATERIALS & TOOLS (as shown)
Bottle Preparation
The bottle selection is the most critical decision in this build. The ideal bottle has 
a short neck so the plug can quickly access the main body of the bottle. If possible, 
select a wide bottle. Wide bottles maintain their water level longer, giving the roots 
more opportunity to grow into the nutrient solution before the water level drops 
due to evapotranspiration. The following steps 
are for clear bottles, so please skip to the next 
section if using a nontransparent bottle.
1 Remove any labels from the bottle.
2 Add a strip of tape along the side. This will 
be removed later to create a viewing window 
for the roots. Fold the end of the tape strip 
on the bottom of the bottle to make removal 
easier after painting. 
Required
Glass or plastic bottle
Stone wool seedling plug 
sized for bottle opening
Fertilizer
Optional
Scotch tape 
Stake for mounting  
while painting
Blackboard spray paint
Chalk
Burlap or cloth
Bottle label
Grow light
Optional Tools
Scissors
Funnel
Hot glue gun
2

46    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
3 My preferred method for painting bottles is putting them on a stake, but I've also 
had success dipping bottles in paint. Make sure there are enough coats of paint 
that light will not penetrate inside the bottle. 
4 Remove the tape strip once the paint dries. 
5 It is best to do any chalk art at this point before filling the bottle with water. 
Plug Selection
Either select a plug that fits snugly in the neck of the bottle or select a bottle with an 
opening suitable to your plugs. It is possible to cut a stone wool plug to fit a smaller 
bottle but this can potentially damage the seedling's roots.
6 The plug should be wide enough to hold itself firmly in the opening of the bottle. 
7 Growing more seedlings than needed allows you greater options to select only the 
best seedlings for your hydroponic bottle.
3
4
6

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    47
9
Leave enough stone wool above the neck of the bottle 
to make plug removal easy when refilling the bottle.
Nutrient Solution and Transplanting
It is important to use a fertilizer designed for hydroponic gardens. In this garden I 
used FloraNova Grow, but there are many other options. Check out the Plant Nutrition 
chapter to learn more about hydroponic fertilizer options.
8 Mix fertilizer with water using the recommended rates listed on the fertilizer bottle 
or bag. Mix the water and fertilizer in a separate container to make it easy to check 
if the fertilizer has fully dissolved. Extra nutrient solution may be saved for a couple 
weeks if stored in an airtight container in a dark, cool environment.
9 Fully fill the bottle with nutrient solution. There is potential for some overflow when 
the seedling is inserted, but this is preferable to too little water. 
10 If you do not plan on using a wicking strip (see next page), the seedling can now be 
transplanted into the bottle. The bottom of the plug should be sitting in nutrient 
solution; if needed, add more nutrient solution to make sure the plug is fully 
saturated. Make sure the bottle is completely full if you are not using a wicking 
strip because the plug will need access to the nutrient solution for several days 
until it can grow roots deep into the nutrient solution. The plug should not be 
placed too deep into the neck of the bottle. You will need to remove the plug to refill 
the bottle, so keep enough of the plug outside of the bottle to make removal easy in 
the future. 
11 Check to see if the plug is dry during the first week. Depending on crop selection 
and environment, you may need to add more nutrient solution in the first few days 
to give your plant a chance to grow roots long enough to pull up water from the 
bottle. A wicking strip is not necessary, but it will help reduce the potential of your 
seedling drying out in the first week.
11

48    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
17
14
16
Optional Wicking Strip
A wicking strip is useful in bottles that are tall and skinny or with crops that grow 
slowly. The following steps use a clear bottle for demonstration purposes, but using 
a clear bottle for growing a crop is not recommended because it will encourage 
algae growth.
12 Cut burlap or cloth into a strip long enough to reach the bottom of the bottle and 
approximately as wide as the seedling plug (usually 1" to 2" wide).
13 String the wicking strip through the bottle opening.
14 Use the seedling plug to hold the wicking strip in place. 
15 Leave enough stone wool exposed to make removal easy when refilling the bottle 
with nutrient solution.
16 A funnel can make it possible to refill the bottle without fully removing the stone 
wool plug. This can help reduce the potential of damaging roots when removing 
and reinserting a plug with a developed root system.
17 If not using a funnel, very carefully lift the plug out of the bottle. 
18 Fill the bottle with nutrient solution. For young plants with poorly developed roots, 
it is best to fill to nearly the top of the bottle. For older plants with larger root 
systems, it is best to fill to three-fourths full so the roots have access to a balance 
of air and nutrient solution.
Very carefully reinsert the plug back into the bottle after refilling. Make sure the 
roots are submerged in the nutrient solution.
Maintenance
Most of the crops that are appropriate for hydroponic bottles are fast growing 
and may not require a lot of maintenance during their growth cycle. It is possible 
to grow longer-term crops that have multiple harvests, such as basil, as long as 
the bottle is kept over half full with nutrient solution. It is a good practice to clean 
out the bottle and refill with fresh nutrient solution every month to avoid nutrient 
imbalances in the solution.

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    49
Some crops, like the basil on 
the left, can send roots into 
the nutrient solution faster 
than the nutrient solution is 
lost due to evapotranspiration. 
These crops may not require 
a wicking strip. Other crops, 
like the heirloom romaine 
lettuce on the right, grow 
slowly and greatly benefit 
from a wicking strip to assist 
with water uptake.
Additional Options
Decorations  Besides chalk art, I like to decorate my hydroponic bottles with name 
tags and burlap scarfs. Covering the neck of the bottle with a scarf can help hide any 
potential algae growth on the surface of the seedling plug. I use a hot glue gun to 
secure burlap on the neck of the bottle.
Lighting  Hydroponic bottle gardens are best suited for indoors. They can be placed on 
a windowsill and receive natural light or placed under a grow light. Hydroponic bottles 
under a small grow light are a great addition to a work desk. 
Troubleshooting
Plants are wilting
• Check water level and add additional nutrient solution if water level is low.
• Water temperature or air temperature may be too high.
• Try adding wicking strip if roots are not reaching nutrient solution.
Plug is falling into bottle 
• Try wrapping plug in cloth or burlap to create a snugger fit into neck of bottle.
• Place plug so more stone wool is exposed above bottle opening.
Plant is growing slowly or poorly
• The crop selection may not be appropriate for hydroponic bottle garden.
• Crop may not be receiving enough light.
• Use a fertilizer designed for hydroponics.

50    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
FLOATING RAFTS
Floating raft hydroponics is a subtype of deep water culture (DWC) hydroponics. Most 
traditional DWC systems hold the plant at a set height and the nutrient solution is 
refilled to maintain contact with the roots. Floating raft hydroponics allows the plant to 
remain in contact with the nutrient solution even as the water level drops. Floating raft 
systems require very little labor and maintenance. It is common to not perform any 
maintenance on the system, not even adding water, from transplant to harvest when 
growing leafy greens. 
CROPS
Floating raft hydroponics has been used for large flowering crops like tomatoes but 
it is most appropriate for shorter crops with lower oxygen requirements in their root 
zone. Traditional DWC systems are great for these larger flowering crops because they 
create space for the roots to access air and they often use air pumps to heavily aerate 
the nutrient solution.
I've trialed hundreds of crops in floating rafts and I'm amazed at the versatility of 
this growing method. The sidebar on the next page lists some crops that can be grown in 
floating rafts.
In a floating raft, the buoyant 
planting platform actually 
floats on the nutrient solution.
• Suitable Locations: 
Indoors, outdoors, or 
greenhouse
• Size: Small to large
• Growing Media: Stone 
wool seedling cubes
• Electrical: Optional
• Crops: Leafy greens 
and herbs
GROWING SYSTEM

Hydroponic GrowinG SyStemS    51
Colorful Swiss chard roots 
make chard a very fun plant to 
grow in a floating raft garden.
Great
• Basil
• Celery/celeriac
• Chives
• Dill
• Fennel
• Kale
• Lettuce
• Mustard greens
• Nasturtium
• Sorrel
• Swiss chard
• Watercress
not optimal,  
but possible
• Arugula
• Beets
• Carrots
• Cilantro
• Dwarf peppers
• Dwarf tomato
• Marigolds
• Mint
• Parsley
• Radishes
• Spinach
• Strawberries
LOCATIONS
Floating raft gardens can be placed indoors, outdoors, or in a greenhouse. Outdoors 
they may have problems if not protected from rain. The rainwater will dilute the 
nutrient solution and wash away the nutrients. Floating raft systems often hold a lot 
of water, and this might not be ideal indoors. If the system is not properly placed or 
built there could be potential for leaks and flooding indoors. Water is very heavy too, so 
floating raft systems should not be installed on floors with weight limitations.
Floating raft systems benefit from aeration. but for most crops it is not necessary. 
I've grown beautiful heads of lettuce and basil in floating raft gardens with no aeration 
in 90°F weather. These crops will benefit from aeration, often with faster growth and 
reduced potential for root diseases and nutrient issues, but floating raft gardens can 
thrive without electricity. There are affordable options for solar-powered air pumps if 
you wish to keep your floating raft garden off-grid yet receive the benefits of aeration. 
SIZING
Floating raft systems can be designed for countertops or large fields. Very small 
floating rafts have the potential of getting unstable when supporting large, top-heavy 
crops, but they are great for leafy greens. Large rafts are capable of holding more 
weight, but they should be handled with care when they are holding heavy mature 
crops because they can break under the weight when lifted out of the reservoir. Most 
rafts are made from 2 × 4-foot foam boards or 4 × 8-foot foam boards cut in half. 
Most floating raft gardens are thus rectangular with widths in increments of 2 feet 
and lengths in increments of 4 feet. Don't feel limited to rectangles, though; these 
foam boards can be cut to any shape. I've seen circular kiddie pools transformed into 
floating raft gardens with foam boards cut to size.

52    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
Reservoir
4 
2 × 12" × 8' lumber
2 
1 × 2" × 8' furring strip board
1 gal. White water-based latex 
 
primer, sealer, and stain  
 
blocker (KILZ 2 LATEX)
1 lb. 
#10 × 2½" exterior screws 
1 lb. 
#8 × 1¼" exterior screws
1 
6 × 100' black 6 mil. 
 
plastic sheeting
This design can be used as a model for smaller 
or larger floating raft gardens. No matter the size 
there are several steps that will remain the same, 
including adding a liner and building rafts. You may 
wish to use an existing container, like a kiddie pool, 
as your reservoir instead of building one, in which 
case you can simply skip ahead to building the 
raft. This design worked great for me but there are 
many ways to add your own spin to it. I painted this 
garden white because it is in a greenhouse that can 
get very hot and I wanted to do everything possible 
to prevent the nutrient solution from getting 
extremely hot (over 95°F). You may wish to use a 
darker color if your garden will be placed indoors or 
in a cooler environment.
HOW TO BUILD A FLOATING RAFT GARDEN
MATERIALS & TOOLS
Raft
1 
1" × 4 × 8' insulation 
 
foam board
18 
2" net pot
Optional
18–72 2" net pots (additional 
 
pots to increase  
 
planting density)
1 
Air pump with air stones
1 
Small water pump with 
 
venturi attachment
Tools
Circular saw
Paint roller and/or paintbrush 
Rafter square
Level
Drill
Drill bits matching screws
Staple gun and staples
Heavy-duty scissors
Razor blade knife
Sawhorses with clamps
Tape measure
Permanent marker
2" hole drill bit (if using net pots)
Safety Equipment
Work gloves
Eye protection

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    53
Assemble the Reservoir
There are many ways to make reservoir assembly easier. Most stores that sell lumber 
offer to cut the lumber to specific dimensions if requested. Request the dimensions 
listed in the steps below to skip the work of cutting the lumber and reduce the number 
of tools required. It is possible to buy prefabricated reservoirs for floating rafts; check 
out the Pots and Trays section in the Equipment chapter to see some of the options.
1 Wearing work gloves and eye protection, cut the four 2 × 12" × 8' boards into the 
following lengths:
One board into 4'4" and 2'4" segments
Another board into 4'4" and 2'4" segments
One board into 2'1", 2'4", and 2'4" segments
One board into 2'1" and 2'4" segments
Cut a 4'1" and a 2'4" segment from each of the two 1 × 2" × 8' furring strips.
Final lengths and quantities of cut lumber:
2 
2 × 12" × 4'4" boards
5 
2 × 12" × 2'4" boards
2 
2 × 12" × 2'1" boards
2 
1 × 2" × 4'1" strips
2 
1 × 2" × 2'4" strips
The lumber can be painted before or after assembly.
2 Lay the five 2 × 12" × 2'4" boards on a flat level surface. These boards will be the 
base of the system. It is possible to build the reservoir frame without a base, 
but a solid wood bottom can add a lot of strength to the structure. A base also 
helps reduce the chance of tears to the reservoir liner. Foam boards are also 
commonly used as a base to protect the liner from the ground.
3 Set up one of the 2 × 12" × 4'4" boards on its side running along the long side 
of the base and one of the 2 × 12" × 2'1" boards on its side running along the 
short side of the base. The 4'4" board should cover the end of the 2'1" board. 
3

54    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
See 3 and 5 for proper placement. Make sure they are square and level.  
Use two 2½" screws to fasten the boards together. 
4 Place the other 2 × 12" × 4'4" board along the other long side of the base and 
fasten to the outside end of the 2'1" board from step 3 using two 2½" screws.
5 Place the remaining 2 × 12" × 2'1" board on the last open side of the base between 
the two 4'4" boards. Fasten into place with two 2½" screws on each end. 
6 Flip over the frame and place the five 2 × 12" × 2'4" baseboards back into position. 
Fasten the base to the frame with two 2½" screws on each end of the 2'4" boards. 
7 Flip the frame back over.
8 Adding the liner is one of the most difficult steps in assembling the reservoir. It is 
always best to have excess liner inside the reservoir instead of making the liner 
very taut. A very taut liner may be stressed by the weight of the water and could 
rip, creating leaks. For this reservoir, I used two layers of 6 mil. plastic to add some 
leak security. Fold the liner at the reservoir corners to get the liner flush with the 
frame. Once the plastic is in place, staple it to the rim of the reservoir frame.
9 Cut away excess liner with scissors or a razor blade knife. 
5
9
6
8

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    55
DIY raft on the left and a 
prefabricated hydroponic raft 
on the right
10 The furring strips are fastened along the 
rim of the reservoir to hide the ends of the 
plastic liner and to hold the liner securely 
in place. The furring strips are not 
completely necessary for the functionality 
of the reservoir but they add a lot 
aesthetically. Fasten the furring strips into 
place with 1¼" screws. 
10
Assemble the Raft
Building a DIY raft is very easy. There are prefabricated rafts available, but they can 
be expensive. Many of the prefabricated rafts have holes created for specific seedling 
plug sizes and eliminate the need for net pots. It is possible to create a DIY raft with 
holes specific to your plug size, making net pots unnecessary, but for this floating raft 
garden I'm using net pots because they make the process far easier. The prefabricated 
rafts have a few other design features, like raised plug holders, that make them really 
nice to use, but for most applications a DIY raft is more than sufficient.
11 Cut a 2 × 4' section from the 1" × 4 × 8' foam board using a razor blade knife. Brush 
away any loose foam pieces from the cut edge.
12 Place the 2 × 4' section of foam board on sawhorses and fasten into place with 
clamps.
13 Most leafy greens are grown with 6" spacing in hydroponic systems. A 2 × 4' raft 
with 6" spacing holds 18 plants (3 rows of 6). Some greens, such as romaine and 
basil, grow upright and can be grown at a density of 36 plants per 2 × 4' raft. Some 
growers go even higher density (72 plants or more per 2 × 4' raft) to grow crops 
like baby kale, baby lettuce, spring mixes, and some herbs. Measure and mark the 

56    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
plant site positions on the 
raft and drill 2" holes with 
the 2" hole drill bit. 
14 Some hydroponic growers 
leave the reflective 
surface on their DIY 
foam boards, but I prefer 
the look of clean white 
boards in my clean white 
reservoir. 
15 Test to see if the raft fits 
in the reservoir. Make any 
additional adjustments 
to the raft size so it 
comfortably fits inside 
the reservoir. Too much 
exposed reservoir surface 
can encourage algae 
growth, but too snug of 
a fit makes it difficult 
for the raft to move 
downward as the water 
level drops over time. 
16 Place the 2" net pots into 
the 2" holes in the raft.
13
14
15

Adding Nutrient Solution, Aeration, and Transplanting
Fill the reservoir with water to 1¼-inch below the start of the furring strip. This will be 
about 10-inch deep of water, approximately 50 gallons. 
Use a hydroponic fertilizer at the recommended rate on the fertilizer bottle or 
bag. Mix the fertilizer into the water thoroughly until fully dissolved. See the System 
Maintenance chapter for nutrient solution management strategies, including target EC 
and pH ranges.
Optional: Adding an air pump can improve plant growth and reduce the risk of root 
rot. The air pump to the right of the reservoir is a four-outlet 15 liter/minute pump 
that is connected to four 4-inch round air stones spaced evenly in the reservoir. This 
air pump provides great aeration. The smaller air pump placed on the top rim of the 
reservoir is connected to a small solar panel. This small pump has one outlet and 
provides at most one-fourth the output of the larger air pump, and only in optimal 
conditions with full sun. A solar-powered air pump is more expensive but it has the 
ability to provide the benefits of aeration without an electric bill, and the system can be 
placed anywhere with sunlight. 
Float the raft in the reservoir and transplant your seedlings. Stone wool seedlings 
work great in this system but nearly any hydroponic substrate will work in a floating 
raft garden. Substrates that hold a lot of water like coco or peat plugs will require 
more attention because they may have overwatering issues when the plant is young 
Adding aeration to a floating 
raft system is not essential for 
leafy greens but it generally 
improves crop health and 
increases potential yield.

58    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
with a small root system. Some growers even use 
seedlings started in soil in their floating rafts. Soil-
started seedlings can be messy and may require more 
frequent cleaning of the garden, but they are an option.  
Maintenance
Most leafy greens can be grown in this system from 
transplant to harvest without any maintenance of 
the system. For longer-term crops, see the nutrient 
solution management strategies detailed in the System 
Maintenance chapter. 
Additional Options
This floating raft garden is used as a reservoir in the 
DIY nutrient film technique (NFT) system later in this 
chapter. For this NFT add-on, a frame was constructed 
to hold PVC pipes above the raft garden. This frame 
also supports a 4-foot six-tube T5 grow light that acts 
as a supplemental light source in additional to natural 
sunlight present in the greenhouse. If this system were 
placed indoors, this same 4-foot six-tube T5 grow light 
would be capable of providing all the light required by 
these crops.
See the DIY nutrient film technique 
(NFT) for a step-by-step guide to 
adding a second level of production to 
the floating raft garden.

Hydroponic GrowinG SyStemS    59
Troubleshooting
roots are growing poorly or are brown and mushy
• Water may be too warm.
• The pH may be out of target range. Test and adjust based on target pH for your 
crop (see the appendix for target pHs).
• May have root diseases present and susceptible crops. Flush and completely 
sanitize reservoir, raft, and net pots before replanting garden.
plants are growing slowly 
• Check EC to make sure it is in target range.
• Garden may not be receiving enough light.
• Water may be too cold. Temperatures less than 65°F can slow growth on some 
crops. Try painting the reservoir black, adding a water heater, and/or selecting 
different crops that are more tolerant of cold conditions.
water level is dropping fast
• May have a leak in the liner. Check for water around the reservoir. If the reservoir 
is leaking, remove existing liner, check for any objects that may have caused a 
puncture in the liner, and insert a new liner. If leaks persist, try adding foam boards 
on side walls and the bottom of the reservoir before adding new liner.

60    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
WICKING BED
WICKING BED GARDENS ARE VERY versatile and can be modified for a variety of 
substrates, fertilizers, and crops. Similar to the previous hydroponic gardens in this 
chapter, the wicking bed garden requires no electricity. The design is incredibly simple. 
Wicking beds take advantage of capillary action, a natural phenomenon by which 
water can flow upward against gravity by using its surface tension and adhesion. A 
common example is a paper towel wicking water upward from a cup. In a wicking bed 
garden, the “cup” is the frame of a raised bed garden and the “paper towel” is a fine-
textured substrate like coco, peat, or soil.
• Suitable Locations: 
Outdoors or 
greenhouse;  
can be modified  
for indoors
• Size: Small to large
• Growing Media: 
Expanded clay pellets 
and coco coir chips
• Electrical:  
Not required
• Crops: Leafy greens, 
herbs, strawberries, 
and short flowering 
crops
GROWING SYSTEM

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    61
The frame of a wicking bed is lined with a waterproof layer, like 6 mil. painter's 
plastic, to prevent leaks and to protect the wood frame from rotting. The bottom of 
the bed is filled with a quick-draining substrate like clay pellets, river rock, or washed 
gravel. The bottom of the bed holds water or a nutrient solution that is wicked up to 
the fine-textured substrate above. A fabric barrier like burlap or cloth prevents the 
substrate from dropping into the water reservoir space. An inlet pipe makes filling the 
reservoir easy and an overflow pipe prevents overwatering.
CROPS
Crops that are tolerant of wet conditions are great for wicking bed gardens. This 
system may not be appropriate for cacti. It is possible to design wicking beds 
with several layers of different-textured substrate to create drier conditions while 
maintaining enough moisture for roots, but it may involve some tinkering to figure out 
the best mix for your specific environment, crop selection, and garden size.
Often it is the size of a wicking bed garden that limits crop selection. A wicking bed 
garden like the one described in the step-by-step guide could grow a large flowering 
crop like a tomato or cucumber, but the limited size of the garden would likely restrict 
it to just one plant. 
LOCATIONS
Wicking bed gardens are typically used outdoors or in greenhouses. By adding a 
collection bottle to capture overflow water or directing overflow to a sink drain, a 
wicking bed garden could be used indoors without creating a huge mess. The design 
that follows does not direct the overflow into a container and would not be appropriate 
indoors unless modified.
WICKING SYSTEM VARIATIONS
The wicking bed design is very versatile and is seen in both hydroponic and traditional 
gardens. The design in the step-by-step guide can be modified to use traditional 
potting mixes and fertilizers that would not be suitable in other hydroponic garden 
designs. Below are a few optional modifications you can make to the wicking bed 
design to make it your own.
Optional Modifications
• The inlet and overflow pipe can be made from PVC instead of vinyl tubing.
• The frame could be a metal trough or plastic tote instead of wood with a liner.
• A pond liner could be used instead of painter's plastic.
• The outside could be painted instead of using decorative wood. 
• A wood trellis could be built on to support larger crops.
• A raised crossbeam could be installed above the growing bed to support a  
grow light.

62    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
HOW TO BUILD A HYDROPONIC WICKING BED
MATERIALS & TOOLS
Substrate
10 L 
Expanded clay pellets
2 cu. ft. Coco coir chips
Optional
Chalkboard paint
Paintbrush
Quick-set clear epoxy
Chalk
Frame
2 
1 × 8" × 8' pine whitewood board 
 
(actual dimensions ¾" × 7¼" × 96")
5 
½ × 4" × 4' weathered hardwood board
1 lb. 
#8 × 1¼" exterior screws
1 lb. 
#8 × ¾" wood screws
1 
6 × 100' black 6 mil. plastic sheeting
2' 
¾" black vinyl tube
1 
¾" fill/drain fitting with screen
1 
¾" tee
1 
2 × 6' burlap
The wicking bed shown in this chapter is purely hydroponic but do not feel limited to these substrates. Try 
your own modifications; worst-case scenario, you take out the substrate and try again.
Tools
Circular saw
Rafter square
Level
Drill
Drill bit matching screws
Tape measure
Permanent marker
1⅜" hole saw drill bit
Safety Equipment
Work gloves
Eye protection
Step drill bit with ⅛" 
increments from ¼"  
to 1⅜"
2" hole saw drill bit
Staple gun and staples
Heavy-duty scissors
Sawhorses with clamps
Razor blade knife

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    63
Assemble the Frame
There are several ways to make frame assembly easier. Most stores that sell lumber 
offer to cut lumber to specific dimensions if requested. Request the dimensions listed 
in the steps below to skip the work of cutting the lumber and reduce the number of 
tools required. The weathered hardwood is used purely for aesthetics and could be 
skipped to make assembly easier.
1 Wearing work gloves and eye protection, cut the two 1 × 8" × 8' boards into the 
following lengths: 
• One board into four 18" segments and one 14½" segment
• The other board into one 14½" segment and one 19½" segment
2 Cut the five ½ × 4" × 4' weathered hardwood boards into the following lengths: 
• Two 19½" segments and one 8¼" segment from each of four 4' boards
• Four 8¼" segments from the other 4' board
Final lengths and quantities of cut lumber:
4 
1 × 8" × 18" boards
2 
1 × 8" × 14½" boards
1 
1 × 8" × 19½" board
8 
½ × 4" × 19½" weathered hardwood boards
8 
½ × 4" × 8¼" weathered hardwood boards
3 The top rim of the raised bed frame can be painted before or after assembly with 
chalkboard paint. This is purely an aesthetic addition and this step is not necessary 
for the functionality of the garden. If painting the rim before assembly, paint the 
wide edge of two 1 × 8" × 18" boards and the end of both 1 × 8" × 14½" boards.
4 Making sure the boards are square and level, fasten the end of one 1 × 8" × 14½" 
board to the 1 × 8" × 19½" board using two 1¼" screws. The 19½" board is the base 
of the frame. 
4
1

64    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
5 Fasten a 1 × 8" × 18" board to the 1 × 8" × 14½" board 
using two 1¼" screws. 
6 Fasten another 1 × 8" × 18" board to the 1 × 8"  
× 14½" board to complete another side wall. 
7 Repeat steps 5 and 6 to assemble the other side wall.
8 Fasten the remaining 1 × 8" × 14½" board to 
complete the last wall of the frame.
Install the Liner and Drainage Assembly
9 Measure and mark a hole with a center 6" above the 
bottom of the frame and 3" from the side wall. Use 
the 1⅜" hole saw drill bit to create the hole. 
10 Use the step drill bit to create a slope around the 
hole on the outside of the frame. This slope is 
necessary to securely attach the fill/drain fitting.
11 Line the inside of the frame with 6 mil. plastic.  
Fold the plastic sheet at the corners to shape it to  
the frame. 
5
6
8
9
10
13

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    65
12 Staple the plastic liner along the inside upper rim of the frame to hold it in place.
13 Cut away the excess plastic sheeting with scissors.
14 Assemble the drainage pipe. Attach a 3" piece of ¾" vinyl tubing to the fill/drain 
fitting. Unscrew the fastener but keep the rubber gasket on the fitting. 
15 Create a small hole in the plastic liner in the middle of the drainage hole. The hole 
in the liner should fit tight around the fitting.
16 Attach the drainage pipe to the frame. Tightly screw on the fastener to make the 
fitting watertight. 
17 Test the drainage pipe before proceeding! Make sure there are no leaks. If leaks 
are found around the fitting, adjust the liner and tighten the fasten. If leaks are 
found elsewhere, remove and replace the liner. Do not proceed with leaks; water 
should only drain from the drain pipe.
Make the Decorative Weathered Hardwood Exterior
Adding the weathered hardwood exterior is optional. This system would also look 
great painted. During the assembly of the hardwood exterior I accidentally cut the side 
panels 1 inch short. I improvised a solution by adding long skinny pieces of hardwood 
to patch in the corners. The dimensions used in these instructions have been 
corrected so you won't make the same mistake . . . or creative flair . . . lots of ways to 
looks at mistakes in DIY!
18 Use the 2" hole saw drill bit to create a hole in one of the 19½" segments of 
weathered wood. The center of the hole should be 3" from the end of the board. 
19 Attach the weathered hardwood to the frame. 
Option 1: Use quick-set clear epoxy and hold boards in place with clamps  
 
while epoxy dries.  
Option 2: Use ¾" wood screws to secure boards to frame.
14
16
19
18

66    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
Install the Inlet Pipe and Substrate
20 Assemble the inlet pipe. Attach an 18" piece of ¾" vinyl tubing to the ¾" tee.
21 Prepare the substrate. 
22 Rinse the expanded clay to wash off fine clay particles.
23 Soak the coco chip block to expand it.
24 Position the tee end of the inlet pipe on the side opposite the drainage pipe. The 
irrigation water will enter the inlet pipe and then flow across the bottom of the bed 
and drain from the drain pipe at the opposite end. Fill the bottom of the bed with 
clay pellets while positioning the inlet pipe to hold it in place. 
25 Fill the bed with clay pellets until the drainage pipe is partially covered. Do not 
bury the drainage pipe too deep or the system will drain before the upper level of 
substrate has access to water.
30
27
24

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    67
26 Cut a section of burlap large enough to cover the growing bed. This will be the 
fabric divider between the lower reservoir and the upper substrate. With very 
porous fabrics like burlap it is helpful to use multiple layers to prevent the upper 
substrate from entering the lower reservoir.
27 Push the burlap divider into the growing bed so it makes contact with the  
clay pellets.
28 Fill the growing bed with expanded coco chips. Fill to ¼" from the top of the liner. 
Planting and Decoration
29 Cut a section of burlap that covers the growing bed.
30 Use a couple staples to hold the burlap in place.
31 Cut an opening for the inlet pipe and cut away any excess burlap covering the rim 
of the bed.
32 Cut openings for transplants.
33 Transplant and label seedlings using chalk. 
34 Immediately water the garden from above after transplanting to make sure 
seedling roots make contact with the substrate.
35 For the first 2 weeks, water the garden from above every couple of days. Do not use 
the inlet pipe until the plants have the chance to send roots deep into the substrate 
to access water on their own. After a couple of weeks, the plants should be able 
to access the reservoir below and may not require waterings for a week or more 
depending on the environment.
33

68    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
36 This garden does not use a substrate that has an initial fertilizer charge, so 
all nutrients will need to be provided through water-soluble fertilizers during 
waterings. Watering with a hydroponic nutrient solution once a week is often 
sufficient to meet nutrient requirements of crops in this system. When adding 
water to this system, do not stop watering until the system is visibly draining.
36
The burlap mulch in this 
wicking bed was added 
primarily for decoration, but 
in very warm climates it can 
help retain moisture in the 
growing bed. 

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    69
NUTRIENT FILM TECHNIQUE (NFT)
Nutrient film technique (NFT) is a circulating hydroponic growing style that irrigates 
plants with a shallow stream of nutrient solution in growing channels. NFT is one 
of the most popular techniques for commercially growing leafy greens. One of the 
biggest advantages is the ability to grow a lot of plants on a small reservoir. NFT 
is very popular with rooftop growers because they can cover the entire roof in NFT 
channels using a small reservoir that won't exceed the load-carrying capacity of the 
roof. A gallon of water weighs 8.34 pounds . . . that means 240 gallons weighs over 
a ton! The weight of water can quickly add up. Many home gardeners may also be 
worried about heavy reservoirs, especially indoors. 
NFT is a very popular DIY hydroponic technique because it can be customized 
in so many ways. I've seen NFT channels arranged in cascading patterns on walls, 
in A-frame pyramids, and in spiraling coils. Some DIY NFT systems are more 
successful than others—it can be easy to let creative design take over and forget 
about the fundamentals that make an NFT garden successful. I encourage everyone 
to experiment, but first learn the potential limitations and nuances of NFT gardens so 
you can avoid costly mistakes. The success of your NFT garden will depend on crop 
selection, growing environment, channel length, channel slope, channel shape, and 
flow rate.
NFT systems are very popular 
for indoor growing because 
they are lightweight and 
water-efficient.
• Suitable Locations: 
Indoors, outdoors, or 
greenhouse
• Size: Medium to large
• Growing Media: Stone 
wool
• Electrical: Required
• Crops: Leafy 
greens, herbs, and 
strawberries
GROWING SYSTEM

70    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
CROPS
The most popular crops for NFT are leafy greens, herbs, and strawberries. At maturity, 
these crops have a decent root system but generally not enough roots to restrict flow in 
the NFT channel. Roots clogging the channels can be an issue when growing larger crops 
like tomatoes, peppers, and cucumbers. Some DIY gardeners use large PVC pipes (4 
inches or more) or very wide gutters to accommodate the roots of these larger crops. Feel 
free to experiment but, in general, NFT is not the ideal system for growing large crops.
LOCATIONS
The ability to irrigate many channels on a small reservoir, without the weight of 
hundreds of gallons, makes NFT popular for indoor gardens. NFT is a great choice 
for rooftops, classrooms, balconies, and apartments. NFT gardens generally have a 
nice flat canopy, which is great for grow lights. It is sometimes tricky to grow plants 
of various heights under a grow light because some may receive a lot of light while 
blocking the light for other crops, but this is rarely an issue with indoor NFT gardens. 
NFT CHANNELS
The channels in this build are made from 2-inch PVC pipe with 2-inch net pots. Other 
popular DIY options are 3-inch PVC pipe, rain gutters, and vinyl fence posts. If using 
gutters, it is best to create a gutter cover to avoid algae growth in the channel. Flat-
bottom channels like gutters and fence posts sometimes direct water to the sides 
of the channel instead of directly down the middle. This diversion of the water to the 
sides makes it difficult to get good contact between the seedling and the irrigation 
stream. Gutters with grooves on the bottom sometimes mitigate this issue by 
spreading the stream evenly along the bottom of the channel. 
The length of the channel is a very important consideration. Most commercial 
NFT channels range from 4 to 15 feet. Longer channels sometimes have issues with 
sagging and must be supported at several points. A sagging channel creates areas of 
stagnant water flow, which can lead to decreased oxygen available to the roots, a rise 
in water temperature, and an increase in the chance of root diseases. 
Long channels are not recommended in warm climates because they often have 
issues with heat buildup. The water will spend a long time in a long channel before 
returning to the reservoir, and this increased time in the channel leads to increased 
temperatures in the nutrient solution. Gardeners in warm climates should focus 
on channels 8 feet and shorter, unless using a water chiller or another method for 
cooling the nutrient solution. 
The slope of an NFT channel is also important for limiting heat buildup in the 
nutrient solution and avoiding stagnation of the nutrient solution within channels. 
A slope of 1 to 4 percent is acceptable; 2 to 3 percent is generally the slope used in 
commercial systems. The system built in this chapter targets a 1-inch drop over a 
4-foot (48-inch) channel to create a 2-percent slope. 

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    71
FLOW RATE
Most NFT gardens target a flow rate of ½ to 1 liter per channel per minute. I've found 
improvements in plant growth with flow rates up to 2½ liters per channel per minute. To 
measure the flow rate per channel, remove the irrigation line to that channel and redirect 
it to a measuring cup. Either measure exactly how much water flows from that line in one 
minute or find how long it takes to fill 1 liter and use that number to calculate the flow 
rate per minute. The Irrigation section in the Equipment chapter details the process for 
calculating minimum pump output to meet the flow rate requirements in a hydroponic 
garden. But because it is such important information, I am repeating it here.
The major factors to consider when selecting a water pump are delivery height, 
target flow rate, and output tube size. Most systems simply need a pump powerful 
enough to deliver water to a specific height. For example, a grower selecting a 
pump for a flood and drain system can primarily focus on whether that pump has a 
maximum delivery height greater than the distance from pump outlet to flood tray. 
Some systems perform best when water is delivered at a target flow rate. A couple 
systems that depend on target flow rates are NFT and aeroponics. For these systems, 
it is important to consider how delivery height will impact flow rate. A pump that 
delivers 600 gallons per hour (GPH) at 4 feet high only delivers 200 GPH at 10 feet 
high. The number of emitters will also impact flow rate. It is generally better to select 
a pump that may be slightly overpowered than a pump that could be underpowered. It 
is possible to reduce flow using valves, but it is not possible to increase flow.
Example: An NFT system has a target flow rate of 15 GPH per channel. The system 
has 20 channels. This means the pump must be able to deliver 15 GPH to 20 channels, 
so 15 GPH × 20 channels for a total of 300 GPH. Additionally, the channels are 2 feet 
above the pump outlet. 
Pump Failure and Power Outages
The biggest issue with NFT is its 
vulnerability to quick crop death in the 
event of a power outage. Plants in an 
NFT channel depend on constant or 
very frequent irrigation. In the event of 
a pump failure or power outage, there 
is no substrate to retain water and keep 
the root zone hydrated. In a warm, sunny 
environment, all the crops in an NFT 
channel can die in less than 30 minutes 
with no irrigation. In five years of working 
commercially with NFT systems, I've 
seen far more massive crop failures than 
I wish to remember, almost all due to 
pump failure or power outages. Large 
commercial NFT farms will have backup 
generators in the event of a power 
outage to avoid complete crop loss, but 
this is usually not an option for home 
gardeners. All the DIY systems previously 
detailed in this chapter have the 
capability of living for a several days up 
to several weeks without electricity, but 
the rest of the systems in this chapter 
involve pumps and circulating systems 
that are very dependent on electricity. 
The following systems enter the realm 
of increasing complexity and increasing 
risk. Now that that disclaimer is out of 
the way, let's build some really exciting 
circulating hydroponic systems.

72    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
Frame
2 
2 × 6" × 8' lumber
2 
2 × 4" × 8' lumber
1 gal. White water-based latex 
 
primer, sealer, and  
 
stain-blocker  
 
(KILZ 2 LATEX)
1 lb. 
#10 × 2½" exterior screws 
1 lb. 
#8 × 1¼" exterior screws
HOW TO BUILD AN NFT GARDEN
Note: This system uses the floating raft garden detailed earlier in this chapter as a reservoir  
(see pages 50 to 59).
It is not necessary to build the floating raft garden to build this NFT garden. A prefabricated 
reservoir can be purchased or a reservoir can be made from a variety of repurposed materials, such as 
an opaque plastic tote. If growing in a warm environment, it is often advantageous to bury the reservoir 
to keep the nutrient solution cool.
MATERIALS
Channels
3 
2" PVC, 10'
22 
2" net pots
Irrigation
4 
2" PVC tee
6 
2" PVC end cap
4 
¾" elbow
11' 
¾" black vinyl tubing
3' 
¼" black vinyl tubing
1 
Zip tie
9 
¾" EMT straps
1 
¾" gasket
4 
¼" straight double barbed 
 
connectors
1 
Submersible water pump, 550 GPH
Optional Lighting for Lower Level
1 
4' six-tube T5 grow light
1 
Light hanger

Hydroponic GrowinG SyStemS    73
Lumber and PVC Preparation
Most stores that sell lumber offer to cut the lumber to specific dimensions 
if requested. Some home improvement stores will cut PVC too. Request the 
dimensions listed in the steps below to skip the work of cutting the lumber and/or 
PVC to reduce the amount of labor and tools required.
1 Wearing work gloves and eye protection, cut the two 2 × 6" × 8' boards into  
the following lengths:
• One board into two 4' segments
• One board into two 2'6¾" segments
2 Cut the two 2 × 4" × 8' boards into four 4' segments.
Final lengths and quantities of cut lumber:
2 
2 × 6" × 4' boards
2 
2 × 6" × 2'6¾" boards
4 
2 × 4" × 4' boards
3 Paint the lumber before assembly. 
4 Cut the 2" PVC to make the following lengths. Clean the edges of the cuts  
with a deburring tool.
4 
3'7" segments
3 
2¼" segments
1 
4" segment
1 
3" segment
 
¾" grommets
TOOLS
Paint roller and/or 
paintbrush
Circular saw
Deburring tool
Drill
Hacksaw
Step drill bit with ⅛" 
increments from ¼"  
to 1⅜"
Tape measure
Permanent marker
2¾" hole saw drill bit 
Rafter square (also called 
a speed square)
Level
Drill bit matching screws
Sawhorses with clamps
2" hole saw drill bit 
Irrigation line hole punch
Heavy-duty scissors
Safety equipment
Work gloves
Eye protection
3

74    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
Assemble the Manifold
The manifold will collect the drainage from the NFT channels. Before gluing any of the 
components together, check that the total length of the manifold is less than 27½ inches. 
If it is longer, the 3-inch PVC segment can be trimmed down to 2¼ inches. The center 
of the tees should be 5 inches apart. Channels can be spaced closer or further than 5 
inches apart, but this spacing works great for lettuce and basil. The end of the manifold 
with the 4-inch PVC segment will be used for a ¾-inch drainage line. A ¾-inch elbow will 
be inserted into the PVC and another ¾-inch elbow will direct the flow to the reservoir. 
Check that there is enough space to fit elbows before gluing.
Some PVC tees and caps are longer or shorter than others, so there may be 
 some adjustments specific to your materials. Only proceed once the manifold 
assembled without glue is less than 27½ inches long, the tees have 5-inch spacing  
at their centers, and there is sufficient space on the 4-inch PVC segment to fit the 
¾-inch elbows.
5 The four 2" PVC tees are connected by the 2¼" PVC segments. Glue the tees so 
they all lay flat on a surface. 
6 One end cap connects to the tees using the 4" PVC segment and the other cap 
connects using the 3" PVC segment. 
Grommet
6
5
7
8

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    75
7 The end of the manifold with the 4" PVC segment will be used for the ¾" drainage 
line. A ¾" elbow will be inserted into the PVC and another ¾" elbow will direct the 
flow to the reservoir. Check that there is enough space to fit these before drilling. 
Slowly drill the PVC and check periodically to see if the hole is large enough to hold 
the grommet. Most ¾" grommets fit in a 15⁄16" to 1" hole. 
8 Fit the grommet snugly into the hole in the PVC manifold and insert one of the  
¾" elbows.
Assemble the Frame
9 Place the manifold on one of the 2 × 6" × 2'6¾" boards. There should be at least 
1½" of space from the end caps to the 6" edges of the board. The manifold should 
be ½" from one of the 2'6¾" edges and 2½" from the other 2'6¾" edge. With a 
marker, trace the ends of the 2" tees.
10 Repeat step 9 on the other 2 × 6" × 2'6¾" board. Be sure to trace the 2" tees near 
the 2'6¾" edge of the board. It is the positioning of these circles that will determine 
the slope of the NFT channels. 
11 Use the 2¾" hole drill bit to create holes at the traced locations in the 2'6¾" 
boards. Clean off any sawdust from the boards.
10
11

76    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
12 Position these 2'6¾" boards on top of the reservoir. Position the 2 × 6" × 4'  
boards on top of these, running the length of the reservoir. These will be used  
to guide the positioning of the support legs. 
13 Use the square and level when fastening the support legs to the reservoir. It is very 
important that these legs are straight upright and not leaning. Use two 2½" screws 
to secure the legs into position. 
14 Fasten the 2 × 6" × 4' boards to the support legs. The top edge of the 4' boards 
should be flush with the top of the legs. 
15 Mark the position for the 2'6¾" crossbeams. The high end of the NFT channels 
will go through a crossbeam 5¼" from the end of the 4' boards and the low end 
of the NFT channels will go through a crossbeam 6¼" from the other end of the 
4' boards.
16 Arrange the 2'6¾" crossbeams so one side has the drilled holes toward the bottom 
and the other side has the drilled holes toward the top. Fasten the crossbeams 
with only one screw near the top of the frame. It will be important to have the 
ability to adjust the angle of this board when inserting the PVC channels. Later they 
will be secured into place with a second screw.
13
15
16
Crossbeam with drilled holes near the bottom 
Crossbeam with drilled holes near the top

Hydroponic GrowinG SyStemS    77
17 Insert the 3'7" PVC segments into the crossbeams. These will be the growing 
channels. 
18 Attach the manifold to the 3'7" PVC channels. The ¾" drainage elbow should be on 
the lower side of the manifold. Do not glue it yet. 
19 Mark the placement of the net pots in the channels. The net pots in this design are 
6" apart within the channel and are arranged in a checkerboard pattern to create 
additional space between plants from neighboring channels. 
18
DRILLING REFERENCE
19

78    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
20 Take down the channels from the frame. Use a sawhorse with clamps to hold  
the channels in place while drilling holes for the net pots. Use the 2" hole drill bit.  
Be sure to keep the drill straight and position the bit in the middle of the PVC pipe. If 
the drill is off center or at an angle it can cut into the side wall of the PVC pipe. 
21 Use the deburring tool to clean the drilled holes.
22 Glue the drilled channels to the manifold. Keep the holes upright! 
23 Insert the channels with attached manifold back into the crossbeams. 
24 Position the end caps on the channels but do not glue them into place.
25 Mark positions for the ¼" water delivery lines. 
26 Drill a small hole in the marked positions and use the deburring tool to open 
up the hole until it is wide enough for a ¼" vinyl tube. The ¼" tube should be 
held tightly in place when inserted. It may be easier to remove the channels and 
manifold from the frame to drill the holes. 
22
20
26
25

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    79
Assemble the Irrigation System
27 The main water delivery line to the channels is a ¾" vinyl tube attached to a 
submersible pump in the reservoir. The ¾" delivery line can be run up to the 
channels along one of the support legs. Use an elbow to direct the tube across the 
crossbeam. End the line going across the crossbeam with a ¾" elbow. This elbow 
attaches to a short 4" segment of ¾" tube that is held tightly folded in half with a 
zip tie. This zip tie can be removed to clean out the irrigation line during system 
cleanouts. The elbow at the end allows the gardener to direct the water away from 
the system during a cleanout. Fasten the ¾" water delivery line in place with ¾" 
EMT straps and 1¼" screws.
28 Use the irrigation line hole punch to create four holes in the top of the horizontal 
¾" tube. Insert the ¼" double barbed connectors into these holes.
29 With scissors, cut four 8" segments of ¼" black vinyl tubing. Attach one end of the 
tubes to the ¼" double barbed connectors and insert the other end into the PVC 
channel. The tube should be positioned in the channel so the flow is directed down 
the channel. 
29
28
Barbed connectors

80    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
30 Place the end caps on the channels. These end caps should not be glued into  
place; it is best to have the ability to remove them in the future to facilitate cleaning 
and make troubleshooting potential problems easier.
31 Create the ¾" drainage line by connecting the elbow in the manifold to another 
¾" elbow using a small section of ¾" tubing. This will direct the drainage 
downward. It also makes it easy to run the ¾" drainage line along one of the 
support legs. The drainage line should reach the bottom of the reservoir. The 
submersible pump and drainage line are positioned at corners diagonal to each 
other so the water will flow across the reservoir when water circulates through 
the channels. 
32 Modify the 2" net pots by cutting out the bottom. This will ensure the seedlings 
have contact with the nutrient solution and it makes removing the plants from the 
pots easier during harvest. Insert the net pots into the channels. 
31
32
Manifold
Elbow
Drainage 
tube
Leg
Drainage tube

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    81
34
33
33 Add the second screw to the crossbeams to  
securely fasten them to the 2 × 6" × 4' boards. 
34 If this NFT garden is built over the floating 
raft garden, adding a grow light for the 
floating raft garden can be a huge help. It 
is possible to grow plants in the raft system 
without adding a grow light, but growth may 
be slow and stretched. This design uses a 4' 
six-tube T5 light.  

82    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
Planting and Harvesting
35 Seedlings should have roots visibly emerging from the bottom of the plug before 
being transplanted into an NFT channel. 
36 Some crops, like basil and other herbs, can be harvested multiple times. This is 
great and generally not a problem, but sometimes the roots of these plants can 
grow so massive that they will start to restrict the flow within the channels. 
37 Many NFT gardeners like to harvest living plants. The whole plant with roots 
attached can be stored indoors in a cup of water and the leaves are pulled off as 
needed. This is a great way to share your harvest with friends while keeping the 
produce fresh. 
38 Net pots can be reused. Remove roots to be composted and save the pots. The pots 
can washed, rinsed, and reused. 
Troubleshooting
Clogged channel
• Check to see if roots are clogging channel. Harvest crops if needed to open up channel.
• Check to see if an expanded clay pellet or other substrate is clogging drainage line.
Clogged irrigation lines
• If using ball valves (shutoff valves), close off flow to all ¼" irrigation lines except 
the clogged line. If pressure does not remove clog, unfold a paper clip and push 
it down irrigation line to loosen any debris clogging line. If line is still clogged, 
replace the line with new ¼" tube. If line is still clogged, replace the ¼" double 
barbed connector.
35
36
37

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    83
TOP DRIP SYSTEM
TOP DRIP IS A HYDROPONIC 
technique that includes a wide 
range of garden designs, all with 
one similar feature: Irrigation 
lines deliver water to the top of 
the substrate. Sometimes the 
irrigation lines are attached to 
flow rate regulators that create 
a slow drip, thus top drip. One of 
the more popular variations of 
top drip is Dutch buckets. Dutch 
buckets are closed-bottom pots 
with a single drainage site. This 
drainage site is slightly raised from 
the bottom of the bucket so it can 
be set up to drain into a collection 
pipe that directs the used nutrient 
solution back to the reservoir to be 
recirculated. 
• Suitable Locations: Indoors, 
outdoors, or greenhouse
• Size: Medium to large
• Growing Media: Perlite or  
clay pellets
• Electrical: Required
• Crops: Leafy greens and large 
flowering crops, including 
tomatoes, cucumbers, and 
peppers
Top drip systems supply 
nutrient solutions to the top 
surface of the substrate.
GROWING SYSTEM

84    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
CROPS
Dutch buckets are commonly used for large flowering crops like hops, tomatoes, 
peppers, cucumbers, and eggplant. Many of these large crops can be grown for a year 
or more in a Dutch bucket. Leafy greens and herbs can be grown in Dutch buckets, but 
most hydroponic gardeners prefer to take full advantage of their buckets by growing 
large flowering crops.
LOCATIONS
Dutch bucket gardens are typically outdoors or in greenhouses because the crops  
can get huge. Many gardeners using Dutch buckets install a trellis system next to  
the buckets so plant growth can be directed upward and managed in a space- 
efficient manner. Using Dutch buckets indoors is an option, but the growth needs  
to be managed in a way that makes efficient use of grow lights. Some grow lights can 
be installed vertically to light a vertically trellised crop. Most indoor gardeners set up 
a horizontal trellis and weave the plant growth horizontally to create an even height 
canopy. A nice level canopy is great for grow lights because it creates minimal  
shading of other plants and maximizes the use of light.
Single vs. Double Bucket
Traditional Dutch buckets use a single 
bucket full of substrate. Single bucket 
systems have a couple limitations: it is 
difficult to check the health of the plant 
roots and they can be tricky to unclog if 
the drainage site gets clogged. These 
limitations can be removed by using a 
double-bucket system. A double-bucket 
design, like the one in this chapter's 
build, uses a bucket inside a bucket. 
The top bucket holds the substrate and 
has a lot of drainage sites. The bottom 
bucket has the single drainage site that 
connects to the collecting pipe leading 
back to the reservoir. It is possible to 
pull out the top bucket from the bottom 
bucket to inspect the root health in 
a double-bucket system. Temporarily 
removing the top bucket also makes 
it easy to fix clogs that are preventing 
the drainage of nutrient solution into 
the collecting pipe. Most commercial 
hydroponic farms using Dutch buckets 
employ a single-bucket system because 
it is cheaper than double buckets and 
still very capable of growing great 
plants. I think it is important for new 
hydroponic gardeners to have the ability 
to check root health, so this chapter 
shows a double-bucket system. 

Hydroponic GrowinG SyStemS    85
HOW TO BUILD A RECIRCULATING TOP DRIP BUCKET SYSTEM
This build guide only shows one top drip bucket, but this bucket design, irrigation delivery system,  
and drainage setup could be expanded to accommodate many buckets.
MATERIALS & TOOLS
Frame
1 
2 × 12" × 8' lumber
1 gal. White water-based 
 
latex primer, sealer,  
 
and stain blocker  
 
(KILZ 2 LATEX)
1 lb. 
#10 × 2½" 
 
exterior screws 
Buckets
2 
Square bucket
1 
¾" elbow
1 
¾" gasket
Substrate
Expanded clay pellets 
irrigation
4' 
1½" PVC
1 
1½" rubber cap 
 
with clamp
1 
1½" rubber 
 
elbow with clamps
2 
1½" EMT 
 
2-hole strap
20 gal. Reservoir
5' 
¾" black vinyl 
 
tubing
1 
Submersible water 
 
pump, 550 GPH
3 
¾" EMT 2-hole strap
1 
Zip tie
2 
¼" double barbed 
 
connectors
4' 
¼" black vinyl 
 
tubing
1 
Outlet timer
tools
Circular saw
Hacksaw
Paint roller and/or 
paintbrush
Level
Rafter square
Tape measure
Permanent marker
Drill
3/16" drill bit
Drill bit matching 
screws
Step drill bit with ⅛" 
increments from ¼" 
to 1⅜"
Deburring tool
2" hole drill bit
Heavy-duty scissors
Irrigation line hole 
punch 
optional
 
Trellis netting, 
 
5 × 30',  
 
3½" mesh 
2 
Ball valves 
 
(shut off valves)
2 
Irrigation stakes
Safety equipment
Work gloves
Eye protection

86    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
Frame Assembly and Bucket Preparation
Bucket selection is very important. The ideal bucket is square and there should be at 
least a 2-inch gap between the buckets when stacked into each other. The buckets in 
this garden were obtained for free from the bakery section of a grocery store. Many 
bakeries receive their raw ingredients in large square buckets.
There are many ways to make frame assembly easier. Most stores that sell lumber 
offer to cut the lumber to specific dimensions if requested. Request the dimensions 
listed in the steps below to skip the work of cutting the lumber and to reduce the 
number of tools required. 
The frame should slope toward the reservoir. Some growers prefer to use cinder 
blocks as supports for the buckets, or a mix of cinder blocks and wood. Top drip 
buckets can get heavy, so make sure the frame is capable of supporting a lot of weight.
1 Wearing work gloves and eye protection, cut the 2 × 12" × 8' board into the 
following lengths: 
2 × 12" × 16" 
2 × 12" × 16¼"
2 × 12" × 2' 
2 Remove any labels from the buckets. 
3 Paint the lumber before assembly. The outer buckets can be painted too, if desired. 
The inner bucket in the double Dutch bucket does not need to be painted. 
4 Measure and mark drainage holes in the inner bucket and drill the holes using the 
3/16" drill bit. The top bucket should be quick draining.
5 Build the frame using the 16" and 16¼" boards as legs. The shorter support leg is 
closest to the reservoir to create a slope toward the reservoir and is positioned 7½" 
from the edge of the 2 × 12" × 2' board to create an overhang. Use the level and 
square to assemble the frame with the 2½" screws. 
4
5

Hydroponic GrowinG SyStemS    87
8
11
6 Keeping the lid of the top bucket is optional. A lid on the top bucket can help 
reduce algae buildup. Create holes in the lid larger than the size of the transplants. 
Most Dutch buckets are capable of growing at least two plants.
Assemble the Irrigation System
This irrigation design can be modified to add more buckets to the garden. To expand this 
garden, increase the length of the frame, the 1½" PVC line, and the ¾" vinyl tubing, and 
add additional ¼" lines coming off the ¾" vinyl tubing for the additional buckets. 
7 Cut the PVC into a 25" segment and a 10" segment. 
8 Check the positioning of the bucket and PVC pipe. There should be enough  
space on either side of the PVC pipe to fasten an EMT strap.
9 Cap the end of the 25" PVC pipe with the 1½" rubber cap.  
Tighten the clamp on the cap.
10 Attach the 1½" rubber elbow to the other end of the 2'1" PVC pipe.
11 Fasten the 25" PVC pipe to the frame with the two 1½" EMT straps. 
6

88    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
12
16
15
14
17

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    89
12 Drill a 1" hole for the ¾" drainage elbow from the bucket. 
13 Use the deburring tool to clean the drilled hole. The deburring tool can also be 
used to widen the hole.
14 Position the ¾" elbow from the lower bucket into the PVC pipe. 
15 Drill a 2" hole into the reservoir lid to fit the 1½" PVC drainage line. Position the 
hole in the reservoir so there will be minimal bend in the rubber elbow. 
16 Attach the 10" PVC pipe section to the 2'1" PVC pipe section with the rubber elbow. 
17 Drill a 1" hole in the reservoir lid for the ¾" black vinyl tubing. 
18 Connect the ¾" black vinyl tubing to the submersible pump placed inside  
the reservoir.
19 Position the ¾" black vinyl tubing along the edge of the 2 × 12" × 2' board.  
Fasten into position using the ¾" EMT straps. 
20 Leave 6" of vinyl tubing after the last EMT strap. Cut off the excess.
21 Use a zip tie to kink the end of the ¾" tube. This zip tie can be removed to rinse out 
the irrigation line or to expand the system. 
22 Create a small hole in the ¾" tube for the ¼" double barbed connector. The hole 
can be made with an irrigation line hole punch or the tip of a screw. Start with a 
very small hole to avoid the possibility of making the hole too large. If the hole 
is too large, the ¾" tube will need to be replaced. Insert the ¼" double barbed 
connector into the small hole, and then repeat to add a second ¼" double barbed 
connector. This is similar to the NFT irrigation design, starting on page 69.
23 Fill the bucket with pre-rinsed expanded clay pellets.
24 Remove the reservoir and hand water the bucket to rinse out any plastic shavings 
or remaining clay dust on the pellets. 
19
21
24

90    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
25 Place the reservoir back in place and partially fill with water.
26 Cut two 2' segments of ¼" black vinyl tubing. Connect these ¼" tubes to the ¼" 
double barbed connectors in the ¾" black vinyl tubing.
27 Plug in the pump to test the irrigation. Check for leaks in the ¾" tube. If leaks  
are detected at the ¼" double barbed connectors, replace the ¾" tube.  
If leaks are detected at the end of the ¾" tube, tighten and/or replace the zip tie. 
28 In this top drip design, I used ball valves (shutoff valves) and irrigation stakes. This 
is not required, but it is helpful. Ball valves are great for controlling flow when 
connecting many buckets to one pump. The flow can be restricted at buckets near 
the pump to even out the flow among all the buckets. 
29 Fully fill the reservoir, amend with fertilizer, and adjust the pH if needed. Attach the 
pump to a timer. This system has operated great with 15 minutes on and then 30 
minutes off, cycling 24 hours a day. This irrigation frequency works in my specific 
environment, which is very sunny and hot. Indoors or in cooler environments it may 
be beneficial to increase the off time between irrigation cycles. This system uses 
clay pellets that drain very quickly, so fortunately it is difficult to overwater plants 
in this top drip design.
When transplanting seedlings, 
check to see that the 
seedlings receive water when 
the pump turns on. Adjust 
the ¼" lines and/or irrigation 
stakes if necessary.
27
28

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    91
A trellis is very helpful with 
large, sprawling crops like 
cucumbers. It can help 
manage and contain the 
growth to a small footprint by 
directing the growth vertically.

92    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
MEDIA BEDS
Media beds are a fairly simple hydroponic garden design. A grow bed is periodically 
flooded and drained using nutrient solution from a reservoir that is generally placed 
directly under the grow bed. This setup is very similar to the flood and drain garden 
design covered in the next section, the major difference being the placement of the 
substrate. Media bed gardens simply load the substrate into the grow bed, eliminating 
the need for pots.
Pros
• Easy to grow a wide range of crops
• Great for aquaponics, provides a lot of surface area for beneficial bacteria
Cons
• Limited to just a few substrate options for filling the grow bed, difficult to  
use fine-textured substrates 
• Difficult to clean
CROPS
Media beds are great for long-term crops. When a plant is removed from a media 
bed it is very difficult to completely remove the roots. Often some of these roots will 
break off and these can quickly accumulate in a media bed if using fast-growing 
crops like lettuce. Herbs that can be cut and regrow are great options because 
they can be harvested without removing the plant and damaging the root system. 
The media bed in the following guide is too small for flowering crops like tomatoes 
A fun approach to 
hydroponics that lets you use 
your imagination.
• Suitable Locations: 
Indoors, outdoors, or 
greenhouse
• Size: Small to large
• Growing Media: 
Expanded clay pellets
• Electrical: Required
• Crops: Leafy greens, 
herbs, strawberries, 
and other short crops
GROWING SYSTEM

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    93
and cucumbers, but some aquaponics media beds are much larger and can easily 
handle large flowering crops. 
LOCATIONS
Media beds can be designed for any location. The media bed in the following guide is 
great for indoors but could also be placed outdoors or in a greenhouse. Media beds 
placed outdoors may have some issues if there is a lot of rain—the reservoir may flood 
and the nutrients washed away—but the reservoir can easily be amended with fertilizer 
to return the EC to a target range.
SUBSTRATE OPTIONS
Expanded clay pellets, expanded shale, river stone, lava rock, aquarium gravel, and 
drainage gravel are just some of the substrate options in a media bed. Be sure to use 
substrate made from large particles that are pH neutral (avoid limestone). Always 
prewash any substrate used in a media bed. It is possible to use a very coarse coco 
coir (coco croutons), but it is not ideal. Coco holds more water than traditional media 
bed substrates, so the irrigation frequency will likely need to be reduced. Coco will 
trap more roots from harvest plants and cleanings may need to be more frequent. 
Coco also decomposes, so eventually it will need to be completely replaced.
IRRIGATION METHODS
The traditional method for irrigating a media bed is with fill and drain fittings. Both of 
the fittings are secured in the bottom of the grow bed. The fill fitting is flush, or nearly 
flush, with the bottom of the grow bed and the drain fitting is elevated to just slightly 
below the surface of the grow bed. During an irrigation cycle the water enters the grow 
bed through the fill fitting and nutrient solution drains back into the reservoir through 
the drain fitting. The drain fitting prevents the grow bed from overflowing. When the 
irrigation cycle ends, the nutrient solution drains from the media bed by flowing back 
into the reservoir through the fill fitting. There are a couple of other popular ways 
to irrigate a media bed, including bell siphons and U-siphons, but for beginners I'd 
recommend sticking to traditional fill and drain fittings. 
Aquaponic Media Beds
Media beds are very popular in 
aquaponics. The bed acts as both a 
physical and a biological filter for the fish 
waste. The coarse substrate in the grow 
bed provides plenty of surface area for 
beneficial bacteria that are capable of 
breaking down and converting fish waste 
into plant-available nutrients. The grow bed 
can also catch the solid fish waste, helping 
keep the fish tank clean. 
Media beds often function well for the 
first couple of crops but eventually they 
need to be cleaned. The root systems of 
harvest crops start to break down and 
organic matter begins to accumulate in 
the grow bed. Some of this organic matter 
is broken down into nutrients that are 
available to the plants, but eventually 
there will be too much organic matter 
and the substrate in the bed will need to 
be removed to do a deep clean of the 
grow bed. Most of the substrates used in 
media beds can be sterilized, rinsed, and 
reused.

94    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
HOW TO BUILD A MEDIA BED FAIRY GARDEN
MATERIALS
Drill
Step drill bit with ⅛" 
increments from ¼"  
to 1⅜"
Deburring tool
Heavy-duty scissors
Irrigation line hole punch 
(optional)
Safety Equipment
Work gloves
Eye protection
TOOLS
Reservoir and Grow Bed
1 
14" L × 11" W × 3¼" H plastic tote
1 
14.7" L × 10.6" W × 9.1" H plastic tote (4 gal.)
 
Scotch tape
 
Chalkboard spray paint
Irrigation
1 
Fill/drain fitting combo kit:
 
¾" fill/drain fitting with screen
 
½" fill/drain fitting with screen
14" 
½" black vinyl tubing
1 
Submersible water pump, 160 GPH
1 
Timer
Substrate
10 L 
Expanded clay pebbles
Optional Waterwheel Addition
1 
¼" double barbed connector
3'  
¼" black vinyl tubing
1 
Waterwheel
1 
¼" shutoff valve
1 
Zip tie

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    95
Prepare the Reservoir and Grow Bed 
Picking a grow bed and reservoir that fit well together is critical. The bottom of the 
grow bed should fit inside the reservoir and the lip of the grow bed should hang over 
the edge of the reservoir. 
1 Add a strip of tape on the side of the reservoir. Fold the end of the tape under the 
bottom. This tape will be removed after painting to create a viewing window into 
the reservoir to check water height. 
2 Spray paint the grow bed and reservoir. Make sure they are fully opaque so light 
does not enter the reservoir, leading to algae growth. I used two layers of spray 
paint on this garden. 
3 Remove the tape once the spray paint dries to create a viewing window. 
4 Wearing work gloves and eye protection, drill 1⅜" holes in opposite corners of the 
grow bed. 
5 Use a deburring tool to smooth the holes.
Assemble the Irrigation System
6 Connect the fill and drain fittings to the grow bed. The drain fitting has a ¾" 
connector. Use one riser on the drain fitting. 
7 Cut a piece of ½" black vinyl tubing long enough to reach the fill fitting while 
connected to the pump positioned at the bottom of the reservoir. It is better to have 
this tube be a little too long rather than too short.
8 Connect one end of ½" vinyl tubing to the fill fitting and the other to the 
submersible pump. 
2
4
6
8

96    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
9 Fill the reservoir with water.
10 Position the pump at the bottom of the reservoir and place the grow bed over the 
reservoir. 
11 Plug in the pump to test the irrigation system. Check that the grow bed does not 
overflow and the drain fitting is working properly.
12 Fill the grow bed with pre-rinsed expanded clay pellets. The water should not 
flood higher than the surface of the grow bed, so the clay pellets should cover the 
screen of the drain fitting. This grow bed was shallower than I originally thought, 
so I ended up removing the riser on the drain fitting so the drain fitting would be 
submerged under the clay pellets.
13 At this point the media bed is operational. Simply amend the reservoir with 
fertilizer and plant. The following additions are purely for aesthetics and are not 
required for this garden to function properly.
Waterwheel Addition (Optional)
Most of the decorations in this fairy garden are Legos and small toys. The only decora-
tion that involved any major adjustment to the garden was the waterwheel. The following 
steps detail how to add a water line from the main irrigation line to power a waterwheel.
14 Use the irrigation hole punch to create a small hole in the ½" vinyl tubing. 
15 Insert a ¼" double barbed connector into the ½" vinyl tubing.
16 Connect the ¼" black vinyl tubing to the ¼" double barbed connector. 
17 Drill a ¼" hole in the funnel of the waterwheel using the step drill bit. 
18 Remove the clay pellets from the grow bed so the base of the waterwheel is set  
on the bottom of the grow bed. Place the waterwheel in the middle of the grow bed.
19 String the ¼" black vinyl tubing to the waterwheel. Insert the shutoff valve.
20 Secure the ¼" black vinyl tubing to the legs of the waterwheel with a zip tie.
TIP
Expanded clay pellets 
can be reused. Remove 
old plant roots after 
harvesting, and then 
sterilize the pellets with 
a mild bleach solution, 
hydrogen peroxide, 
isopropyl alcohol, 
or heat. Boiling clay 
pellets is a great way 
to sanitize them without 
using chemicals.
10
12

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    97
21
19
17
14
22
21 Connect the remaining ¼" vinyl tubing to the 
shutoff valve and string it through the ¼" hole in the 
waterwheel funnel. Cut off the excess tubing. 
22 Turn on the pump to test the waterwheel. Adjust the 
shutoff valve until water flows to the waterwheel. 
Make sure the pump intake is set to fully open for 
maximum flow. 

98    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
Above: The crops planted in 
this garden include rainbow 
swiss chard, nasturtium, dill, 
chervil, purslane, and Thai 
basil. These crops can be 
harvested multiple times. A 
2' four-tube T5 grow light fits 
perfectly over this garden.
Left: Fairy gardens don't 
need to house only fairies! 
This garden has dump trucks, 
dinosaurs, and Legos.

Hydroponic GrowinG SyStemS    99
FLOOD AND DRAIN
THE FLOOD AND DRAIN TECHNIQUE goes by many names, including “ebb and flow” 
and “ebb and flood.” These names all describe the irrigation method used in this 
garden design. A nutrient solution is pumped to flood a grow tray and then it drains. 
This is similar to the media bed design covered in the previous section, but flood 
and drain gardens do not fill the grow bed with substrate. Flood and drain gardens 
generally use pots filled with a hydroponic substrate or stone wool blocks. 
CROPS
The flood and drain garden shown in the guide below can easily be modified for 
anything from microgreens to large flowering crops. A flood and drain garden can 
grow nearly any crop with a few adjustments to irrigation frequency, pot size, substrate 
selection, and flood height (drain height).
LOCATIONS
Suitable for any location. This garden will have similar issues as other garden designs 
if placed outdoors and exposed to heavy rain, the primary issue being the washing 
away and dilution of the nutrient solution. 
• Suitable Locations: 
Indoors, outdoors, or 
greenhouse
• Size: Small to large
• Growing media: 
Perlite, expanded clay 
pellets, stone wool, or 
coco coir
• electrical: Required
• crops: Any crop 
depending on pot size
GROWING SYSTEM

100    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
VARIATIONS
The build guide shows several flood and drain variations. Here are just a few ways to 
modify this garden design:
• Change pot size. Larger pots are great for large flowering crops. Many small pots 
might be more manageable for leafy greens and herbs.
• Change pot material. Plastic pots are great but they can sometimes lose substrate 
through drainage holes. This loose substrate can then clog irrigation lines. 
Fabric pots are perfect for flood and drain gardens because they make it nearly 
impossible to lose substrate. The fabric allows the nutrient solution to quickly 
reach the plant, and then it drains quickly, giving the roots access to air and 
preventing overwatering.
• Change substrate. Expanded clay pellets are great because they are difficult to 
overwater and are reusable. Coco is another great option; it holds more water, 
Flood and drain is a popular 
design for vertical gardens 
because the grow beds can 
be stacked on a rack with one 
reservoir at the bottom for all 
the levels.

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    101
so irrigation frequency should be adjusted accordingly. Other popular options 
include perlite, peat, and stone wool. Fine-textured substrates like coco, peat, and 
small perlite are often best in fabric pots to avoid losing substrate from the pots' 
drainage holes.
• Change grow bed size. Prefabricated flood and drain trays come in many sizes, 
generally ranging from 1 to 4 feet wide and 2 to 12 feet long. DIY grow beds can 
be as big or as small as you want. A grow bed can be constructed from concrete 
mixing trays, intermediate bulk containers (IBC totes), plastic storage totes, dish 
tubs, or even wood with a plastic liner (similar to the wicking bed design). Whatever 
is chosen, make sure the tray can be modified to include a fill fitting that is flush, 
or nearly flush, with the bottom of the tray and a drainage fitting that is elevated 
above the surface. Most flood and drain designs place the drainage fitting about 
one-third the height of the selected pots.
Coco root rugs create a 
hybrid between flood and 
drain and media bed systems. 
The root rugs allow roots 
to grow along the entire 
tray, similar to a media bed, 
yet the plants are kept in 
individual pots (or blocks) like 
a flood and drain. Root rugs 
keep the surface of the grow 
tray clean and reduce the 
potential for algae growth. 
The primary drawback of root 
rugs is the price. 

102    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
Reservoir and Grow Bed
1 
14" L × 11" W × 3¼" H 
 
plastic tote
1 
14.7" L × 10.6" W × 9.1" H 
 
plastic tote (4 gal.) 
 
Scotch tape
 
Spray paint
Irrigation
11" 
5/16" black vinyl tubing
4" 
½" black vinyl tubing
1 
Submersible water pump, 
 
40 GPH
1 
Outlet timer
HOW TO BUILD A FLOOD AND DRAIN SYSTEM
MATERIALS & TOOLS
Substrate and Pots*
2 
6" square pot 
 
or
4 
5" square pot 
 
or
1 
2-gal. fabric pot 
 
or
5 
3" net pot 
 
or
 
Grodan A-OK 36/40 cubes 
 
(for microgreens)
* This garden can be modified to 
fit a wide variety of pots. See the 
planting options before deciding 
on pot selection.
Tools
Drill
Step drill bit with ⅛" increments  
from ¼" to 1⅜"
Hot glue gun 
Heavy-duty scissors
2¾" hole saw drill bit
Safety Equipment
Work gloves
Eye protection

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    103
Prepare the Reservoir and Grow Bed 
Picking a grow bed and reservoir that fit well together is critical. The bottom of the 
grow bed should fit inside the reservoir and the lip of the grow bed should hang over 
the edge of the reservoir. 
1 Add a strip of tape on the side of the reservoir. Fold the end of the tape under the 
bottom. This tape will be removed after painting to create a viewing window into 
the reservoir to check water height.
2 Spray paint the grow bed, grow bed lid, and reservoir. Make sure they are fully 
opaque so light does not enter the reservoir. If light enters the reservoir it can lead 
to algae growth. I used two layers of chalkboard spray paint on this garden.
3 Remove the tape once the spray paint dries to create a viewing window. 
4 
Wearing work gloves and eye protection, drill a 5/8" and a ⅜" hole in the grow bed.
Assemble the Irrigation System
5 Insert the 11" segment of the 5/16" black vinyl tubing into the ⅜" hole in the grow 
bed. Use the hot glue gun to fasten the 5/16" tube in place. The 5/16" tube should be 
flush with the surface of the grow bed. 
6 Insert the 4" segment of ½" black vinyl tubing into the ⅝" hole in the grow bed. It 
does not need to be glued into position. The height of the ½" tube will be adjusted 
based on substrate and pot selection. 
7 Connect the 5/16" tube to the submersible pump. 
8 Fill the reservoir with water.
9 Position the pump on the bottom of the reservoir and place the grow bed on top of 
the reservoir.
10 Turn on the pump. Water should fill the grow bed and drain from the ½" tube.
11 Turn the pump off and water should drain back into the reservoir through the pump. 
3
5
6
10
11

13
15
14
Planting and Harvesting Microgreens 
12 Prepare the stone wool by rinsing it in 
nutrient solution. 
13 Remove plugs as needed for the stone wool 
sheet to fit the grow bed. 
14 See the Microgreen Crop Chart in the 
appendix for recommended seeding rates. 
Some microgreen seed packets will provide 
a recommended seeding density. 
15 Gently mist the microgreen seeds. Misting 
the seeds twice daily for the first 3 to 5 days 
will help germination. 
16 Most microgreens are ready to harvest after 
10 to 15 days. Some varieties are slower 
growing and require 3 to 4 weeks before they 
are ready to harvest. 
17 Many microgreen varieties can be harvested 
multiple times. Cut the young plants above 
their lowermost leaves to give them an 
opportunity to regrow. 
17

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    105
Planting Options
Option 1 This garden can fit two 6" square pots. These 
pots are a little tall for this flood tray. The height of the 
drain should be about one-third of the height of the pots in 
the tray. It may be possible to use taller pots, or it may be 
necessary to water the plants from the top for the first few 
weeks until the roots reach the bottom of the pot. 
Option 2 This garden can fit four 5" square pots. These are a 
great fit for this flood tray. 
Option 3 This garden can fit one 2-gallon fabric pot. 
Fabric pots are great for holding loose substrates like 
coco, peat, and perlite. 
Option 4 This garden can fit five 3" net pots. Drill five 2¾" 
holes in the lid of the flood tray to fit the net pots. This setup 
is great for herbs and leafy greens. The lid will reduce the 
potential for algae development in the flood tray. This garden 
can grow microgreens too.

106    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
AEROPONICS
Aeroponics is a very exciting hydroponic technique. It offers the potential for very fast 
growth and huge yields while using very little water. There are two major categories 
within aeroponics: high pressure and low pressure.
High Pressure The build guide below shows how to build a high-pressure 
aeroponic garden. Most hydroponic growers think of high-pressure designs when 
they hear the term aeroponics. A pump is attached to a main irrigation line, often 
PVC, and misters are inserted into the PVC line. The pump creates pressure in the 
PVC pipe, which helps generate a fine mist. High-pressure aeroponic designs are very 
popular for rooting cuttings or “clones.” The fine nutrient solution mist creates a great 
environment for new root growth.
Low Pressure Low-pressure aeroponic gardens do not use misters. The aeroponic 
“mist” is often created by passing the nutrient solution through perforated disks and/
or creating splashes near the plant roots. Low-pressure aeroponic systems generally 
have fewer moving parts and are less prone to clogging. 
CROPS 
Nearly any crop can be grown aeroponically. I've seen papayas grown in aeroponic 
systems! The most common crops for aeroponic systems are leafy greens and 
herbs, but do not feel limited to these options. If growing larger flowering crops, be 
sure to consider how the plant will be supported. Plants grown in pots can support 
themselves (to a certain extent) by securing their roots to the substrate. Without a 
substrate, the plant roots do not have much physical support and a top-heavy plant 
could lean or fall over if not provided with support, such as a vertical or horizontal 
In an aeroponic system, 
plants are suspended in 
air, not water. Moisture is 
provided by emitters that 
deliver mist under pressure.
• Suitable Locations: 
Indoors, outdoors, or 
greenhouse
• Size: Small to large
• Growing Media: 
Perlite or clay pellets 
• Electrical: Required
• Crops: Leafy greens, 
herbs, strawberries, 
and other short crops
GROWING SYSTEM

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    107
trellis. Long-term crops also have a greater chance of facing a power outage or 
an equipment failure that could quickly damage roots or kill plants that may have 
required many months of care. 
LOCATIONS
Aeroponics is suitable for any location. Aeroponic gardens can be small and fit 
on kitchen counters or be massive vertical towers stretching over 15 feet tall. DIY 
aeroponic gardens can sometimes have issues with leaks and they should be tested 
before being placed in a leak-sensitive location. 
Caution
Many first-time hydroponic gardeners 
get very excited about aeroponics: it 
looks futuristic and promises the fastest 
growth, but it also comes with the 
most risk. Plants grown in aeroponics 
are very sensitive to grower mistakes 
or equipment failures. The roots are 
hanging in air, and if they are not 
watered frequently they will dry out. It 
does not take long for the roots to dry 
out to the point of being permanently 
damaged. Disruptions to waterings can 
occur for a variety of reasons, including 
pump failure, irrigation line clogging, 
mister clogging, and power outages. 
Other hydroponic methods are sensitive 
to these disruptions in watering too, 
but aeroponics is especially susceptible 
because of its fine misters and lack 
of substrate protecting the roots. I 
would never recommend a first-time 
hydroponic gardener start with an 
aeroponic garden. Some aeroponic 
gardens, like the low-pressure Tower 
Gardens, are more beginner friendly 
than others, but these prefabricated 
aeroponic systems can be very 
expensive. Start with a hydroponic 
garden that is cheap and robust, like 
a mini floating raft garden, and then 
start to experiment with more advanced 
techniques like aeroponics.

108    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
HOW TO BUILD A HIGH-PRESSURE AEROPONIC SYSTEM
Frame
1 
23½" L × 16⅞" W × 12¼" H 
 
storage tote with lid
18 
2" net pot
Irrigation
6' 
¾" PVC pipe
4 
¾" PVC elbow
3 
¾" PVC tee
1 
Submersible water pump, 
 
400 GPH
 
PVC glue
10 
360° mister, flow rate 
 
31.4 GPH at 20 PSI
1 
Outlet timer
Tools
Permanent marker
Drill
2" hole drill bit
Deburring tool
11/64" brad point drill bit
Titanium step drill bit with ⅛" 
increments from ¼" to 1⅜"
Ratcheting PVC cutter (or hacksaw)
Spray paint (if not using an  
opaque tote)
Safety Equipment
Work gloves
Eye protection
MATERIALS & TOOLS

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    109
There are many options for 
outlet timers. The ideal timer 
for an aeroponic system 
works in very short intervals, 
as short as a couple of 
seconds. Most timers work in 
15-minute intervals, and these 
can do the job as well.
Prepare the Reservoir and Lid 
The reservoir selection is very important! It should have a tight-sealing lid. When the 
aeroponic irrigation turns on, there is a lot of spraying, so make sure the lid fits tightly 
to prevent leaks. Five-gallon buckets also work great and come with a tight-fitting lid.
1 Spray paint the reservoir if it is not already opaque. Make sure light does not reach 
the nutrient solution, because it can encourage algae development.
2 The lid can be modified to fit a variety of net pot sizes or foam inserts. Foam 
inserts are very popular for rooting cuttings, and 2" or 3" net pots are great for 
growing herbs and leafy greens.  
3 Aeroponic systems designed for rooting cuttings can fit many sites for foam 
inserts. These sites are sometimes spaced 2½" apart. This aeroponic system will 
be using net pots spaced 3" 
apart, which is suitable for a 
variety of herbs, baby green 
mixes, and some miniature 
romaine lettuce varieties. 
Space the net pots 6" apart to 
grow full-size lettuce. Mark 
the lid with the location of the 
plant sites. 
2
3

110    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
4 Wearing work gloves 
and eye protection, 
use a 2" hole drill bit 
to create holes for the 
net pots. 
5 Clean the edges of 
the drilled holes with 
the deburring tool. 
6 Create a very small 
flap on the side of the 
lid. This will be used 
for the pump's power 
cord. Sometimes this 
flap can be a source 
of leaks, so another 
option is drilling a 
hole in the lid for 
the cord to pass 
through and using a 
foam insert around 
the cord to cork the 
drilled hole.
6
5
4

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    111
Assemble the Irrigation System
This irrigation design (pictured above) can be modified for a variety of reservoir 
sizes by adjusting the length of the PVC segments and moving the placement of the 
360-degree misters.
7 The exact lengths of the PVC segments will depend on the reservoir and specific 
¾" elbows and tees used. Do not glue any of the components together until the 
entire irrigation system has been test-fitted. Only glue the components together 
once they fit well without glue. 
8 Build the center part of the irrigation manifold first. It will need to be compact 
enough to fit within the width of the reservoir but there should be enough space 
between the tees so an aeroponic mister can be installed.
7
8

112    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
9 Cut four PVC segments of equal 
length and attach them to the 
center manifold. The segments 
in this design are 4½" long. 
10 Connect the four elbows  
to the manifold. 
11 Place a PVC pipe between the 
elbows and mark the pipe at 
the appropriate length for it 
to connect the elbows. Cut 
two segments of this length to 
connect both sides. 
12 The length of the final PVC 
segment that will connect 
the manifold to the pump will 
depend on the height of the 
reservoir. It should be long 
enough to place the top of the 
manifold within 5" to 7" of the 
lid once it is attached to the 
pump. The PVC manifold should 
fit snugly to the ¾" fitting of the 
pump. If it does not fit snugly, 
try another fitting that came 
with the pump or use PVC glue 
to fasten PVC pipe to the fitting 
on the pump. 
13 Mark the placement of the 360° 
misters. This system uses a 400 
GPH pump. The misters each 
have a flow rate of 31.4 GPH. So, 
400 GPH divided by 31.4 GPH 
equals 12.73. To ensure good 
pressure, I only used 10 misters 
in this system. This pump has 
a valve to adjust flow rate, so 
I added fewer misters than its 
maximum to ensure good flow. 
The flow rate can always be 
reduced on the pump if there is 
too much pressure.
10
11
Manifold
4½"
Elbow

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    113
14 Drill holes at the marked spots with the 11/64" drill 
bit. Twist the 360° misters into the drilled holes. 
15 Place the fully assembled irrigation manifold and 
pump in the center of the reservoir. Fill the reservoir 
with water. Do not fill over the height of the misters. 
16 Place the lid on the reservoir and plug in the pump. 
Check the distribution of the misters to make sure 
all plant sites receive water. 
12
14
15
16

114    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
17 Plug the pump into 
a timer. This garden 
was set to water for 
10 seconds every 5 
minutes. The irrigation 
frequency will depend 
on the age of the crop, 
the environment, the 
size of the pots, and the 
timer selection. Many 
aeroponic systems 
operate well when on for 
15 minutes and then off 
for 15 to 45 minutes. 
Plant
18 Add the net pots. 
19 Amend the reservoir with 
a hydroponic fertilizer 
(do not use an organic 
hydroponic fertilizer). 
Transplant! 
19
17

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    115
VERTICAL GARDENS
VERTICAL GARDENS COME IN ALL shapes and sizes using both soil and 
hydroponic growing techniques. Vertical gardens are popular for gardeners 
with limited space because they can maximize the available growing area in a 
given footprint. Vertical gardens are also popular as living art installments. It is 
increasingly common to go to a bar, restaurant, office, or school and see a vertical 
garden used as an edible art installation.
There are a few considerations to keep in mind when choosing a vertical garden. 
First, not all crops are well suited for this production method. Large, top-heavy crops 
GROWING SYSTEM

116    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
like tomatoes, eggplant, and peppers may not have the support they require if grown 
in a vertical garden. Most vertical hydroponic systems are best suited for leafy greens, 
herbs, and strawberries. The second major consideration is the light requirement 
of the chosen crop. Vertical gardens are notorious for having light issues if poorly 
designed or positioned. Sometimes vertical systems cast shade on lower crops. 
Insufficient light for lower crops may not be an issue during summer when there is a 
lot of light, but in lower light conditions this can be a problem. 
Although this book focuses on hydroponics, hydroponics is not the only option when 
selecting a vertical garden design. The garden shown in the following project could 
easily be modified to use a potting mix and receive hand waterings. I personally find 
that putting in the initial effort of building a hydroponic system pays off in the long run 
because I don't have to remember to water my plants, but to each his or her own—this 
is DIY! Here are some of the common vertical hydroponic garden setups.
AEROPONIC TOWERS
Aeroponic systems can be either low or high pressure. A high-pressure aeroponic 
vertical garden will generally have a main irrigation line in the middle of a large tube 
or square. This main irrigation line will have evenly spaced foggers or misters that 
emit a fine mist for the plant roots positioned on the inside of the outer tube or square. 
These systems require a decent amount of pressure and can be prone to clogging. 
An irrigation system that uses misters or foggers requires the use of a high-quality 
fertilizer that will not precipitate. The grower must also be cautious of leaves and roots 
falling into the system, because these may break down and clog emitters. 
A low-pressure aeroponic vertical garden will also have a main irrigation in the 
middle of a large tube or square but it will only release the nutrient solution at the top 
Aeroponic towers feature 
a tubular tower with evenly 
spaced planting pockets on 
the outside of the tower. A 
central irrigation line runs 
vertically up the length of 
the tower and provides 
pressurized water that is 
dispersed to the plants 
through foggers or emitters 
inside the tower.

of the garden. The nutrient solution then falls through a series of disks that disperse 
the water. Tower Garden is a very popular low-pressure vertical aeroponic system. 
DIY versions of this system are possible, but it sometimes is advantageous to simply 
purchase a complete system. 
DRIP TOWERS
Drip towers also come in many shapes and sizes. They almost all consist of either 
a vertical post or bag full of an inert substrate like perlite, coco, or stone wool. The 
ZipGrow tower is a vertical drip tower that has gained a lot of popularity in the past few 
years. It uses a plastic matrix and a capillary mat in the middle of a square post. 
FLOOD AND DRAIN GROW RACKS (see pages 99 to 105)
Flood and drain grow racks are a common vertical system in commercial farms. 
Shown below is an image of a vertical flood and drain system by Growtainer. Many 
growers create their own versions of these systems. Most of these are constructed out 
of metal storage shelves, flood tables, and lights. When designing your own flood and 
drain grow rack, it is important to include shutoff valves for each level. These valves 
will help you adjust the flow to each level so they all fill in roughly the same amount 
A drip tower circulates water 
into horizontal tubes at the 
top of the system. The water 
seeps down into the tops of 
a series of vertical growing 
towers that are filled with 
growing mats to absorb and 
hold the water and provide 
rooting material for the plants. 
The water runoff is captured 
in troughs and is recirculated 
to the feeder tubes on top.

118    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
of time. The height between levels and placement of lights is also important. Most of 
these grow racks have 18 to 24 inches between levels. I suggest using T5 fluorescent 
or LED bars for lighting. The most common problems I see with grow racks are 
insufficient light and poor airflow. One of the best indicators that light levels are low 
is spindly, stretchy growth in seedlings. The seedlings are reaching out for more light. 
Often, it is better to remove spindly seedlings and start over. Airflow can also help 
strengthen seedlings. A small clip-on fan can gently shake the seedlings, encouraging 
them to develop stronger stems and better-established roots. With crops like head 
lettuce, poor airflow will sometimes result in tip burn.
ROTATING/FERRIS WHEEL
Rotating hydroponic systems are very cool looking, but generally not practical. 
Gardens like the Omega Garden are fun to look at but the growers using these systems 
seem to quickly lose interest. Difficulty viewing and accessing the crop, issues with 
airflow, water dripping onto leaves, high price, high maintenance . . . these are just a 
few of the reasons growers abandon rotary hydroponic systems. That said, I've had a 
lot of fun building Ferris wheel hydroponic systems. These systems are not designed 
to optimize production, increase yield, or reduce labor; they are designed to simply 
be aesthetically pleasing. Ferris wheel planters can be found at some garden shops 
and a search through online vendors will generally result in several options. I've 
tried building a couple of Ferris wheel systems and have learned a few lessons in the 
Flood and drain racks are 
relatively simple hydroponic 
growing systems. Metal 
shelving supports plastic 
tubs and provides mounting 
surfaces for lighting. Water 
floods the tubs to irrigate the 
plants, then the water drains 
back to the reservoir on the 
lowest level.

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    119
process. First, moving the Ferris wheel with a motor so the plants can be dipped into a 
nutrient solution can be a headache. Second, gravity and the weight of water are great 
for moving plants in a Ferris wheel. Third, use pots that drain quickly. Generally, stone 
wool and/or perlite are good options for these systems. 
NFT A-FRAME
An NFT A-frame system consists of NFT channels arranged in an A shape. These 
systems have pros and cons. The pro is the ability to increase the number of plant 
sites in a given footprint. The cons are an uneven distribution of light and possible  
flow rate issues. If you plan on building an A-frame NFT system, follow the same 
guidelines for slope and flow rate as mentioned in the NFT project. Additionally,  
use ¼-inch shutoff valves for each channel to balance flow among all levels. The use 
of ¼-inch shutoff valves is further described in the project for the rain gutter garden.
RAIN GUTTER SYSTEMS
These are one of my favorite and are fun to build and customize. See next page.
Ferris wheel systems are 
largely visual novelties, 
but they do function when 
it comes to growing small 
plants. Nutrient solution is 
delivered to small, quick-
draining grow pots when they 
reach the peak of the wheel. 
The increased weight of 
the grow pot after irrigation 
encourages it to rotate 
downward, queuing up the 
next grow pot for irrigation. 

120    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
HOW TO BUILD A RAIN GUTTER GARDEN
This system is one of the more complicated systems in this book, but 
that is because I was focused on the aesthetics of the final system. I 
personally like a system that looks so nice that a visitor to my garden 
would not immediately think it is a DIY project. To simplify the assembly 
of this system, you can skip the paint job, use vinyl tubing to connect 
troughs, and reduce the number of levels. Alternatively, this system can 
be thought of as a model for a much larger system. I cut my channels 
to 33 inches wide, but this system could easily be modified to have 
10-inch-wide channels. It could be many levels taller too. When adding 
more vertical levels, it is important to consider pump size. I prefer to 
oversize a pump and use shutoff valves to control flow for each level. 
Oversized pumps also help reduce the potential of debris clogging the 
irrigation lines.
MATERIALS
Irrigation
3 
½" rubber grommet
3 
½" elbow connectors
10'  
½" black vinyl tubing
6' 
1½" PVC pipe
3 
1½" PVC coupling
4'  
¼" black vinyl tubing
1 
½" stopper
3 
¼" double-barbed 
 
connectors
3 
¼" shutoff valve
1 
Submersible water 
 
pump (800 GPH)
3 
Active Aqua screen 
 
fitting
Optional
3 cans White water-based latex 
 
primer, sealer & stain- 
 
blocker (KILZ 2 LATEX)
 
Paint roller and/or paint 
 
brush (paint frame  
 
before assembly)
Frame
1 
2 × 10" × 8' board
2 
2 × 4" × 8' board
1 lb. 
#10 x 2½" exterior screws
20 gal. Reservoir
Troughs
1 
10' vinyl rain gutter
6  
White vinyl gutter hanger
3  
White vinyl K-style end cap set
50 L 
Coarse perlite
• Suitable Locations: Indoors, 
outdoors, or greenhouse
• Size: Medium to large
• Growing Media: Perlite, 
clay pellets, and other fast-
draining materials
• Electrical: Required
• Crops: Leafy greens, herbs, 
strawberries, and other 
short crops

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    121
Sawhorses with clamps
Tape measure
Permanent marker
Circular saw
Drill
2" hole saw drill bit  
(shown at right)
Step drill bit with ⅛" incre-
ments from ¼" to 1⅜"
¼" drill bit
Level
Rafter square
Hacksaw
Heavy-duty scissors
Deburring tool
Reciprocating saw
Irrigation line hole punch
Safety Equipment
Work gloves
Eye protection
TOOLS

122    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
2
3
4
Build the Frame
Choose a reservoir before building the frame. The width of the frame needs to be 
wider than the reservoir so the reservoir can easily fit between the vertical supports.
1 Move the 2 × 10" × 8' board onto the sawhorses and fasten with clamps. Measure 
and mark two 30" segments to be used as the base of the frame. 
2 Draw square cutting lines for each segment of the 2 × 10. 
3 Wearing work gloves and eye protection, cut the 2 × 10" × 8' board into two 30" 
segments with the circular saw. 
4 Move the two 2 × 4" × 8' boards onto the sawhorses and fasten with clamps. 
1

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    123
5 Measure and mark 
a 5' segment in both 
boards. Placing the 
boards on top of 
each other can help 
make sure they are 
cut to the exact same 
length.
6 Cut the two 2 × 4" × 8'  
boards along the 
marked lines to create 
two 5' segments  
and two 3' segments. 
7 Measure, mark, and 
cut a 30" segment 
using one of the  
3'2" × 4” segments 
from step 6. 
8 Move the 30" 2 × 4" 
segment onto the 
sawhorses, fasten 
with clamps, and 
mark the center. 
9 Use the 2" hole saw 
drill bit to create a 2" 
hole in the marked 
center of the 30"  
2 × 4" segment. 
6
5
7
8
9

124    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
10
11
12
10 Attach the two 5'  
2 × 4" segments to 
one of the 30" 2 × 
10" bases. Use two 
screws on each side.  
11 Attach the other side 
of the two 5' 2 × 4" 
segments to the 30"  
2 × 4" segment. Use 
two screws on each 
side. 
12 To build the support 
legs for the frame,  
cut two small 2 × 4"  
segments from the 
remaining 2 x 4" 
 wood. Place the 
segments in the 
angles between the 
base and vertical  
2 × 4" supports. Mark 
the small segments 
so the cuts will be a 
perfect match. 
Support leg

Hydroponic GrowinG SyStemS    125
13
17
14
13 Cut the angle support 
legs. 
14 Secure the support 
legs to the base using 
two screws. Secure the 
support legs to the  
vertical supports with  
one screw.  
15 Set up the frame in a level 
area. Check that the base 
and top crossbeam are 
level and square.
16 Position the reservoir in 
the frame.
17 Level the reservoir by 
moving the second 30"  
2 × 10" board under the 
front of the reservoir. 
Base
Support leg
Vertical support

126    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
Trough Assembly
Build the frame before assembling the troughs. The troughs need to be at least 3" 
wider than the frame to allow the gutter end caps to fit securely.
20 Measure and mark three 33" segments in the 10' vinyl gutter. 
21 Cut the three 33" segments using a hacksaw and/or heavy-duty scissors.
22 Use the deburring tool to remove any burrs from the ends of the gutters. 
23 Stack the three 33" gutter segments and fasten onto sawhorses with clamps. 
Measure and mark the center of the gutters at 16½". 
24 Use a step bit to create a ¾" hole in the marked center of the gutters. The 
placement of this hole is very important! It should be placed closer to the curved 
edge of the gutter. The center of the hole is approximately 2" from the flat back of 
the gutter. Deburr the hole but make sure not to widen the hole too much. 
20
21
22
23
24

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    127
25 Insert the ½" grommet 
into the hole. If the hole 
is too small, use the 
deburring tool to widen 
the hole. 
26 Repeat steps 24–25 for 
each of the three 33" 
gutter segments. 
27 Insert a ½" elbow into 
the ½" grommet in each 
gutter section. 
28 Cut three 4" segments 
of ½" tubing. Attach to 
the elbows. 
25
26
27
28

128    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
Attaching Troughs  
to Frame
The troughs in this design 
are 18" apart starting 3" 
from the top beam. This 
gives 18" of space below 
the lowest trough for the 
11"-tall reservoir. 
29 On each of the vertical 
5' 2 × 4" segments, 
mark 3", 21", and 39" 
from the top beam. 
30 Screw in the gutter 
hangers into the 
marked areas on 
the vertical 5' 2 × 4" 
segments. 
31 Slide the gutters into 
the hangers. 
32 Add the end caps.
32
31
30
29

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    129
Irrigation Assembly
The irrigation design in this system uses one main PVC 
pipe both for drainage and to conceal the tubing used 
for water delivery. The assembly of the irrigation could 
be simplified by removing the PVC pipe and using 1⁄2” 
vinyl tubing to connect all the drains and by running 
the water delivery tubing in the open (not concealed 
in a PVC pipe). I chose a more complicated irrigation 
design because it looks cleaner and avoids a potentially 
unsightly web of tubing. 
33 Insert the 6' 1½" PVC pipe through the guide 
hole in the top crossbeam. Mark the approximate 
intersection of the 1½" PVC pipe and the ½" 
drainage tube coming from each gutter level. 
34 Make a second set of marks approximately ½" above 
each gutter level. It will be important to distinguish 
between the marks made in the previous step and 
this step.
35 Remove the 1½" PVC pipe and fasten to the 
sawhorses using clamps. Using the step bit, drill a 
⅝" hole into each of the three marks made in step 
33. This will be used for the ½" drainage tube. 
36 Using the ¼" drill bit, drill a hole into each of the 
three marks created in step 34. This will be used for 
the ¼" water delivery line.
33
34
36

130    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
37 On the bottom end of the 1½" PVC pipe (the end closer to the ½" hole), drill four 
1⅜" drain holes. This pipe will be resting on the bottom of the reservoir and 
drainage water will pass through these holes into the reservoir. Use the deburring 
tool to clean all edges.
38 The 1½" PVC couplings will be placed above the ¼" hole for the lower two levels 
and between the ¼" and ⅝" hole for the top level. Make a mark 2" above the two 
¼" holes for the lower two levels. Make a mark 2" below the ¼" hole for the top 
level. Make sure the coupling will not cover the ¼" holes when the coupling is put 
in place. 
39 Cut the 1½" PVC pipe at the marks made in step 38. 
40 Connect the cut PVC segments with couplings.
41 Move the assembled PVC main line back into the system with the top coming  
out of the guide hole in the 2 × 4" wood crossbeam. 
41
39
38
37

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    131
42 Check to see if ½" drainage tubes from all three levels can be inserted into the PVC 
main line. If not, shorten segments in the main PVC line until all ½" drainage tubes 
match with their corresponding holes in the PVC main line. The PVC couplings 
can create gaps (sometimes big ones) that increase the total length of the pipe, 
throwing off the previous measurements.
43 Mark the top of the 2 × 4" wood crossbeam on the 1½" PVC pipe.
44 Remove the top PVC pipe segment and cut along the mark made in step 43. This is 
to prevent the PVC pipe from sticking out high above the top wood crossbeam.
45 Move the PVC mainline to a flat service. Gather the ¼" vinyl tubing, ½" vinyl tubing, 
½" stopper, ¼" double-barbed connectors, ¼" shutoff valves, irrigation line hole 
punch, and scissors.
46 Cut three 10" segments and three 2" segments of the ¼" vinyl tubing. 
47 Place the ½" vinyl tubing next to the PVC main line. It may be helpful to use  
clamps to hold the line straight. 
48 Insert the ½" stopper into the end of the ½" vinyl tube near the top of the  
PVC main line.
49 Begin poking holes into the ½" vinyl tubing with the irrigation line hole punch. 
Place holes adjacent to the ¼" holes drilled into the PVC main line. 
50 Insert ¼" double-barbed connectors into the three holes in the ½" vinyl tubing 
created in step 49. 
47
49
50

132    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
51
53
54
55
56
57

HYDROPONIC GROWING SYSTEMS    133
51 Connect the 2" segments and 10" segments of ¼" tubing using the ¼" shutoff valves.
52 Disconnect the PVC mainline at the 1½" couplings.
53 Insert the assembled ¼" tubes from step 51 into the ¼" holes in the PVC main line. 
Insert the 10" segment into the PVC so the ¼" shutoff valve remains outside of the 
PVC mainline. 
54 Starting from the top of the PVC main line, connect the 10" segment of the ¼" vinyl 
tubing to the ¼" double-barbed connector in the ½" vinyl tubing. 
55 Slide the ½" vinyl tubing down the PVC main line and continue connecting the 10" 
segments of the ¼" vinyl tubing to the ¼" double-barbed connectors in the ½" vinyl 
tubing. 
56 Reconnect the PVC main line segments. 
57 Slide the bottom end of the ½" vinyl tubing through one of the drain holes created 
in step 37. 
58 Place the assembled PVC main line back into the vertical system with the top held 
in place by the guide hole in the 2 × 4" wood crossbeam. 
59 Insert the ½" drain lines coming out of each gutter into their corresponding ⅝" 
hole in the PVC main line.
60 Connect the bottom end of the ½" vinyl tubing to a pump in the reservoir. 
58
60

134    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
Planting
Test the irrigation system before planting. Fill the reservoir with enough water to cover 
the pump, turn on the pump, and check that each level is receiving water. Adjust the 
flow to each level by adjusting the shutoff valves. This irrigation test will also help 
clean out the irrigation lines and catch any loose plastic particles left over from the 
assembly. Dump the test water.
61 Place the Active Aqua screen fittings over the ½" drain grommets before filling 
each trough. 
62 Pre-rinse the perlite in a bucket. This will help keep the system clean. Fill each 
trough with perlite. 
63 The amount of space you leave at the top of each trough will depend on the amount 
of plants you plan to add. The seedling plugs will take up space in the trough, so 
filling the trough to the top before transplanting is not recommended. 
64 Fill the reservoir with clean water and prepare a nutrient solution specific to the 
crop you plan on planting (see System Maintenance chapter).
65 Turn on the pump and check to see that each level is receiving nutrient solution.
66 Transplant the seedlings. 
Additional Options
Reservoirs  There are many alternative reservoirs that could be used with this rain 
gutter system. A nontranslucent plastic storage tote, a 5-gallon bucket, or even a 
small pond would work as a reservoir. It is important to cover the reservoir to reduce 
the development of algae, which can attract fungus gnats that can potentially damage 
plant roots. If growing in a warm climate, it may be beneficial to bury the reservoir to 
keep the nutrient solution cool.
61
62
63

Hydroponic GrowinG SyStemS    135
Lighting This system can be modified for use indoors by adding grow lights. I 
added two 2-foot fluorescent lights for the lower two levels to supplement light in 
the greenhouse. LED light bars are another option. LED light bars are often more 
powerful than fluorescent lights and may be better suited for gardeners planning 
on using the rain gutter system indoors. If using this system indoors, you may 
want to build a fourth level to support a grow light for the top trough.
Troubleshooting
trough is leaking from end caps
• Drain reservoir and let system dry. 
• Use PVC cement to attach and seal end caps.
no water coming out of multiple levels 
• Check power to pump.
• Check pump for materials clogging intake.
• Make sure pump intake valve is in fully open position.
• Make sure shutoff valves are open for all levels.
no water coming out of one level
• Reduce flow from other levels to direct more pressure to dry level.
• Completely shut off flow to other levels to force out any debris clogging line.
• Loosen any potential debris by pushing an unfolded paper clip down clogged 
¼" line.
• Disassemble and reassemble irrigation for that level. It may be helpful to 
shorten ¼" irrigation line too.
The framework supporting the 
rain gutter troughs provides 
ample opportunity for 
mounting grow lights.


137
GROWING A HEALTHY, ROBUST SEEDLING or root cutting is often one of the 
biggest challenges for new hydroponic gardeners. The ideal conditions for 
germination or root establishment are dependent on crop selection. Refer to 
the crop selection charts in the appendix to find recommended germination 
temperatures for various crops. Do not be discouraged if you struggle to grow 
healthy seedlings or rooted cuttings on your first try; it may take a few attempts 
to understand the proper practices for your environment. Worst case, you can 
transplant traditional soil seedlings purchased from a garden center into a 
hydroponic system using the steps listed in the final section of this chapter.
STARTING SEEDS and CUTTINGS
4
Stone Wool Preparation 
It is important to rinse stone wool before 
seeding. Some stone wool growers prefer 
to soak their stone wool overnight, but 
I've found that is generally unnecessary. 
Technically, stone wool should be rinsed or 
soaked with water at a pH of 5.5, but I've 
also found this to be unnecessary. I've had 
success starting seeds in stone wool with 
water anywhere in the pH range from 5 to 7. 
If you don't have a pH meter, don't worry—
chances are you will still have success. The 
initial rinse of stone wool can be with either 
water or a nutrient solution, but it is important 
to eventually rinse the stone wool with a 
nutrient solution so the young seedlings or 
cuttings have access to nutrients once roots 
emerge. Most recommendations say to use a 
nutrient solution at one-fourth to half strength, 
but I've had success starting seeds in nutrient 
solutions anywhere from one-fourth up to 
full strength. The point is, most things in the 
process of growing plants are slightly flexible, 
so don't panic if your pH, nutrient solution, 
root temperatures, or other factors are 
slightly off from the recommendations.
My preferred method of rinsing stone 
wool is using a mesh bottom tray, which 
allows any loose stone wool dust to be 
easily rinsed away. It is also possible to 
rinse stone wool in a solid bottom tray by 
simply soaking the sheet and pouring off the 
excess nutrient solution.

138    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
STARTING SEEDS IN STONE WOOL 
Starting seeds in stone wool can be incredibly easy and involve very little effort. The most important factors 
for success are having the proper amount of light, airflow, heat, and humidity. There are many different 
techniques for starting seeds in stone wool; the methods I describe have repeatedly worked for me for my 
hobby hydroponic and commercial hydroponic systems. There are definitely more bare-bones methods for 
starting seeds in stone wool that involve far less equipment, but my goal is to give you a method that will 
provide a high likelihood of success with minimal maintenance. 
Stone wool starter cubes  
(Grodan A-OK 36/40)
10 × 20" mesh bottom tray
10 × 20" solid bottom tray
Nutrient solution
Seedling heat mat  
with controller
Seeds
Labels and marker
Misting bottle
Vented humidity dome
2' 4-bulb T5  
fluorescent light
Fan 
MATERIALS
1
2
1 Place the stone wool seedling sheet into the 10 × 20" mesh bottom tray.
Rinse and prepare the stone wool with a half-strength nutrient solution.
2 Let any excess nutrient solution run off the seedling sheet through the mesh 
bottom tray.
3 Place the mesh bottom tray into the solid bottom tray. The stone wool should 
be damp to the touch but not sitting in water.
4 Place the solid bottom tray on the seedling heat mat. 

Starting SeedS and CuttingS    139
5 Seed that sheet.
6 Pelleted seeds should be seeded one per plug.
7 Basil often yields more when three to eight seeds are used per plug. Basil will 
often germinate great even when not placed directly in a dibbled hole.
8 Lettuce mixes using raw seed (not pelleted) yield more and look better when three 
to five seeds are used per plug. 
9 Plants like tomatoes, peppers, cucumbers, and eggplant should be seeded two per 
plug if possible. Once the seedlings emerge, identify the smaller plant in the plug 
and remove it by pinching and pulling. Using two seeds per plug and removing one 
later increases the chances of having successful seedlings in every plug. If one 
seed doesn't germinate, then there is a backup. 
10 Label your varieties. Use plant markers or make a note on a sheet of paper; either 
way, it is important to keep track of what varieties you plant. 
11 Misting the seeds can help ensure they have good contact with the stone wool and 
have enough moisture to germinate. Misting is very helpful with pelleted seeds 
because sometimes they struggle to absorb enough moisture by simply making 
contact with the stone wool.
4
5
8
9

140    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
12 Plug in the heat mat to the heat mat controller. Weave the controller's 
thermometer through one of the humidity dome vents and insert it into  
the stone wool. 
13 Secure the humidity dome on the tray and pull any excess slack on the 
thermometer cord. 
14 Set the heat mat controller to a desired minimum temperature. Various  
target germination temperatures can be found in the appendix in the  
Crop Selection Charts.
15 For the first few days, there should be no need to touch the seedling tray. The initial 
stone wool rinsing/soaking will provide enough moisture for several days.
16 Remove the humidity dome once 50 percent of the seedlings have germinated. For 
most vegetable crops this will be after 3 to 5 days. Leaving the humidity dome on 
too long can increase the chance of fungal diseases and seedling death.
17 Stone wool will feel heavy when it is wet and it is noticeably lighter when in need of 
irrigation. It is best to develop a sense of how much water is in your seedling sheet 
by lifting up the tray to gauge the weight. Irrigate with a nutrient solution when the 
tray feels light; often this is every 2 to 4 days indoors depending on air temperature 
and crop age. Depending on the environment, it may not be necessary to irrigate 
the seedlings at all, because they may be ready to transplant into your hydroponic 
garden within 1 to 2 weeks before an irrigation would be necessary.
17
12

STARTING SEEDS AND CUTTINGS    141
Collecting Cuttings 
Collecting cuttings is a skill 
that many struggle with at 
first. It is very important to 
collect cuttings from clean 
plants using clean tools. The 
ideal environment to root 
a cutting is also the ideal 
environment for various plant 
diseases that can quickly kill 
or severely weaken cuttings. 
Before you collect cuttings 
it is important to wash your 
hands, pruners, and any 
containers used to hold the 
cuttings. Many gardeners 
prefer to use gloves to 
prevent contamination from 
their hands and use alcohol 
wipes to sanitize pruners.
The minimum length 
required to use a cutting 
will depend on the rooting 
technique, but it is generally 
best to collect longer 
cuttings (6 inches or more) 
and cut them shorter later if 
needed. Remove all the side 
shoots and leaves so only a 
few leaves remain at the top 
of the cutting.
Store cuttings in water during the collection process.
Remove any flowers so the cutting 
can focus its energy on growing roots 
instead of producing fruit.
Cuttings only need a few leaves; too many leaves 
will increase their chance of drying out and dying 
before establishing roots. Collect more cuttings 
than needed to give yourself options later.
Remove side shoots and leaves.
When possible, select cuttings that have thick woody 
stems (left) over weaker thin stems (right).
Cut just above leaf internodes.

142    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
• Suitable Locations: 
Indoors or greenhouse 
with shade
• Growing Media: Stone 
wool
• Electrical: Required 
indoors, not required 
outdoors
• Crops: Basil, mint, 
sage, rosemary, thyme, 
lavender, tomatoes, 
peppers, sweet potato, 
and many more
ROOTING CUTTINGS IN STONE WOOL 
There are many different ways to root a cutting and there are many variations in technique within these 
methods. This tutorial covers a few of these variations; please experiment and see what works best for you, 
your crop, and your unique cloning environment. 
Stone wool starter cubes  
(Grodan A-OK 36/40)
Nutrient solution
10 × 20" solid bottom tray 
Sharp pruners and/or scalpel 
Rooting hormone (optional)
Tall vented humidity dome
2' 4-bulb T5 fluorescent light
Seedling heat mat with controller 
(optional)
Gro-Smart tray (optional) 
MATERIALS & TOOLS

Starting SeedS and CuttingS    143
1 Rinse and prepare the stone wool with half-strength nutrient solution. Place it 
in the solid bottom tray. With sharp pruners, collect cuttings (see the Collecting 
Cuttings guide on page 141).
2 Shorten the cuttings to 4" to 7", making a 45-degree cut below an internode.
2
(Optional) Some growers prefer 
to make a horizontal cut and then 
split the bottom of the stem, some 
growers prefer just a 45-degree cut, 
and some growers prefer to do both 
a 45-degree cut and split the stem.
(Optional) Some growers remove a 
thin layer from one side of the cutting 
to expose more cambium, a white 
layer inside the stem from which new 
roots emerge. 
(Optional) Rooting hormone can be very helpful when rooting challenging crops. 
Some gardeners use honey instead of a rooting gel.

144    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
3 Always wear gloves when working with rooting hormone.
4 Pour some of the rooting solution into a separate container to avoid potentially 
contaminating the entire bottle.
5 Dip the end of the cutting into the rooting hormone, and let any excess rooting 
solution drip off before moving the cutting to the cube. 
6 The cutting can be positioned in the cube in several ways:
A. The standard method is to insert the cutting into the cube about 1" deep through 
the pre-dibbled hole. 
B. Another option is creating a smaller dibble hole so the cutting fits more snugly 
into the hole. This is beneficial when using thin cuttings because it increases the 
amount of contact between the stem and the stone wool. 
C. Another option is to insert the cutting into the bottom of the stone wool cube. 
This has similar benefits to the previous option plus it has a wider bottom, 
making it possible to place individual cubes in a tray without a holder. 
6C
6B
6A
5

STARTING SEEDS AND CUTTINGS    145
7 Try to avoid leaves touching, which can create areas of excessive moisture and 
increase risk of fungus. 
8 Snugly place the humidity dome onto the tray and place under a low-intensity  
light. I turned off two bulbs in this four-bulb light to reduce the potential of 
stressing out my cuttings before they have a chance to establish roots. 
9 If your cuttings are drying out before establishing roots, try removing more leaves 
to reduce transpiration, decreasing light intensity, adding water to the bottom of 
the tray to increase humidity, adjusting the humidity dome vent to keep in more 
humidity, or adjusting the heat mat temperature. If adding water to the bottom of 
the tray, do not add so much that the cubes are sitting in water.
10 A heat mat with a controller is great for speeding up the rooting process. Most 
gardeners target 70° to 80°F. 
11 Cuttings should be slowly acclimated to normal humidity levels by incrementally 
opening up the dome vents.
12 Some plants root very quickly from cuttings, in less than a week, but most will 
require a couple of weeks or more until they have enough roots to be transplanted 
into a hydroponic garden. Cuttings can be transplanted when roots emerge from 
the stone wool cube.
10
8
7

146    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
ROOTING CUTTINGS IN A HYDROPONIC CLONER
Most hydroponic gardeners find rooting cuttings in a hydroponic cloner far easier 
than rooting cuttings in stone wool. The plants often root faster, appear less 
stressed during the rooting process, and rarely require a rooting 
hormone. There are a few variations within hydroponic cloners, 
including aeroponic and deep-water culture options. This book 
describes how to build an aeroponic cloner that could be used 
in the following process. To show another option, this tutorial 
uses a deep-water culture hydroponic cloner.
Hydroponic cloners do not need to be limited to starting 
plants. They often can grow plants to full maturity. I've grown 
strawberry bushes full of berries and monstrous mint plants  
in hydroponic cloners. A hydroponic cloner is a great addition to a  
hydroponic garden or it can be the hydroponic garden. 
MATERIALS & TOOLS
Sharp pruners
oxyCLONE 40 Site 
Cloning System
2' 4-bulb T5 
fluorescent light
Nutrient solution
1 With sharp pruners, collect cuttings (see the Collecting Cuttings guide on 
page 141). The cutting should be long enough to have at least 1" of stem 
submerged in the nutrient solution. I generally aim for 6" cuttings so I can 
have a couple of inches of stem submerged in the nutrient solution.
2 Assemble the cloning system and place under the grow light if using indoors. 
3 Fill with half-strength nutrient solution or use a hydroponic fertilizer 
specifically for rooting cuttings (sometimes called a “clone solution”).
4 Plug in the air pump and water pump.
5 Use a soft collar to hold the cuttings in place. Make sure no leaves  
are stuck in the collar.

STARTING SEEDS AND CUTTINGS    147
6 Evenly space cuttings 
in the cloner and 
cover any unused 
holes with a collar. 
7 After 4 to 7 days, 
most cuttings show 
evidence of roots. 
Some plants root 
more slowly than 
others and may need 
to stay in the system 
longer.
8 Plants with 
established roots 
are ready to be 
transplanted into a 
hydroponic garden. 
Simply remove the 
collar and your new 
plant is ready to go. 
• Suitable Locations: 
Indoors, outdoors, or 
greenhouse
• Growing Media: Just 
water
• Electrical: Required
• Crops: Basil, mint, 
sage, rosemary, 
thyme, lavender, 
tomatoes, peppers, 
sweet potato, 
strawberries, and 
any other plant that 
can be rooted from a 
cutting
2
6
8

148    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
TRANSPLANTING PLANTS STARTED IN SOIL
The option of using a soil-started plant in a 
hydroponic garden is often very attractive to 
new hydroponic gardeners because it makes it 
possible to purchase plants from a garden center 
or use plants from their existing soil garden. It is 
definitely possible to transplant soil-started plants 
into a hydroponic system, but it is not the best 
way to source plants for a hydroponic garden. The 
process of rinsing off the soil from a plant's roots 
usually involves some root loss and damage, which 
increases the potential of exposure to root diseases. 
If the hydroponic garden uses small irrigation 
lines (¼ inch or smaller), it is possible that any soil 
particles not rinsed off from the transplant may 
clog the irrigation lines. I would not recommend 
transplanting a soil plant into a hydroponic system 
if you are not okay with the possibility that the 
plant may not survive the process. Now that the 
disclaimers are out of the way, I must personally say 
that I really enjoy the process of washing off the soil 
from a plant's roots.
1 If possible, prune off all the fruit and some of the vegetation from the plant. Less 
fruit and vegetation means less need for water uptake and less demand on the root 
system. It is important to reduce the demand on the root system because it might 
be damaged in the rinsing process and unable to deliver the water and nutrients 
required for the full-size plant. 
2 Pour off any loose soil from the top of the transplant. 
3 Remove the plant from its pot.
4 Gently dunk the root system into a bucket of water. 
TOOLS
Sharp pruners
Bucket
1
4

STARTING SEEDS AND CUTTINGS    149
5 Gently shake the plant 
to wash off soil from 
the roots. 
6 Use your fingers to 
loosen up the roots 
to expose soil clumps 
trapped deep within.
7 It may be necessary 
to dump and refill the 
bucket multiple times 
to get all the soil off 
the roots. A watering 
wand with a gentle 
flow can help speed 
the process.
8 Pick out as much soil 
and debris as possible 
without ripping up the 
roots. 
9 Clear some space for 
the transplant.
10 Insert the transplant 
and cover the root 
system. 
11 Water in the new 
transplant to improve 
root contact with the 
substrate.
5
6
8
9
10


151
PLANT NUTRIENT UPTAKE
PLANTS CANNOT TELL THE DIFFERENCE between natural and synthetic 
fertilizers. Plants have specialized pathways that only allow them to uptake a 
very short list of ions and simple molecules. In traditional soil-based gardening, 
these ions and molecules are often derived from manure or decaying plant 
matter broken down by a series of biological processes. For example, nitrogen is 
primarily only available to plants when present as ammonium (NH4
+) or nitrate 
(NO3
-). In manure, nitrogen can be present in a wide variety of forms, including 
organic nitrogen (Org-N), ammonia (NH3), ammonium (NH4
+), hydrazine (N2H2), 
hydroxylamine (NH2OH), nitrogen gas (N2), nitrous oxide (N2O), nitric oxide (NO), 
nitrous acid (HNO2), nitrite (NO2
-), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), nitric acid (HNO3), and 
nitrate (NO3
-). Bacteria present in the soil can transform these forms of nitrogen 
into the specific plant-available forms of nitrogen. The process of breaking down 
a raw nutrient source like manure into simple molecules and ions available to 
the plant is dependent on many factors, including bacterial populations, soil 
temperature, and water content. In traditional hydroponic fertilizers, nitrogen is 
applied in its plant-available forms (ammonium and nitrate) and there is no need 
for bacteria to process the fertilizer into plant-available forms.
Plants grown in soil are constantly searching for nutrients. Their roots are on 
a scavenger hunt for nutrients spread through the soil. The roots generally find 
nutrients dissolved in water in the soil, often called the soil solution, which can 
then be picked up by the roots. The availability of nutrients in the soil is dependent 
on not only the presence of nutrients, but also the moisture in the soil, pH of the 
soil, distribution of nutrients in the soil, the cation exchange capacity of the soil, 
and more.
PLANT NUTRITION 
5

152    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
On the other hand, plants grown in hydroponic systems can have constant access 
to nutrients. The nutrients are evenly dissolved in water to create a nutrient solution, 
similar to a soil solution. Any time the plant needs water or nutrients, they're available. 
This allows a plant to reach its full potential without needing to expend energy 
searching for nutrients or being stunted by the inability to find essential nutrients. 
FERTILIZERS
Fertilizers can be a very difficult topic. It is one of the most common issues I deal with 
when working with commercial hydroponic growers. Decades ago, almost all growers 
had to blend more than ten ingredients to create a hydroponic fertilizer recipe that met 
all their crop's nutrient requirements. This involved a lot of chemistry, lab tests, and 
spreadsheets! Today many commercial growers still create custom fertilizer blends 
using many ingredients but there is an increasing use of pre-blended fertilizers. These 
pre-blended fertilizer mixes allow growers to simply purchase two or three different 
fertilizer bags to create a recipe that meets all their crop's nutrient requirements. 
The manufacturers of hobby hydroponic fertilizers have further simplified the process 
by creating one-part fertilizer options. One-part fertilizers are as easy as making 
fruit punch from concentrate. Just add the fertilizer powder or liquid concentrate to a 
specific volume of water using the rate on the fertilizer bag or bottle.
ORGANIC HYDROPONIC FERTILIZERS
Organic hydroponics is possible, but I would not recommend it for new growers. It 
is important to have some experience with hydroponics and understand how plants 
should perform under normal conditions before venturing into organic hydroponics. 
One of the most beginner-friendly choices for a new hydroponic grower looking to 
grow organically is aquaponics. Aquaponics is a combination of hydroponics and 
aquaculture, or fish farming. In an aquaponic system, the fish waste is broken down in 
a series of biological processes to create nutrients that are available to the plants. 
You may be tempted to experiment with an organic fertilizer created for traditional 
gardening but this often results in a foul-smelling mess. Many organic fertilizers are 
made from animal manure or byproducts from the meat industry. These fertilizers can 
quickly turn rancid in a hydroponic system. The nutrient solution will begin to smell 
foul and the system will get covered in goop, requiring the gardener to frequently flush 
and clean the system. Most successful organic hydroponic fertilizers use nutrients 
derived from plant sources like sugarcane. I've managed several successful organic 
hydroponic systems using a molasses-based fertilizer called Pre-Empt. 
Nutrition  
Definitions
Nutrient solution 
Nutrients dissolved  
in water. 
Stock solution 
Nutrients dissolved at 
a highly concentrated 
rate, often 50x–200x 
the strength of a 
nutrient solution. Stock 
solutions are created 
because measuring 
and adding a liquid 
fertilizer to a reservoir 
is generally easier than 
measuring and adding  
a dry fertilizer.

PLANT NUTRITION     153
CONVENTIONAL FERTILIZER SOURCES
Liquid or Dry Fertilizer
Within conventional fertilizers there are several categories. The first decision most 
hydroponic gardeners make is between liquid or dry fertilizers. Liquid fertilizers 
are often easier to use because they are easy to measure and don't require much 
mixing, but liquid fertilizers are often more expensive than dry fertilizers. Most liquid 
hydroponic fertilizers are simply a dry fertilizer mixed with water and then sold in 
a bottle. Liquid fertilizers are often less concentrated than dry fertilizers and more 
expensive due to the increased costs of shipping a liquid.
One-Part, Two-Part, or Many Parts
Many hydroponic fertilizer companies try to create a product line with many add-on 
products, but these add-ons are often unnecessary for healthy plant growth. Many 
new hydroponic gardeners get carried away with fertilizer amendments and cause 
more harm than benefit. It is surprisingly easy to love a plant to death. New hydroponic 
gardeners want to give their plants every flashy product they see, but too much love 
will quickly kill your crop.
One-part fertilizers like those listed below are able to grow healthy crops 99 
percent of the time without any amendments. Most of the one-part fertilizers are 
formulated for either vegetative growth, like lettuce and young plants, or reproductive 
growth, like mature tomato plants developing fruit or any other flowering crop.
Many fertilizers come in two or three parts. These multipart fertilizers are very 
different from add-on products, and they come in two or three parts because certain 
nutrients have a tendency to bind to each other when mixed in high concentration. 
This binding is called precipitation. The usual culprits are calcium with phosphate or 
calcium with sulfate. When these nutrients bind, they create a precipitate that looks 
like sand. This sand will fall to the bottom of the reservoir and becomes unavailable 
to the crop. Many companies sell their fertilizer in two parts: one part containing 
calcium (along with other nutrients) and the other part containing phosphorus and 
sulfur (along with other nutrients). Sometimes one-part liquid fertilizers have a poor 
shelf life because the nutrients begin to create precipitates that gather at the bottom 
of the bottle. It is always a good idea to shake a one-part liquid fertilizer bottle before 
purchasing to check if there is a solid chunk of fertilizer precipitate at the bottom.
Another benefit of two- and three-part fertilizers is the ability to adjust the ratio 
of nutrients. Many of the fertilizers created for the hobby hydroponic gardener have 
suggested ratios of each of the ingredients for various stages of growth. 
Large commercial hydroponic growers and universities create fertilizers from 
many parts. Each of these additions generally contains one or two of the thirteen 
essential nutrients for plant growth. These fertilizer recipes often involve ten or 
more different ingredients. If you get very excited about stoichiometry and want to 

154    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
learn about advanced hydroponic fertilizers, a great place to start is researching 
the Hoagland solution. The Hoagland solution and the many versions of modified 
Hoagland solutions are based on the original hydroponic nutrient recipes developed at 
the University of California in the 1930s.
MEASURING FERTILIZER CONCENTRATION
There are several ways to measure fertilizer concentration in a hydroponic nutrient 
solution. The preferred unit of measurement varies by country and application. 
ELECTRICAL CONDUCTIVITY
Electrical conductivity (EC) is a measure of a material's ability to transport an  
electrical current. Water's ability to conduct electricity is the reason swimming during 
a thunderstorm or using an electrical appliance near a bathtub is incredibly dangerous. 
Surprisingly, pure distilled water with no mineral content is actually a very poor conductor. 
Pure distilled water is not common, and virtually all water sources have some degree  
of conductivity due to their mineral content. In hydroponics, growers increase the  
mineral content of the water by adding fertilizers. These fertilizers increase the water's 
ability to conduct electricity in a predictable pattern. For this reason, EC is a great way  
to estimate the fertilizer concentration in a hydroponic nutrient solution. EC is commonly 
measured in millisiemens per centimeter (mS/cm). Some countries, primarily Australia 
and New Zealand, may use conductivity factor (CF) instead of EC. The conversion chart  
on page 155 compares the EC, CF, and ppm.
One-part liquid fertilizer is easy 
to use but more costly. Examples 
include FloraNova Grow (left), 
formulated for vegetative growth, 
and FloraNova Bloom (right), 
formulated for reproductive growth.
MaxiBloom is a one-part 
dry fertilizer formulated for 
reproductive growth.
Two-part and three-part liquid fertilizers are also easy to use, have a great shelf life, and 
offer the ability to adjust the ratio of nutrients. Examples include FloraDuo two-part fertilizer 
(left) and Flora Series three-part fertilizer (right). Two-part and three-part dry fertilizers have 
the same benefits as liquid ones but are often cheaper. It is sometimes difficult to find 
multipart dry hydroponic fertilizers at traditional grow stores. A few of the more popular 
ones are blended by Hort Americas, Hydro-Gardens (Chem-Gro), JR Peters Inc. (Jack's), and 
Plant Marvel (Nutriculture).

Plant nutrition     155
PARTS PER MILLION 
Parts per million (ppm) refers to the mass of a nutrient in a specific volume of 
water, typically measured in milligrams per liter. Ppm is generally associated with 
total dissolved solids (TDS) meters. The conversion chart has a couple of different 
ppm columns because ppm can be interpreted in several ways, depending on the 
manufacturer of the ppm meter/probe. This can be a great source of confusion for 
new hydroponic growers trying to target a recommended ppm because they might be 
unsure whether their meter is measuring ppm using the same interpretation as the 
recommended ppm. To avoid this confusion, I recommend using an EC meter. That 
said, the reason there are so many different ppm interpretations is very interesting. As 
mentioned previously, EC measures how well a nutrient solution conducts electricity 
and EC increases as fertilizer is added to a solution, but all fertilizers do not increase 
the EC equally. Some nutrients have little impact on EC while others have a very 
significant impact. For example, an EC reading of 1 mS/cm could mean there is 400 
ppm calcium or it could mean there is 620 ppm phosphorus. Nutrients are present in 
the nutrient solution as ions and some ions are better conductors of electricity. Almost 
all ppm meters measure a solution's EC and then convert that number into ppm 
by multiplying the EC by a conversion factor that the manufacturer suggests as an 
approximation for ppm. This means the manufacturer has to predict which nutrients 
will be used in the nutrient solution in order to determine how their meter should 
convert the original EC reading into ppm. Again, to avoid this confusion, please use an 
EC meter if given an option between EC and ppm.
Fertilizer Storage
Always store fertilizer 
in airtight containers. 
Some of the ingredients 
in dry fertilizers, like 
calcium nitrate, are able 
to absorb moisture from 
the air. Dry fertilizer 
not stored properly can 
turn into a big solid 
brick once it absorbs 
moisture from the air. 
This fertilizer brick may 
still be usable but it is 
difficult to get accurate 
measurements because 
its weight and volume 
are affected by the 
additional moisture. 
EC  
(mS/cm)
CF
ppm 500 
(TDS)
ppm  
700
0.1
1
50
70
0.2
2
100
140
0.3
3
150
210
0.4
4
200
280
0.5
5
250
350
0.6
6
300
420
0.7
7
350
490
0.8
8
400
560
0.9
9
450
630
1
10
500
700
1.1
11
550
770
1.2
12
600
840
1.3
13
650
910
1.4
14
700
980
1.5
15
750
1050
EC  
(mS/cm)
CF
ppm 500 
(TDS)
ppm  
700
1.6
16
800
1120
1.7
17
850
1190
1.8
18
900
1260
1.9
19
950
1330
2
20
1000
1400
2.1
21
1050
1470
2.2
22
1100
1540
2.3
23
1150
1610
2.4
24
1200
1680
2.5
25
1250
1750
3
30
1500
2100
3.5
35
1750
2450
4
40
2000
2800
4.5
45
2250
3150
5
50
2500
3500
KEY: 
EC 
Electrical  
  
conductivity
CF 
Conductivity  
  
factor
 tDS Total  
  
dissolved  
  
solids 
PPM Parts per  
  
million


157
AT SOME POINT, EVEN THE most basic hydroponic gardens will require some 
upkeep. Hydroponic system maintenance includes everything from monitoring and 
adjusting nutrient concentrations to regularly flushing the system, and even the 
occasional scrubbing of pots and reservoirs.  
MANAGING THE NUTRIENT SOLUTION
There are several ways to manage a hydroponic nutrient solution. Choosing the 
management strategy for your hydroponic garden will depend on crop selection, 
reservoir size, garden design, and personal preference. I often choose the option 
that requires the least amount of time even if that might slightly affect growth 
rate or crop quality, but you may wish to manage your nutrients more closely to 
optimize growth. The following management techniques are organized by the 
effort they require.
LEAST EFFORT: SET AND FORGET
Build the reservoir with the recommended fertilizer rate per gallon listed on the 
fertilizer bag/bottle. Adjust the pH if it is far outside of the target range, or don't. 
Allow the crop to grow until it is ready to harvest or until the water level is too low 
for plants to access the nutrient solution. This method can work great for leafy 
greens in floating raft systems and may work in other systems if they have a large 
enough reservoir relative to the number of plants growing. I've grown a surprising 
number of wonderful-looking crops using this minimal effort strategy. This 
management style can have issues when used with crops that have long growth 
cycles, such as tomatoes, peppers, cucumbers, and other flowering crops. If you 
wish to use minimal effort and grow crops that have a longer time until maturity, 
try the top off method.
SYSTEM MAINTENANCE
6

158    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
LITTLE EFFORT: TOP OFF
This method is similar to set and forget, but as the water level drops the grower simply 
adds water to maintain the original level. Over time this method will dilute the nutrient 
concentration in the reservoir and nutrient deficiencies may appear on the crop. This 
method can work for fast-growing crops with low nutrient demands like microgreens, 
leafy greens, and some herbs. This method sometimes works for some larger crops 
depending on the system, but there is some risk of overdiluting the nutrient solution, 
especially when using a small reservoir.
SOME EFFORT: TOP OFF AND AMEND
The most common method for maintaining a nutrient solution in a hydroponic garden 
is to top off the reservoir as mentioned in the previous method, then add more 
fertilizer to the reservoir to maintain a target EC. Please see the appendix for example 
target ECs for common hydroponic crops. After adding fertilizer to reach the target 
EC, the grower adjusts the pH of the nutrient solution using either an acid (pH down) 
or base (pH up). There are many easy-to-use pH down and pH up products available in 
grow stores, and there are DIY options that are often less optimal but definitely usable. 
For pH down, some hydroponic gardeners use vinegar or lemon juice and for pH up 
some use baking soda. 
To top off and amend the solution in your system, you will need an EC meter, 
hydroponic fertilizer, a measuring cup, a pH meter, pH down and pH up amendments, 
and a pipette (eyedropper).
Measure the starting EC after 
adding water to the reservoir.
Mix dry fertilizers in a separate 
container before adding to the 
reservoir. It is important to fully 
dissolve dry fertilizers before adding 
them to the reservoir.
Add fertilizer in small increments to avoid 
overfertilizing.

SYSTEM MAINTENANCE    159
Check the EC after adding fertilizer and continue adding small 
amounts of fertilizer until the target EC is reached.
Measure the pH after reaching the 
target EC.
Add pH down or pH up in small 
increments.
Thoroughly mix in additions before retesting the pH.
Slowly adjust the pH until the meter readings are within the 
target range.
Any pH up and pH down products should always be 
handled with caution. Avoid skin contact and follow 
all safety recommendations on the product label.
Stir the reservoir by hand or use a pump to circulate the nutrient 
solution to disperse the concentrated fertilizer after each addition.

160    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
FLUSHING
EC is a great general reference for nutrient content in a hydroponic reservoir, but 
unfortunately it does not tell the whole story. Not all nutrients are taken up by plants 
at the same rate. Over time, some nutrients will accumulate and others will be rapidly 
depleted, resulting in an imbalanced nutrient solution. Large commercial hydroponic 
farms send out water samples to testing facilities to get exact quantities of each 
nutrient in the reservoir and the grower then adjusts the fertilizer inputs accordingly. 
To perform these fertilizer adjustments requires complex chemistry and a deep 
understanding of a crop's specific nutrient requirements. The far-easier alternative 
is to periodically flush a hydroponic system. Flushing is the process of removing the 
existing nutrient solution and refilling the system with fresh water and then adding 
new fertilizer. The frequency of flushing is dependent on many factors, including crop, 
environment, system, fertilizer, and water quality. Most gardeners find success using 
the following rule of thumb to figure out flush frequency: “Flush a reservoir when the 
quantity of water added to top off a reservoir is equivalent to the size of the reservoir.”
Example: A 40-gallon reservoir loses 5 gallons a day to evapotranspiration (plant 
transpiration and reservoir evaporation). The grower adds 5 gallons to the reservoir 
daily to top off the reservoir for water loss. After 8 days the grower adds a total of 40 
gallons (8 days × 5 gallons = 40 gallons), the same volume of water as the original 
reservoir size. The grower should flush the reservoir every 8 days.
This rule of thumb is very conservative and many growers can flush less frequently 
when using traditional hydroponic fertilizers. This rule is useful, however, for getting a 
general guideline. The water flushed from a hydroponic system does not need to be put 
down the drain. Many gardeners use the old nutrient solution to water their potted plants, 
raised beds, lawn, or trees. A traditional garden is a great companion to a hydroponic 
garden, and it can be a home for old nutrient solutions, composted plants, and substrates.
The flushed hydroponic 
nutrient solution can be used 
to fertilize a traditional soil 
garden.

SYSTEM MAINTENANCE    161
CLEANING
Hydroponic growers can use a variety of products to sanitize their gardens. The 
safest and easiest option is usually dish soap. Some additional options available to 
hobby hydroponic growers include household bleach (use ½ to 1 ounce per gallon of 
water), isopropyl alcohol (70 percent or stronger), and hydrogen peroxide (3 percent is 
generally sufficient; stronger concentrations are available but they must be handled 
with care, so read and follow product labels).
Remove all substrate and plant 
material from the hydroponic 
garden before cleaning.
Rinse the growing tray and 
reservoir to remove any 
plant debris.
It is best to clean a hydroponic garden while 
it is still wet. Stains, plant roots, and leaves 
are more difficult to remove when dry.
Dish soap is often 
sufficient for cleaning 
most hydroponic gardens.
Scrub the growing area and 
reservoir with a soft sponge that 
won't scratch the plastic surfaces.
Fertilizer residue can 
accumulate on the pump 
and sections of the power 
cord that are submerged 
in the nutrient solution. 
Use a sponge to clean off 
any buildup.
Hand dry or air-dry the 
garden after a final rinse.
If possible, disconnect any pumps 
or air stones to clean independently 
from the reservoir.


163
NOW THAT YOU HAVE LEARNED to be a system builder, an indoor gardener, 
and a maintenance worker, it is time to learn to be a doctor. Here is a brief 
primer on how to diagnose and troubleshoot your hydroponic growing system.
NUTRIENT DEFICIENCIES
Traditional nutrient deficiency and toxicity identification guides show a single 
leaf with symptoms, but these can easily lead a gardener to overcorrect a 
problem or correct a problem incorrectly. Very often a nutrient toxicity or 
deficiency is due to nutrient solution/substrate pH, environmental conditions, 
crop age, or the presence of a pathogen. Before assuming the problem is 
nutrient related, check to see if:
• All plants of the same variety show similar symptoms. 
• The pH is in the target range for the crop and not low (below 5.0)  
or high (above 6.5).
• The EC is in the target range for the crop.
• The air temperature is within the target range for the crop.
• The water temperature is within an ideal range for the crop,  
not below 55°F or above 85°F.
• The entire crop is receiving decent airflow. The leaves should be  
visibly moving.
• The crop is pest free.
• The light levels are within target range.
• The nutrient solution is created using a fertilizer designed for  
hydroponic gardens.
COMMON PROBLEMS 
and TROUBLESHOOTING
7

164    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
If the answer is yes to all these conditions, it is likely the problem is nutrient 
related. Often, nutrient-related issues can be remedied by dumping out the nutrient 
solution and restarting the system. 
CHLOROSIS AND NECROSIS
Chlorosis is the loss of the chlorophyll, the green pigment in plants. Chlorosis can be 
used to describe leaf yellowing from many causes, including nutrient deficiencies or 
pest damage. Necrosis is plant tissue death. Plant diseases or nutrient deficiencies 
often start with signs of chlorosis that lead to necrosis. 
Interveinal Chlorosis on New Growth
Interveinal chlorosis on new growth often indicates an iron deficiency or another 
micronutrient deficiency. Most hydroponic fertilizers provide plenty of iron, so the 
problem is rarely the presence of iron. Iron deficiencies generally occur because the 
pH is too high. Some crops are “iron-inefficient” and struggle to uptake iron. Basil is 
one of the common examples for an iron-inefficient plant. If basil is grown in a nutrient 
solution with a high pH, sometimes just over 6, it can show interveinal chlorosis on 
new growth indicative of an iron deficiency. The leaves showing this type of interveinal 
chlorosis will not recover but future growth can return to normal if the pH is adjusted 
and/or iron is supplemented to the nutrient solution.
Chlorosis on Older Leaves
Chlorosis on older leaves can be the result of a few different scenarios:
Nitrogen deficiency Nitrogen is a major component of chlorophyll, the  
green pigment in leaves. Plants are able to take the nitrogen from chlorophyll  
and move it throughout the plant as needed. When the plant detects a nitrogen 
Healthy, chlorotic, and 
necrotic sage leaves
Chlorosis on lower older 
leaves can indicate a nutrient 
deficiency, or it can be the 
natural senescence of older 
leaves.
Chlorotic fig leaf with necrotic 
leaf edges
Interveinal chlorosis on new 
growth

COmmON PROblEmS AND TROublESHOOTING    165
deficiency, it will relocate the nitrogen in its older leaves to its new growth. Nitrogen 
deficiencies can appear when crops are grown at a low EC. New aquaponic gardens 
will sometimes have issues with nitrogen deficiencies.
Natural senescence Senescence is the natural dying of leaves due to old age. 
In mature plants, it is not uncommon to see some lower leaves die from natural 
senescence. If the hydroponic garden has both young and old plants, check to see 
if only the older plants are showing chlorosis on older leaves; this would indicate 
natural senescence.
magnesium deficiency This looks similar to a nitrogen deficiency with older 
leaves showing chlorosis, but a magnesium deficiency will have interveinal chlorosis 
with necrotic spots and/or necrotic leaf edges. Most magnesium deficiencies can be 
remedied with magnesium sulfate (Epsom salt) at a rate of ½ to 1 teaspoon per gallon.
TIP BURN
Tip burn is technically a calcium deficiency, but very often it appears even when there 
is calcium present in the nutrient solution. Calcium is critical for the formation of 
plant cell walls. The plant's calcium uptake can sometimes struggle to keep up with 
the formation of new cells when a plant is growing fast in an environment with intense 
light and warm conditions. There are several ways to remedy this issue.
• Try a different variety. Some varieties are very sensitive to tip burn while others 
may grow fine in the existing conditions.
• Increase airflow on the crop to increase transpiration and speed up calcium uptake.
• Use a fertilizer with less nitrogen to slow down growth.
• Give the crop less light by adding shade or moving a grow light to slow down growth.
• Increase calcium. Sometimes this helps, but most hydroponic fertilizers provide 
sufficient calcium.
Tip burn on butterhead lettuce

166    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
INFESTATIONS
ALGAE
Algae growth is usually not an issue, but it can lead to other problems. Algae will steal 
some nutrients from the nutrient solution, but this is usually not a significant issue. 
The major concern is algae can act as a food source for fungus gnats and shore flies. 
To control algae growth, minimize the exposure of sunlight to the nutrient solution. 
Algae growing on the surface of seedlings is often a sign of overwatering, but it usually 
is not an issue that will significantly affect plant growth.
FUNGUS GNATS AND SHORE FLIES
Fungus gnats feed on fungi, algae, and plant tissue. The adult fungus gnats generally 
do not pose a threat, but the larvae can damage crops. The larvae feed on plant 
roots, creating wounds that make the plant susceptible to pathogens like Pythium 
and Fusarium. Shore flies are very similar to fungus gnats in looks but their larvae 
do not feed on plant roots. Shore flies do not damage crops, but they can definitely 
be annoying. Fungus gnats have a mosquito-like body shape with long legs. Shore 
flies look more like a fruit fly than a mosquito. There are many ways to control fungus 
gnats and shore flies; the following are just a few strategies:
Shore flies lay eggs in algal 
scum. The shore fly larvae 
feed on algae.
Algae on the edge of a 
floating raft

Common Problems and TroubleshooTing    167
• Remove algae and decaying plant matter from growing area.
• Introduce beneficial nematodes like Steinernema feltiae.
• Use pest-control products containing the bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis 
israelensis (Bti).
• Use organic pesticides that contain azadirachtin.
• Use organic pesticides that contain pyrethrum/pyrethrin.
APHIDS
Aphids usually do not kill plants, but they can damage crops by distorting growth or by 
spreading viruses. The most common sign of aphids is a sticky honeydew on leaves. 
This honeydew can attract ants or be a site for fungus growth. Insecticidal soaps are 
great for controlling aphids. Products containing azadirachtin or pyrethrum/pyrethrin 
are very effective.
THRIPS
There can be many thrips or a single thrips. The word thrips is both the singular and 
the plural form. Thrips damage usually appears as spots on leaves, deformed flower 
growth, and/or distorted new leaf growth. Thrips can be a difficult pest to control. It is 
often easiest to find crops or crop varieties that are less attractive to thrips. A variety 
of biological pest-management techniques can be used, such as the introduction of 
predatory insects like green lacewings, predatory mites, parasitic wasps, and minute 
pirate bugs. Organic insecticides containing spinosad can be very effective on thrips. 
Additional options include insecticides that contain azadirachtin or pyrethrin, or an 
insecticidal soap.
SPIDER MITES
The most common mite found in gardens is the two-spotted spider mite. It is 
primarily a problem with flowering crops, including tomatoes, eggplants, cucumbers, 
and strawberries. Early damage generally shows as a speckled dull appearance 
on the top surface of leaves. This can progress to leaf chlorosis and leaf drop. Bad 
infestations have visible webbing on leaves. Very often spider mites attack the upper 
leaves on a plant. Spider mites like dry weather and are attracted to crops that are 
heavily fertilized. Predatory insects can be very effective when used preventively. The 
predatory mites Phytoseiulus persimilis and Amblyseius fallacis are commonly used. 
Insecticidal soaps and Neem oil can also help control mite populations. When using 
an insecticide on mites, always do two applications about 5 to 7 days apart. Mites 
in the egg stage may not be controlled as effectively by insecticides, so spacing out 
applications helps to fully eradicate mites.
Aphids on mint
Thrips damage and a small 
yellow thrips

168    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
SEEDLING PROBLEMS
Growing a healthy seedling can be one of the most challenging steps in the process for 
new hydroponic gardeners. Here are just a few of the reasons you may be having poor 
germination, seedling death, or poor seedling quality.
• Substrate is too wet and rotting the young seedlings (common with fine coco and 
heavy soil).
• Substrate is too dry.
• Seedlings have long, weak stems due to low light levels. 
• Some seeds naturally have low germination rates. 
• Some seeds are very sensitive to temperature.
WILTING
It is possible to overwater in some hydroponic systems. Letting the root zone dry out 
between irrigation cycles is beneficial to most crops. There are many techniques for 
determining when to water a crop, including the finger test, lift checks, and meters. 
The finger test is simply putting a finger through the surface of the substrate to 
check for moisture. Finger tests are less useful on large pots that can retain a lot of 
moisture deeper than a finger can test. A list test is more effective for large potted 
plants. Simply lift the pot to see if it is heavy with water weight. Water is very heavy 
and it will be noticeable when the pot is light and in need of water. There are a variety 
Poor spinach germination due to high temperatures
These basil seedlings are showing signs of stretch due to low light. 
These seedlings are still usable in this condition but they are on the 
edge of being unusable. Plants grown under low light will have weak 
stems and may not be able to support themselves.

COMMON PROBLEMS AND TROUBLESHOOTING    169
Plants in NFT and aeroponic 
gardens can wilt quickly if 
there is a power outage or 
pump failure.
of moisture meters that can help too, but often a finger test and/or lift check is 
sufficient.
MUSHY BROWN ROOTS
Mushy brown roots are dead roots. The following are a few possible causes of root death:
• Low oxygen in the root zone due to overwatering in a heavy substrate, no aeration, 
and/or high water temperatures.
• Damage from very high EC or nutrient deficiency.
• Damage from very high or very low pH.
• Very warm water temperatures, often seen in hydroponic systems over 90°F.
• Damage from sanitizers used to clean system that were not fully rinsed  
before replanting.
• Root rot pathogens. There are many pathogens that are all clumped  
together under the same general name of root rot.
Remove plants that have dead roots. Very often it is necessary to fully clean 
out a system and sanitize it to remove the presence of pathogens. Try to remedy 
environmental conditions that are favorable to root rot before replanting. Increasing 
the flow rate in NFT can help. Increasing aeration in a floating raft garden can help. 
Burying the reservoir or adding a water chiller can also help. 

170    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
GLOSSARY
Aeroponic: A hydroponic growing technique that suspends plant 
roots in the air and delivers nutrients in a fine mist.
Air pump: Aerates a nutrient solution when connected to air stones.
Air stone: Diffuses air into nutrient solution when connected to 
an air pump. Available in many shapes, including flat circles, 
cylinders, and flexible hoses. 
Azadirachtin: A pesticide derived from the neem tree. Effective 
at disrupting insect molting for long-term pest management.
Beneficial microbes: Fungi and bacteria that can improve a 
plant's nutrient uptake, increase nutrient availability, provide 
protection against pests, or provide any other benefit in the 
growing environment.
Bloom: Often used to describe the flowering stage of growth. 
Bloom fertilizers are blended specifically for flowering crops 
that have different nutrient demands than leafy greens.
Ceramic metal halide: A high-intensity grow light with a blue 
dominant spectrum great for compact growth. Ceramic metal 
halides are more efficient than traditional metal halide grow lights.
CFL: See compact fluorescent light.
Clone: A rooted cutting.
CMH: See ceramic metal halide.
Coco coir: A growing substrate made from the husk of coconuts.
Compact fluorescent light: A beginner-friendly grow light that 
can be placed very close to plants. A compact fluorescent light 
may struggle to provide enough light for flowering crops.
Cut-and-come-again: A harvesting technique that allows 
for multiple harvests when used on specific crops. Plant is 
harvested by trimming back growth but leaving enough stem/
leaves to allow the plant to regrow.
Cutting: Removing a section of stem and leaves from a “mother” 
plant with the goal of asexually reproducing a new plant.
Deep water culture: A hydroponic growing technique often 
associated with floating rafts or bubble buckets. Plants are 
suspended over a nutrient solution and roots grow freely into 
the solution. 
Dissolved oxygen: A measure of the amount of oxygen present in 
a nutrient solution, often measured in parts per million (ppm).
DO: See dissolved oxygen.
Drain-to-waste: A hydroponic growing technique that does not 
recirculate the nutrient solution. The nutrient solution makes 
one pass through the growing substrate and does not return to 
the reservoir.
Dutch bucket: A pot commonly used in top drip hydroponics. The 
pot has a single drainage site that connects to a main drain line 
that returns nutrient solution to the reservoir. 
DWC: See deep water culture.
Ebb and flow: Another name for flood and drain. See flood  
and drain.
EC: See electrical conductivity.
Electrical conductivity: A measure of a material's ability to 
transport an electrical current. The conductivity of a nutrient 
solution can be used as an estimate of fertilizer concentration.
Evapotranspiration: The cumulative water loss from surface 
evaporation and plant transpiration.
Expanded clay pellets: A growing substrate made of clay. It is 
pH neutral, inert, and quick draining. 
Fertigation: The delivery of water-soluble fertilizers to crop  
using an irrigation delivery system. Simply a mix of fertilizing 
and irrigating. 
Fertilizer: A broad term for anything natural or synthetic that can 
provide essential nutrients for plant growth. 
Floating raft: A version of the deep water culture hydroponic 
technique that uses rafts to support plants floating in a  
nutrient solution.
Flood and drain: A hydroponic growing technique that waters 
plants from the bottom using periodic “flood” events in a grow 
tray. After a “flood” event, the nutrient solution drains back into 
the reservoir. 
Flood tray: A general term for a watertight growing area with 
raised walls. Flood trays can be used in a variety of hydroponic 
growing techniques, including media beds, wicking beds, top 
drip, floating rafts/DWC, and flood and drain.
Flowering crop: Any plant that is grown specifically for flowers 
and/or fruits. Flowering crop is often used as a general term 
in hydroponics for a crop that has several growth stages and 
requires high light levels. Tomatoes, peppers, and cucumbers are 
some of the most common flowering crops grown in hydroponics.
Flush: Dumping out the nutrient solution from a hydroponic garden.
Germination: The beginning stage of starting a plant from seed. 
Seed germination is generally triggered by moisture and warmth.
High-pressure sodium: A high-intensity grow light that produces 
a yellow/orange light. High-pressure sodium lights are often 
used indoors for flowering crops and in greenhouses as a 
supplemental light source.

GlOSSARY    171
HPS: See high-pressure sodium.
Kratky method: A hydroponic growing technique similar to deep 
water culture. The Kratky method uses no pumps to circulate 
the nutrient solution; instead, it uses a static, noncirculating 
nutrient solution.
Leafy greens: A broad term for any crop grown for  
harvestable leaves. Typically used to describe lettuce,  
kale, chard, and herbs.
Light meter: A broad term for a variety of tools capable of 
measuring light intensity.
Lux: A unit used to measure light intensity. Lux is based on light 
intensity as perceived by the human eye.
Media/medium: Another term for a growing substrate. See 
substrate.
Media bed: A hydroponic growing technique that uses a flood tray 
filled with a loose, quick-draining substrate such as expanded 
clay pellets. Media beds use a similar irrigation design as flood 
and drain.
Metal halide: A high-intensity grow light with a blue dominant 
spectrum great for compact growth.
MH: See metal halide.
NFT: See nutrient film technique.
Nutrient film technique: A hydroponic growing technique that 
irrigates plants with a shallow stream of nutrient solution 
flowing through a growing channel.
Nutrient solution: Fertilizer dissolved in water.
Parts per million: The unit used by total dissolved solids (TDS) 
meters to measure fertilizer concentration. 
Peat: A growing substrate made from partially decayed plant 
matter harvested from bogs. Often called sphagnum peat or 
sphagnum peat moss.
pH: A scale used to measure the acidity or basicity of a solution.
Photoperiod: Day length.
Photosynthetic photon flux density: A measure of the number 
of photons of light, measured in micromoles (μmol), within the 
400nm–700nm wavelength range that are available per square 
meter (m2) per second (s).
PPFD: See photosynthetic photon flux density.
PPM: See parts per million.
Predatory insect: An insect that feeds on other insects. 
Predatory insects are often used to manage pest populations.
Pyrethrin: An organic pesticide derived from the pyrethrum 
chrysanthemum flower. One of the most powerful organic 
pesticides, it is capable of quickly killing most insects when 
applied at a strong concentration. Pyrethrins may potentially kill 
beneficial insects too. 
Recirculating: Used to describe hydroponic systems that capture 
and reuse the nutrient solution after irrigating the crop.
Rock wool: Another term for stone wool.
Solution: A liquid mixture.
Stock solution: Fertilizer dissolved in water at a highly 
concentrated rate, often 50x–200x the strength of a nutrient 
solution.
Stone wool: A growing substrate made by melting basaltic rocks 
and spinning the “rock lava” into fibers.
Substrate: A material used to support plant roots. Common 
hydroponic substrates include stone wool, coco coir, perlite, 
and expanded clay pellets.
T5 fluorescent: A skinny tube-shaped fluorescent grow light 
that generally comes in lengths of 1, 2, and 4 feet. A great 
beginner-friendly grow light.
Top drip: A hydroponic growing technique that delivers irrigation 
to the top of the growing substrate, generally through ¼-inch 
irrigation lines.
Vegetative: Often used to describe a stage of crop growth 
focused on leaf production. Vegetative fertilizers are blended 
specifically for herbs, leafy greens, and early stage flowering 
crops. Vegetative fertilizers can be used for flowering crops, 
but they may not deliver the optimal nutrient recipe to maximize 
reproductive growth.
Venturi: An attachment used to aerate a nutrient solution. A 
venturi can connect directly to a pump or be installed inline in 
a section of tubing. Venturis take advantage of a phenomenon 
called the Venturi effect, which occurs when a liquid or gas 
flowing through a pipe moves through a constricted section, 
resulting in increased velocity and decreased static pressure. 
The venturi pump attachments have an intake tube positioned 
in the area of lower pressure. The decreased pressure creates 
a suction that is used to pull air into the pipe.
Wicking bed: A hydroponic growing technique that takes 
advantage of capillary action to deliver a nutrient solution  
to crops.

172    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
APPENDIX
CROP SELECTION CHARTS
LETTUCE
KEY
Recommended  
DIY System 
 B 
Bottle  
  
Hydroponics
 F 
Floating Rafts
 W 
Wicking Bed
 N 
NFT
 T 
Top Drip
 M 
Media Beds 
 FD Flood and Drain
 A 
Aeroponics 
 V 
Vertical Gutter  
  
Garden
Rex butterhead lettuce
• Recommended DIY Systems: Lettuce can grow in any of the hydroponic 
systems mentioned in this book.
• Germination Temperatures: Ideal germination temperature is 60–70°F, but 
germination will occur in much wider temperature range.
• Water Temperatures: Ideal water temperature is 65–70°F, but healthy 
lettuce crops have been observed in 55–90°F water.
• EC: Healthy crops have been observed growing in nutrient solutions with 
ECs in the range of 0.7–2.8. The exact target EC will depend on light levels, 
water source, environment, and crop age, but in general an EC of 1.8–2.3 
will produce a healthy crop.
• pH: Healthy crops have been observed growing in nutrient solutions with 
pHs in the range of 5.2–7. Best growth has been observed at pH of 5.5–6.0.
• Air Temperatures: Ideal air temperature is 65–75°F, but healthy lettuce has 
been observed growing in temperatures 50–95°F. 

CROP SELECTION CHARTS    173
MIXES
Allstar Gourmet  
Lettuce Mix
Mixed
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
3–6
Great color, fast growing, and easy to grow. 
Includes green oakleaf, red oakleaf, green romaine, 
red romaine, lollo rossa, and red leaf lettuce.
Five Star Greenhouse 
Lettuce Mix
Mixed
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
3–6
Green oakleaf, red oakleaf, red romaine, green leaf, 
and red leaf lettuce.
Wildfire Lettuce Mix
Mixed
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
3–6
Green oakleaf, red oakleaf, green romaine, red 
romaine, and red leaf lettuce.
Elegance Greens Mix
Mixed
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
3–6
Great spicy mix that includes pac choi, red mustard, 
mizuna, and leaf broccoli.
Premium Greens Mix
Mixed
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
3–6
A decent mix but sometimes the cabbage grows 
poorly. Mix includes red mustard, green mustard, 
Chinese cabbage, pac choi, and tatsoi.
BUTTERHEAD
Rex
Green
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1
The standard for hydroponic lettuce. Great tasting 
and heavy yields.
Flandria
Green
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1
Salanova  
Green Butter
Green
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1
A green butterhead that does not form a dense 
core. Lower yields and smaller leaves than Rex.
Salanova Red Butter
Red
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1
Does not form a dense core like other butterheads, 
but still delivers a great yield. Leaves can range 
from light red to dark red depending on lighting.
Skyphos
Red
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1
If given enough light, this butterhead can grow 
huge. The leaves are generally not deep red, but 
they do taste great.
OAKLEAF
Salanova Red Oakleaf
Red
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1
Good yields but be careful not to overgrow this 
crop. Leaves have a tendency for tip burn when 
grown too long.
Salanova Green Oakleaf
Green
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1
Similar to red oakleaf but fewer issues when 
growing larger heads.
Panisse
Green
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1
Huge, fluffy, green oakleaf. Great for high light 
conditions, not great for low light.
Rouxai
Red
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1
Grows well in a variety of environments and will 
generally produce leaves with deep red color.
Oscarde
Red
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1
Similar to Rouxai. Depending on environment, 
Rouxai or Oscarde may perform best.
  Variety Name
Leaf Type 
or Color
Recommended  
DIY Systems
Seeds/ 
Cube
Notes

174    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
LOLLO
Dark Red Lollo Rossa
Red
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1–2
Generally low yielding.
Livigna
Green
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1–2
 
ROMAINE/COS
Green Star
Green
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1
Generally lanky and fragile, may not be optimal 
romaine for hydroponics.
Tropicana
Green
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1
Good resistance to tip burn when grown in intense 
summer light. Depending on environment, Tropicana 
or Coastal Star may be best.
Coastal Star
Green
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1
Susceptible to tip burn. Depending on environment, 
Tropicana or Coastal Star may be best.
Red Rosie
Red
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1
Some susceptibility to tip burn, performs best under 
shade or low light.
Breen
Red
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1–3
Won't yield much, but this miniature red romaine is 
beautiful and great tasting. Susceptible to tip burn 
when grown under high intensity light.
Thurinus
Red
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1
Similar color and shape as Breen, but much larger. 
Leaves are a little thicker than Breen too. Susceptible 
to tip burn when grown under high intensity light.
Flashy Trout Back
Mixed
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1–3
Very delicate leaves should be used immediately. 
This lettuce does not keep well.
Speckles
Mixed
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1
Similar to Flashy Trout Back.
Outredgeous
Red
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1
Quicker to bolt than other red romaines. Susceptible 
to tip burn.
LOOSE LEAF VARIETIES
Salanova Green  
Sweet Crisp
Green
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1
Good yields but can be very fragile. Grows well  
under LEDs.
Salanova Red  
Sweet Crisp
Red
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1
Good yields but can be very fragile. Grows well  
under LEDs.
Salanova Red Incised
Red
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1
Good yields but can be very fragile. Grows well  
under LEDs.
Salanova Green Incised
Green
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1
Good yields but can be very fragile. Grows well  
under LEDs.
SUMMER CRISP/BATAVIA
Muir
Green
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1
More tolerant of hot weather than other varieties. 
Plants look like a mix of romaine and oakleaf.
Cherokee
Red
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1
 
  Variety Name
Leaf Type 
or Color
Recommended  
DIY Systems
Seeds/ 
Cube
Notes

CROP SElECtION CHARtS    175
HERBS
  Variety Name
Recommended  
DIY Systems
Germination 
EC
pH
Notes
Greek Oregano
W, T, M, FD, V
Sprinkle seeds on 
top of the growing 
medium; seeds 
require light to 
germinate.
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Strong oregano aroma and flavor; 
great for pizza and Italian cooking. 
Characteristic dark green leaves with 
white flowers. 
Italian Oregano
W, T, M, FD, V
 
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
 
Rosemary
W, T, M, FD, V
Can be difficult to 
grow from seed; 
easier to grow 
from cuttings.
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
 
Creeping Thyme
W, T, M, FD, V
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Prefers drier conditions than provided  
in most hydroponic systems but still 
grows okay.
Summer Thyme
W, T, M, FD, V
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Prefers drier conditions than provided  
in most hydroponic systems but still 
grows okay.
Sage (Extrakta)
W, T, M, FD, V
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Great sage variety for hydroponics. 
Calypso Cilantro
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
55–75°F
1.0–1.8
5.5–6.0
Can be tricky to grow and susceptible to 
tip burn. Split seed for best germination.
Santo  
Monogerm 
Cilantro
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
55–75°F
1.0–1.8
5.5–6.0
Monogerm cilantro is much easier to 
germinate than tradition cilantro seed. 
This variety is one of the easier cilantro 
varieties to grow in hydroponics, but 
cilantro is notoriously difficult to grow  
in hydroponics.
Tarragon
F, W, N, T, M, FD, V
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Watercress 
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
65–75°F
1.8–2.3
5.5–6.5
Loves wet conditions. Vigorous grower. 
Flavor is similar to arugula. Great 
addition to hydroponic fairy garden.
Flat-Leaf Parsley
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Parsley Triple  
Curled
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
 
Chervil
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Anise flavor, grows similar to parsley.
Dill Bouquet
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
 
Fernleaf Dill
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
 
Green Fennel
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
70–80°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Prefers air temperatures around 60°F  
but capable of growing in a wide range  
of conditions.
Chives  
(Variety Staro)
F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
 
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Great for rafts. Harvest as a cut-and-
come-again crop. Plants can grow for 
years.
Tokyo Bunching 
Green Onion
F, W, N, T, M, FD, V
50–85°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Very tasty. May be tricky to establish,  
but great once established.
(continued)

176    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
Munstead  
Lavender
F, W, N, T, M, FD, V
 
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Slow growing but produces beautiful 
flowers. 
Corsican  
Mint Mini
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
 
1.8–2.3
5.5–6.0
Partial shade to full sun. Keep  
roots moist. Very intense flavor.  
Small compact leaves.
Wrigley's  
Spearmint
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
 
1.8–2.3
5.5–6.0
Partial shade to full sun.  
Keep roots moist.
Scotch  
Spearmint
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
 
1.8–2.3
5.5–6.0
Partial shade to full sun.  
Keep roots moist.
Mojito Mint
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
55–65°F
1.8–2.3
5.5–6.0
Partial shade to full sun. Keep roots 
moist. Great-tasting mint.
Chocolate Mint
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
 
1.8–2.3
5.5–6.0
Partial shade to full sun. Keep roots 
moist. Unique flavor, definitely a mix  
of mint and chocolate.
 Variety Name
Type
Notes
Italian Large Leaf
Large leaf
Often the cheapest seed, this standard basil can yield more than most varieties.
Napoletano
Lettuce leaf
Huge leaves that are usually 5–6" long but can get to nearly 1' long. Great for making 
basil wraps. Do not seed densely like other varieties.
Mrs. Burns’ Lemon
Citrus
One of the fastest-growing basil varieties. Great taste too. Try making a lemon basil 
pesto. Very sensitive to high pH, will quickly show iron deficiency. Keep pH at 5.5–5.8.
Aroma 2
Genovese
A favorite among hydroponic growers. Tends to perform great in situations where 
other varieties might struggle. Resistant to Fusarium (root rot).
Red Rubin
Purple
Great purple basil variety.
Genovese
Genovese
Mint is generally grown from cuttings, but plants can be started from seed too.
• Recommended DIY Systems: Basil can grow in any of the hydroponic systems 
mentioned in this book.
• Germination Temperatures: Ideal germination temperature is 65–75°F, but 
germination will occur in much wider temperature range.
• Water Temperatures: Ideal water temperature is 70–75°F, but healthy basil crops 
have been observed in 60–95°F water.
• EC: Healthy crops have been observed growing in nutrient solutions with ECs in 
the range of 0.7–2.8. The exact target EC will depend on light levels, water source, 
environment, and crop age, but in general an EC of 1.8–2.3 will produce a healthy crop.
• pH: Healthy crops have been observed growing in nutrient solutions with pHs in the 
range of 5.2–7. Best growth has been observed at pH of 5.5–6.0.
• Air Temperatures: Ideal air temperature is 70–80°F, but healthy basil has been 
observed growing in temperatures 55–100°F.
BASIL
 Variety Name
Recommended  
DIY Systems
Germination 
EC
pH
Notes
Note: Basil often grows 
best when densely 
seeded. Try using five 
to eight seeds per 
plug and do not thin 
out the seedlings after 
germination. Some of the 
plants will grow tall while 
others may stay short, 
creating a dense canopy 
of basil.
(continued)

CROP SELECTION CHARTS    177
PEPPERS
• Germination Temperatures: Ideal germination temperature is 75–85°F, but 
germination will occur in much wider temperature range.
• Water Temperatures: Ideal water temperature is 65–70°F, but healthy pepper 
crops have been observed in 55–85°F water.
• EC: Healthy crops have been observed growing in nutrient solutions with ECs in the 
range of 0.7–2.5, but most peppers will respond well to an EC in the range of 1.4–1.8.
• pH: Healthy crops have been observed growing in nutrient solutions with pHs in 
the range of 5.0–7. Best growth has been observed at pH of 5.5–5.8.
• Air Temperatures: Ideal average air temperature over 75°F, but healthy pepper 
plants have been observed growing in temperatures 55–100°F.
 Variety Name
Heat, Scoville
Recommended  
DIY Systems
Days to 
Harvest
Notes
Fatalii Jigsaw Gourmet
125,000–325,000
W, T, M, FD
120–180
Fruity flavor with intense heat.
Red Datil
100,000–300,000
W, T, M, FD
Solid variety for hydroponics.
Bulgarian Carrot
5,000–30,000
W, T, M, FD
75
Great for drying. Plant stays very short.
Anaheim Chile
500–1,000
W, T, M, FD
80–85 
Long peppers (6–10") with a little bit of heat. Primarily 
picked green.
Scotch Bonnet 
Orange
100,000–350,000
W, T, M, FD
95–100
Grows 2 2½' tall. Very hot. Can be more finicky than 
other pepper varieties.
Tam Jalapeño
1,000–1,500
W, T, M, FD
70–75
Stays relatively short, around 3' tall. 
Serrano Chile 
(Capsicum annuum)
6,000–20,000
W, T, M, FD
75–80
Stays relatively short, around 3' tall. 
Bird’s Eye Chile/ 
Thai Chile
100,000–225,000
W, T, M, FD
Grows well in very hot climates. Peppers dry fast and 
make very hot pepper flakes. Plants can grow 5' tall.
Peter Pepper
10,000–23,000
W, T, M, FD
Known for its unusually shaped fruit. Can be difficult to 
grow compared to other pepper varieties.
Relleno
1,000–1,500
W, T, M, FD
100–120
Goes from green to orange to red. Can be harvested 
at any stage. Popular for stuffing and frying.
Habanada
Almost 0
W, T, M, FD
70 green,  
90 orange
A heatless habanero. Amazing fruity flavor without the 
heat. Slow to start but easy to grow once established.
 Variety Name
Type
Notes
Siam Queen
Thai
Favorite Thai basil. Grows huge, beautiful flowers that also taste great. Leaves are 
larger than traditional Thai basil.
Sweet Thai
Thai
Traditional Thai basil.
Thai Red Stem
Thai
Traditional Thai basil.
Purple Basil Amethyst Improved
Purple
Small but pretty basil variety.
Dark Opal
Purple
One of the best purple basil varieties.
Purple Ruffles
Purple frill
Beautiful frilly purple leaves.
Purple Delight
Purple
Note: Plants should generally 
be spaced 18 to 25 inches 
apart.  All require high oxygen 
root zone environment. Prefer 
to dry out between irrigations. 
Peppers do well with 16 hours 
light, 8 hours dark when 
grown indoors.

178    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
Most tomato varieties can be grown in hydroponics, 
I encourage you to try any varieties, especially if you 
already have a favorite tomato variety. The varieties 
below are some of my favorite tomato varieties I've tried 
in hydroponics.
Tomatoes are generally grown in full sun but many 
can grow well in partial shade.
Most seed packets will instruct gardeners to grow 
tomatoes at 60 to 75°F, if possible. Many of these 
varieties do great at higher temperatures, especially 
cherry tomatoes. Cherry tomatoes can tolerate 
temperatures over 90°F.
TOMATOES
 Variety Name
Type
Recommended  
DIY Systems
Germination 
Temperatures
Days Until 
Fruit
Air Temperaturess
EC
Tasmanian Chocolate
Dark red/ 
purple oblate
T, FD
75–90°F
85
60–75°F
1.2–1.6
Dwarf Golden Heart
Yellow heart 
shaped
T, FD
75–90°F
70
60–75°F
1.2–1.6
Sarandipity
Round striped
T, FD
75–90°F
65
60–75°F
1.2–1.6
Dwarf Purple Heart
Purple heart 
shaped
T, FD
75–90°F
70
60–75°F
1.2–1.6
Sun Gold
Orange cherry
T
75–80°F
60
60–75°F
1.6–2.5
Juliet F1
Saladette  
and sauce
T
75–90°F
60
60–75°F
1.6–2.5
Sakura
Red cherry
T
75–80°F
55
60–75°F
1.6–2.5
Black Cherry
Black cherry
T
75–90°F
65
60–75°F
1.6–2.5
Yellow Pear
Yellow pear 
cherry
T
75–80°F
70
60–75°F
1.6–2.5
Green Zebra
Round, striped
T
75–90°F
75
60–75°F
1.2–1.8
Red Robin
Miniature  
cherry
F, W, T, M,  
FD, V
68–77°F
65
60–75°F
1.2–2.5

CROP SELECTION CHARTS    179
Green Zebra tomatoes
Sun Gold tomatoes
pH
Growth
Yield
Notes
5.5–6.0
Remains short, could be  
grown indoors.
Good
Great flavor, huge fruit. Plants grow to about 4' tall.
5.5–6.0
Remains short, could be  
grown indoors.
Great
Large yellow tomatoes have excellent flavor, one of the best-tasting  
dwarf heirloom varieties. Texture is not ideal for sandwiches, as tomato  
is very juicy.
5.5–6.0
Remains short, could be  
grown indoors.
Low
Mild flavor, great-looking fruit. Plant stays short (no more than 3' tall)  
with minimal branching.
5.5–6.0
Remains short, could be  
grown indoors.
Great
Large purple tomatoes that are great for sandwiches. Mild flavor,  
good texture.
5.5–6.0
Large sprawling growth. Best 
for greenhouse or outdoors.
Good
Amazing sweet flavor. Sweetest cherry tomato I've ever had.  
Hardy and easy to grow.
5.5–6.0
Large sprawling growth. Best 
for greenhouse or outdoors.
Great
One of the most prolific tomato plants, amazing yields. Flavor is good.
5.5–6.0
Large sprawling growth. Best 
for greenhouse or outdoors.
Great
Hardy red cherry tomato plant that can tolerate warm weather and  
has great disease resistance.
5.5–6.0
Large sprawling growth. Best 
for greenhouse or outdoors.
Good
Flavor is similar to large heirloom tomatoes, very unique for a cherry 
tomato. Tolerates warm weather. Great cherry tomato to complement  
Sun Golds in a garden.
5.5–6.0
Large sprawling growth. Best 
for greenhouse or outdoors.
Good
Flavor is mild. Great addition to a cherry mix to create a diverse  
mix of colors.
5.5–6.0
Medium size, could be grown 
indoors but would be best in 
greenhouse or outdoors.
Okay
Amazing flavor.
5.5–6.0
Very short, generally a 
maximum of 1' tall.
Low
Flavor is good but best feature is the height of this tomato.  
Mature plant remains very short, less than 1' tall.

180    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
 Variety Name
Notes
Delizz
Good variety to grow from seed.
Jewel
Earliglow
Good flavor, but mild compared to Evie.
Sparkle
Evie
Very good flavor.
Pineberry
Requires cross-pollination to develop fruit.  
Produces a white strawberry with decent flavor. 
Flavor is supposed to taste like a mix of strawberry 
and pineapple; I only taste strawberry, though. 
Mara Des Bois
Not a very robust variety in hydroponics.
Eversweet
Seascape
A very popular variety for hydroponics,  
flavor is okay.
Sweet Charlie
Strong grower, great for hydroponics.  
Flavor is almost as good as Evie.
STRAWBERRIES
Note: It is very important to keep the crown of a strawberry 
above the surface of the substrate. If the crown gets too wet, 
the plant will rot and die.
Various strawberry varieties grown in a DIY vertical garden
Various strawberry varieties grown in vertical towers
• Recommended DIY Systems: Strawberries can be  
grown in all of the systems mentioned in this book 
except bottle hydroponics.
• Germination Temperatures: Strawberries can be 
started from seed but it is more common to purchase 
bare-root plants ready to transplant. Ideal germination 
temperature for seeds is around 70°F.
• Water Temperatures: 60–75°F
• EC: 0.8–1.2. Can tolerate higher ECs even up to 2.5.
• pH: 5.5–6.0
• Air Temperatures: 60–80°F

Crop SeleCtion ChartS    181
RARE AND UNUSUAL
 Variety Name
Recommended  
DIY Systems
Germination 
Temperatures
Air Temperatures
Water 
Temperatures
EC
pH
Iceplant
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
70–75°F
65–75°F
65–75°F
1.8–2.3
5.5–6.5
Notes: Thick succulent leaves that taste like a mild lettuce. The leaves are covered in trichomes,  
giving them a sparkly appearance.
Green Sorrel
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
65–70°F
65–85°F
65–85°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Notes: Naturally grows black roots. The best tasting part of the crop is often the stem.  
Green sorrel generally has more flavor than red-veined sorrel. Citrusy flavor.
Red-Veined 
Sorrel
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
65–70°F
65–85°F
60–80°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.0
Notes: Leaf quality is best when shade grown. Older mature leaves can get leathery. 
Tangerine Gem 
Marigold
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
75–80°F
65–85°F
65–85°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Notes: Not great tasting, but definitely edible. The plant is beautiful.
Borage
F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
60–75°F
65–85°F
65–75°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.0
Notes: The flowers taste great, just like cucumber. Grow in partial sun.
Wasabi Arugula
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
65–75°F
65–85°F
65–75°F
1.2–1.8
5.5–6.5
Notes: Intense wasabi flavor. Slow-growing crop that has a tendency to flower quickly. Trim off flowers  
to keep plant producing leaves. Flowers are also edible. Full sun to partial shade. 
Mimosa  
Pudica
W, M, FD
65–75°F
65–95°F
65–80°F
1.2–1.8
5.5–6.5
Notes: Known by many names, including Touch-Me-Not and Sensitive Plant, this plant quickly responds  
to touch by folding in its leaves. It can be sensitive to overwatering when young but it is tolerant once  
established. It grows best in warm environments with lots of light.
Nasturtium 
Jewel's Mix
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
60–65°F
65–95°F
65–75°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Notes: Great-tasting leaves and flowers. Intense watercress-like flavor. Tastes great with goat cheese.  
Produces flowers when stressed. Let the plant roots dry out to force flowering.
Hibiscus Roselle 
(Hibiscus 
sabdariffa)
W, T, M, FD
70–80°F
65–95°F
65–75°F
1.2–2.0
5.5–6.5
Notes: Young flowers have strong citrus/cranberry flavor. Very popular for making tea.  
Grows well in a chunky, fast-draining coco coir. Full sun, warm weather.
Purslane
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
70–80°F
65–75°F
65–75°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Notes: Fairly easy to grow in hydroponics. Great addition to a hydroponic fairy garden.
Borage flowers
Nasturium
Red-veined sorrel
(continued)

182    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
Red Callaloo
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
65–75°F
65–95°F
65–75°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Notes: Leafy green that tolerates hot environments.
Sugarcane
W, T, M
Start from cane/
root stock/ratoon
70–95°F
65–80°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Notes: Grows well in coco coir and loose substrates.
Celeriac
F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
70–75°F
55–85°F
65–75°F
1.8–2.3
5.5–6.5
Notes: Grows well with partial sun to full sun. Can be cut and harvested multiple times.
Stevia
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
68–75°F
55–85°F
65–75°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Notes: Sensitive to overwatering when young but can grow great in floating rafts  
if transplanted when mature. Partial shade to full sun. Trim to harvest.
Toothache  
Plant
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
70–75°F
70–95°F
65–90°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Notes: The flowers don't taste great but they create a numbing/tingling sensation when chewed.  
Sensation is similar to pop-rocks candy.
 Variety Name
Recommended  
DIY Systems
Germination 
Temperatures
Air Temperatures
Water 
Temperatures
EC
pH
KALE
Days to harvest is 10 to 15 for microgreens, 20 to 25 for baby leaf, and 35 to 60 for mature leaves. Kale for salads is 
best harvested at baby leaf or microgreen stage. Mature leaves are great for cooking. Cold weather often improves 
the color and flavor of kale.
 Variety Name
Recommended DIY Systems
Germination 
Temperatures
Air 
Temperatures
Water 
Temperatures
EC
pH
Red Russian
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
75–85°F
60–90°F
60–75°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Notes: Okay color, unique leaf shape/texture. One of the highest yielding kale varieties.
Toscano (aka Dinosaur, 
Italian, or Lacinato)
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
75–85°F
60–90°F
60–75°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Notes: Not the fastest grower, but leaves make great kale chips.
Red Kale
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
75–85°F
60–90°F
60–75°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Notes: Great color. Good yield.
Scarlet Kale
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
75–85°F
60–90°F
60–75°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Nash's Green
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
75–85°F
60–90°F
60–75°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Fast-growing kale.
Scarlet
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
75–85°F
60–90°F
60–75°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Darkibor F1
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
75–85°F
60–90°F
60–75°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Siberian
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
75–85°F
60–90°F
60–75°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Starbor F1
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
75–85°F
60–90°F
60–75°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Olympic Red
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
75–85°F
60–90°F
60–75°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Dwarf Blue Curled
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
75–85°F
60–90°F
60–75°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Great compact curly blue-green kale.

CROP SELECTION CHARTS    183
ADDITIONAL LEAFY GREENS
 Variety Name
Recommended DIY Systems
Germination 
Temperatures
Air 
Temperatures
Water 
Temperatures
EC
pH
Ruby Red  
Swiss Chard
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
75–90°F
55–95°F
60–85°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Note: Full sun.
Bright Lights 
Decorticated Chard
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
75–90°F
55–95°F
60–85°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Notes: Very fun crop. The root color matches the stem color. Full sun.
Amara Mustard
F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
75–85°F
60–85°F
65–80°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Notes: Huge fast growth.
Scarlet Frills  
Mustard
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
75–85°F
60–85°F
65–80°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Notes: Vigorous growth, good color, strong flavor.
Mizuna
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
75–85°F
60–85°F
65–80°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Notes: Fast growing and beautiful.
Astro Arugula
W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
65–75°F
60–75°F
65–75°F
1.0–1.8
5.5–6.0
Notes: Some tolerance to heat, but still can be difficult to grow in hydroponics.  
This is a good variety for arugula microgreens.
Sylvetta  
Arugula
W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
65–75°F
60–75°F
65–75°F
1.0–1.8
5.5–6.0
Notes: Slow growing but great taste. Difficult crop to grow in hydroponics.
Celery (Variety 
Conquistador)
F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
70–75°F
60–70°F
65–80°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Notes: Tastes great and can be harvested multiple times.
Upland Cress
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
55–75°F
60–85°F
65–75°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.0
Notes: Fast growing. Taste is similar to arugula.
Bright Lights Swiss chard
Mix of red kale and Toscano kale

184    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
ASIAN GREENS
 Variety Name
Recommended DIY Systems
Germination 
Temperatures
Air 
Temperatures
Water 
Temperatures
EC
pH
Toy Choi
B, F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
75–85°F
60–80°F
65–75°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Notes: Great-tasting miniature bok choi.
Joi Choi
F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
75–85°F
60–80°F
65–75°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Notes: Fastest and biggest bok choi I've grown.
Red Choi F1
F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
75–85°F
60–80°F
65–75°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Notes: Fast-growing red bok choi.
Purple Choi
F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
75–85°F
60–80°F
65–75°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Da Hong Summer
F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
75–85°F
60–80°F
65–75°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
Notes: Deep purple color.
Tatsoi
F, W, N, T, M, FD, A, V
75–85°F
60–80°F
65–76°F
1.2–2.3
5.5–6.5
SPINACH
• Recommended DIY Systems: It is possible  
to grow spinach in any of the systems mentioned  
in this book but it is almost always a difficult  
crop to grow hydroponically.
• Germination Temperatures: Best at 45–65°F. 
Germination is very sensitive to high temperatures, 
so avoid germination conditions over 80°F.
• Water Temperatures: 50–70°F
• EC: Healthy crops have been observed growing in 
nutrient solutions with ECs in the range of 0.7–2.3.
• pH: 5.5–6.0
• Air Temperatures: 65–75°F
 Variety Name
Notes
Kookaburra F1
Good variety for hydroponics. Decent 
resistance to root rot. Plant stays  
compact with large leaves.
Bloomsdale
Not great for hydroponics.
Space F1
Big leaves, some resistance to root 
diseases. Slow to bolt and stays short.
New Zealand
Very slow to germinate compared to other 
spinach varieties. Has a thick leaf. Very 
unique spinach.
 Variety Name
Notes
Monstrueux  
de Viroflay
Some resistance to root diseases.  
Huge leaves. Okay growth in hydroponics.
Giant Noble
Susceptible to root diseases.
Avon
Good variety for hydroponics. Very big  
mature leaves, slow to bolt.
Catalina
Grows slower than other varieties. 
Susceptible to root diseases.
Gigante de 
Invierno
Not great for hydroponics,  
very susceptible to pythium.
Red Kitten F1
Spinach with red stem. Decent growth in 
hydroponic systems, but slower growing  
than most green varieties.
Carmel F1
Good variety for hydroponics.
Reflect F1
Not great.
Emperor F1
Not great.
Chinese Spinach
Okay in hydroponics.
Corvair F1
Not great.
Woodpecker F1
Not great.
Flamingo F1
Not great.

CROP SELECTION CHARTS    185
MICROGREENS
• Germination Temperatures: 70–80°F for most varieties
• Water Temperatures: 60–75°F
• EC: 0.7–2.5. Microgreens generally do not need much 
fertilizer but many of them can be grown successfully 
at higher ECs.
• pH: 5.5–6.0
• Air Temperatures: 60–75°F
Spring mix, spicy mix, and arugula microgreens. Some 
microgreens can be harvested multiple times if cut 
above the lowest leaves.
 Variety Name
Days to Harvest
Teaspoons per 
Square Foot
Notes
Cilantro
14–28
14.0
Use split seeds for better germination.  
Cilantro can be difficult to grow.
Purple Kohlrabi
10–14
4.0
Awesome color with mild cabbage flavor.
Red Rambo Radish
10–14
5.0
Pretty and a little spicy.
Astro Arugula
14–28
3.0
Can be harvested multiple times.
Mizuna
10–14
3.0
Several varieties available, some spicier than others.  
Generally very easy to grow.
Scarlet Frills Mustard
10–21
3.0
Several varieties available, some spicier than others.  
Generally very easy to grow.
Citrus Basil
14–35
2.5
Very sensitive to high pH, keep pH close to 5.5. Great flavor.
Opal Basil
14–35
2.5
Flavor similar to Italian basil. Grows slower than  
other basil varieties.
Italian Basil
14–35
2.5
Great topping on pizza and pasta.
Carrot
28–35
7.0
Tastes like a carrot without the crunch.
Kale
10–21
5.5
Flavor is mild compared to mature kale leaves.  
Great mixed into a salad.

−25°
−20°
−15°
−10°
−5°
−0°
−5°
−10°
−15° 
−20°
−25°
−30°
55°
50°
45°
40°
35°
30°
25°
20°
15° 
10°
5°
0°
186    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
Metric Equivalent
 Inches (in.)
1/64
1/32
½5
1/16
1/8
1/4
3/8
2/5
½
5/8
¾
7/8
1
 Feet (ft.)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yards (yd.)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Millimeters (mm) 0.40 0.79
1
1.59 3.18 6.35 9.53
10
12.7 15.9 19.1 22.2 25.4
 Centimeters (cm)
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.95
1
1.27 1.59 1.91 2.22 2.54
 Meters (m)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
°F to °C: Subtract 32 from the Fahrenheit temperature  
reading. Then mulitply that number by 5/9.  
For example, 77°F − 32 = 45.  45 × 5/9 = 25°C.
°C to °F: Multiply the Celsius temperature reading by 9/5, then add 32.  
For example, 25°C × 9/5 = 45. 45 + 32 = 77°F. 
To Convert:
To:
Multiply by:
Millimeters
Inches
0.039
Centimeters
Inches
0.394
Meters
Feet
3.28
Meters
Yards
1.09
Kilometers
Miles
0.621
Square centimeters
Square inches
0.155
Square meters
Square feet
10.8
Square meters
Square yards
1.2
Cubic centimeters
Cubic inches
0.061
Cubic meters
Cubic feet
35.3
Cubic meters
Cubic yards
1.31
Liters
Pints (US)
2.114 (lmp. 1.76)
Liters
Quarts (US)
1.057 (lmp. 0.88)
Liters
Gallons (US)
0.264 (lmp. 0.22)
Grams
Ounces 
0.035
Kilograms
Pounds
2.2
Metric tons
Tons
1.1
Converting Measurements
To Convert:
To:
Multiply by:
Inches
Millimeters
25.4
Inches
Centimeters
2.54
Feet
Meters
0.305
Yards
Meters
0.914
Miles
Kilometers
1.609
Square inches
Square centimeters
6.45
Square feet
Square meters
0.093
Square yards
Square meters
0.836
Cubic inches
Cubic centimeters
16.4
Cubic feet
Cubic meters
0.0283
Cubic yards
Cubic meters
0.765
Pints (US)
Liters
0.473 (lmp. 0.568)
Quarts (US)
Liters
0.946 (lmp. 1.136)
Gallons (US)
Liters
3.785 (lmp. 4.546)
Ounces 
Grams
28.4
Pounds
Kilograms
0.454
Tons
Metric tons
0.907
Degrees Celsius (°C)
Degrees Fahrenheit (°F)
Converting Temperatures
 Inches (in.)
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
36
39.4
 Feet (ft.)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1
3
3½
 Yards (yd.)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1
1½
 Millimeters (mm) 50.8 76.2 101.6 127
152
178
203
229
254
279
305
914 1,000
 Centimeters (cm) 5.08 7.62 10.16 12.7 15.2 17.8 20.3 22.9 25.4 27.9 30.5 91.4
100
 Meters (m)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.30
.91
1.00
Freezing
METRIC CONVERSIONS

bibliography    187
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Brechner, Melissa, Dr., A. J. Both, and CEA Staff. 
Cornell Controlled Environment Agriculture Hydroponic 
Lettuce Handbook. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
CEA Program. www.cornellcea.com/attachments/
Cornell%20CEA%20Lettuce%20Handbook%20.pdf
Hydroponics | The University of Arizona Controlled 
Environment Agriculture Center. www.ceac.arizona.
edu/hydroponics.
Resh, Howard M. Hydroponic Food Production: A 
Definitive Guidebook for the Advanced Home Gardener 
and the Commercial Hydroponic Grower. 7th ed. Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2013.
Resh, Howard M. Hobby Hydroponics. 2nd ed. Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2013.
Resh, Howard M. Hydroponics for the Home Grower. 
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2015.
Sweat, Michael, Richard Tyson, and Robert Hochmuth. 
“Building a Floating Hydroponic Garden.” University of 
Florida IFAS Extension. March 15, 2016. www.edis.ifas.
ufl.edu/hs184.
Taiz, Lincoln, and Eduardo Zeiger. Plant Physiology. 5th 
ed. Sunderland: Sinauer Associates, 2010.
PHOTO CREDITS
hydrofarm: 20 (all), 21 (middle and bottom), 22 (top, 
all; bottom, left two), 23 (left, all), 24 (all), 25 (all), 26 
(bottom right), 28, 29 (all), 30 (all), 31 (all), 33 (left, 
both), 34 (all), 35 (both), 36 (top), 37, 146 (bottom),  
154 (all)
NaSa: 9
Shutterstock: 1, 4-5, 6, 18, 26 (top left and right, 
bottom left), 40, 44

188    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
INDEX
A
add-on fertilizer products, 153
advantages, 8–13
aeration, 42–43, 51, 57
aeroponic towers, 107, 116–117
aeroponics
building instructions, 108–114
crops for, 106
difficulty of, 107
locations for, 107
overview of, 106
agricultural runoff, 10
air pumps, 20–21
air stones, 21
airflow, 29
algae, 21–22, 56, 70, 87, 101, 109, 166
aphids, 167
aquaponic media beds, 93
aquaponics, 13
Arnon, Daniel, 13
Asian greens, 184
automation, 12
Azadirachtin, 34
B
Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt), 34
Bacillus thuringiensis israelensis 
(Bti), 34
basil, 176–177
beneficial insects, 33
beneficial microbes, 7–8, 34, 93
bottle hydroponics
building instructions, 45–48
crops for, 43–44
lighting for, 49
locations for, 44
maintenance of, 48 
options for, 49
overview of, 42–43
troubleshooting, 49
Bt (Bacillus thuringiensis), 34
Bti (Bacillus thuringiensis 
israelensis), 34
C
calcium deficiency, 165
ceramic metal halide (CMH) lights, 
30–31
channels, 70
chlorosis, 164–165
cleaning, system, 161
cleanliness, 11–12, 14
climate control equipment, 29
CMH (ceramic metal halide) lights, 
30–31
coco chips, 26
coco peat, 26
coconut coir, 25–26
conventional fertilizers, 153–154
crops
contamination of, 12–13
and growing system selection, 
39–40
growth of, 8, 11
in the hydroponic system, 14
nutrient content of, 10–11
for specific systems, 43–44, 50–51, 
61, 70, 84, 92–93, 99, 106
See also specific types
cuttings, 141, 142–145, 146. See also 
transplanting
D
daily light integral (DLI), 36–37
daily light integral (DLI) meters, 
36–37
deep water culture (DWC), 50
delivery height, water, 19
difficulty, level of, 41
dissolved oxygen see oxygen
DLI (daily light integral), 36–37
DLI (daily light integral) meters, 155
double bucket systems, 84
drain-to-waste systems, 16
drip towers, 117
dry fertilizers, 153
Dutch bucket gardens see top drip 
systems
DWC (deep water culture), 50
E
ebb and flow see flood and drain 
systems
electrical conductivity (EC), 154,  
155, 158
essential nutrients, 7, 8, 153
essential oils, 33
expanded clay pellets, 27, 96
F
fairy garden, 94–98
Ferris wheel systems, 118–119
fertilizer concentration, 154–155
fertilizer storage, 155
fertilizers, 15–17, 152–155. See also 
nutrient solution
fittings, 22
floating rafts

INDEx    189
 
building instructions, 52–58
crops for, 50–51
locations for, 51
maintenance of, 58
options for, 58–59
overview of, 50
sizing of, 51
troubleshooting, 59
flood and drain grow racks, 117
flood and drain systems
building instructions, 102–104
crops for, 99
locations for, 99
overview of, 99
planting options, 105
variations of, 100–101, 117–118
flood trays, 24
flow rates, 19–20, 71
flowering crops, 50, 177–182
fluorescent lights, 29–30
flushing, 10, 160
fungus gnats, 166–167
G
Gericke, William Frederick, 13
germination, 137
grow lights, 29–31
grow tents, 28
growing area, 14
growing media see substrates
growing season, 8
growing space, 8
growing systems, 39–41. See also 
specific systems
growth, plant, 24
H
heavy metals, 12–13
herbicides, 9
herbs, 174–176
high pressure sodium (HPS) lights, 
30
history of modern hydroponics, 13
Hoagland, Dennis, 13
Hoagland solution, 10
HPS (high pressure sodium), 30
humidity monitoring equipment, 37
hydroponics methods, 16, 50
hygrometers, 37
I
indoor growing equipment, 28–31
infestations, 166–167
interveinal chlorosis, 164
irrigation equipment, 19–22
K
kale, 182
Kratky method, 42–43
L
leafy greens, 172–174, 182–185
LEDs (light emitting diodes), 31
lettuce, 172–174
light emitting diodes (LEDs), 31
light intensity meters, 35–36
light meters, 35–37
lighting, 15, 29–31, 49, 135
lighting accessories, 31–32
liquid fertilizers, 153
location
flexibility in, 9
and growing system selection, 40 
for specific systems, 44, 51, 61, 70, 
84, 93, 99, 106
lux, 35–36
lux meters, 36
M
magnesium deficiency, 165
maintenance, 40–41, 48, 157–161
manure, 12, 16, 151, 152
media beds
building instructions, 94–98
crops for, 92–93
irrigation methods for, 93
locations for, 93
overview of, 92
substrates for, 93
media/medium see substrates
metal halide (MH) lights, 30–31
meters, 35–37
MH (metal halide) lights, 31
microgreens, 185
multi-part fertilizers, 153–154
mushy brown roots, 169
N
natural fertilizers, 16
natural senescence, 165
necrosis, 164
neem oil, 33
negative pressure grow room, 29
NFT (nutrient film technique) see 
nutrient film technique (NFT)
nitrogen deficiency, 164–165
nutrient content, crop, 10–11
nutrient deficiencies, 163–165
nutrient film technique (NFT)

190    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
building instructions, 72–82
channels for, 70
crops for, 70
flow rates in, 71
locations for, 70
overview of, 69
transplanting in, 82
troubleshooting, 82
variations of, 119
nutrient solution, 13, 35, 152, 155, 
157–159, 160. See also fertilizers; 
water
nutrient sources, 13
nutrient uptake, 151–152
nutrients, 151–152
nutrition, 151–155
O
one-part fertilizers, 153
organic fertilizers, 16–17, 152–153
oxygen, 8, 19, 20–21, 24–25
P
PAR (photosynthetically active 
radiation) meters, 36
parts per million measurement, 155
pathogens, 12
peat, 27
peppers, 177
perlite, 27
pest infestations, 10, 166–167
pest management, 32–34
pesticides, 10
pH, 35, 158, 164
pH meters, 35
photosynthetic photon flux density 
(PPFD), 36
photosynthetically active radiation 
(PAR) meters, 36
positive pressure grow rooms, 29
potassium bicarbonate, 34
pots, 23–24
power outages, 71
PPFD (photosynthetic photon flux 
density), 36
predatory insects, 33, 167
pump failure, 71
pumps, 19–21
pyrethrins, 34
R
rafts, 55
rain gutter systems
building instructions, 122–133
options for, 134–135
overview of, 120–121
planting, 134
troubleshooting, 135
See also vertical gardens
rare plants, 181–182
recirculating hydroponics, 16
reservoirs
and maintenance, 40–41, 160–161
overview of, 13, 24
in specific systems, 53–55, 69, 72, 
86, 95, 103, 109, 134
rock wool see stone wool
root death, 169
root rugs, 101
rotating/Ferris wheel systems, 
118–119
S
sanitizer, 161
seeds, starting, 137–141, 168–169. 
See also transplanting
set and forget method, 157
shore flies, 166–167
single bucket systems, 84
soap, 34, 161, 167
sodium bicarbonate, 34
soil quality, 8
soilborne pathogens, 12
space, growing, 8
spider mites, 167
spinach, 184
Spinosad, 34
sticky traps, 33
stock solutions, 152
stone wool, 25, 137, 138–141
strawberries, 180
Streptomyces lydicus, 34
substrates
overview of, 15, 24–27
for specific systems, 57–58, 61, 
66–67, 93, 100–101
synthetic fertilizers, 16
system features, 13–17
T
TDS (total dissolved solids) meters, 
155
thermometers, 37
thrips, 167
tip burn, 165
tomatoes, 178–179
top drip systems
building instructions, 85–91
crops for, 84
locations for, 84
overview of, 83

INDEx    191
 
top off and amend method, 158–159
top off method, 158
total dissolved solids (TDS) meters, 
155
toxicity, 163
transplanting, 47, 57–58, 148–149. 
See also cuttings; seeds, starting
trays, 24
troubleshooting, 163–169
true hydroponics, 16
tubing, 21–22
U
unusual plants, 181–182
V
vacuums, 33
venturi pumps, 21
vertical gardens, 115–119. See also 
rain gutter systems
W
water, 8, 9, 12–13, 14, 16, 19, 24–25, 
154–155. See also nutrient solution
water delivery height, 19
water pumps, 19–20, 71
water temperature, 37
wicking bed
building instructions, 62–68
crops for, 61
locations for, 61
overview of, 60–61
transplanting into, 67
variations of, 61
wicking strips, 48
wilting, 168

192    DIY HYDROPONIC GARDENS
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Tyler Baras, “Farmer Tyler,” is a well-renowned hydroponic grower with extensive 
experience in both hobby and commercial hydroponics. Besides writing books for both 
home gardeners and commercial growers, Tyler creates educational videos covering 
a range of horticultural topics. His website, www.FarmerTyler.com, offers information 
for hydroponic growers of all experience levels.
Tyler graduated Cum Laude from the University of Florida's Horticultural Sciences 
department specializing in organic crop production. While completing his bachelor 
of science degree, Tyler traveled overseas to study organic agriculture in Spain and 
protected agriculture (greenhouse production) in China. After graduation, he worked 
as a grower for one of the first certified organic hydroponic farms in the United States. 
In 2013, Tyler moved to Denver, Colorado, where he worked as the hydroponic farm 
manager at The GrowHaus. He managed 
a profitable urban farm while creating 
a successful hydroponic internship 
program with a 90 percent job placement 
rate for graduates. The hydroponic farm 
at The GrowHaus is currently managed 
by alumni of the farm internship program 
and continues to provide lettuce for 
Whole Foods, Safeway, and several 
local markets. In 2015, Tyler moved to 
Dallas, Texas, where he designed and 
constructed a hydroponic demonstration 
facility devised to study the productivity 
of various small-scale commercial 
hydroponic systems. Tyler wrote a 
commercial hydroponics book based on 
the collected data from the demonstration 
facility. This book is available through 
the horticultural distribution company 
Hort Americas. While in Texas, Tyler also designed and constructed a hydroponic 
demonstration facility focused on home hydroponic systems. This facility served as a 
video studio for several Farmer Tyler educational video series. Tyler and his hydroponic 
demonstration sites have been featured on P. Allen Smith's Garden Home, which airs 
on PBS and syndicated stations nationwide. Tyler currently works as a hydroponic 
consultant and has worked on several notable projects, including Central 
Market's Growtainer, the first grocery store–owned and –managed on-site 
farm. Tyler continues to produce video content, which can be seen on 
digital magazine Urban Ag News and on www.FarmerTyler.com.
Special Thanks 
Chris Higgins
Cyrus Moshrefi
David & Mary Jo Baras
Federico Martinez Lievano
Hort Americas, LLC
Hydrofarm, Inc.
P. Allen Smith
Rebecca Jin
Ruibal's Plants of Texas
Shawna Coronado


