
 
Copyright © 2014 Rose Michaels
All Rights Reserved.

DISCLAIMER
 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication or the information in it may be quoted from or reproduced in any form
by means such as printing, scanning, photocopying or otherwise without prior written permission of the copyright
holder.
Effort has been made to ensure that the information in this book is accurate and complete, however, the author and
the publisher do not warrant the accuracy of the information, text and graphics contained within the book due to the
rapidly changing nature of science, research, known and unknown facts and internet. The Author and the publisher
do not hold any responsibility for errors, omissions or contrary interpretation of the subject matter herein. This book
is presented solely for motivational and informational purposes only.


Introduction
If you hear Holiday songs in your ears and think about running away to Mexico for a few harried months, this book
is for you. You’re tired of the rough aisles on Black Friday, the packed malls on Holiday Eves, and the general
tension lingering in everyone’s face during the months of November and December. These are supposed to be our
most beautiful months: the days in which we linger with family and friends to laugh over eggnog and forget our woes
and regrets. With the Holidays becoming our only real fear throughout the year, we clearly must alter the ways in
which we live our gift-giving months.
This book, DIY Holiday Gifts, brings over thirty best-kept-secret ideas for your gift giving needs. Release your
hands from the steering wheel. You don’t have to leave your house to create these gifts. In fact, so many of the
directions in this book include supplies you currently have in your house!
Beauty supplies, around the home decorations, kitchen recipes in a jar, do-it-yourself kid gifts. This book is pulsing
with rich information that you can’t get anywhere else. As you fold yourself into the calming scents of creating your
very own essential oil-rich beauty gifts, and as you mix together a beautiful pre-made jar of brownies, you’ll begin to
forget the stunning hatred you have for December 25. In fact, you might just open up to it a little bit. Find yourself
singing Jingle Bells on the ride to work. Find yourself talking about Santa without irony. Who knows? Anything could
happen.
Not a single design in this book costs over $30 to create. In fact, most of the gifts outlined in this book are less than
$10 each—seriously cutting down on your gift giving expenditures this year. You can personalize many of the gifts
to suit the needs of your friend or family member, as well, which is pretty essential in this age of personalized license
plates and name tags. But honestly: when you’re used to getting nameless gifts, gift cards, and run-of-the-mill
clothing items, wouldn’t you rather that someone thought of you, personally, when giving you a gift?
With these gifts, you’re becoming an intrinsic part of everyone’s gift-receiving experience. They don’t expect the
same-old, same-old from you. In fact, they expect something rich, something vibrant from you and your creative
mind. Create beautiful things from the budget you have and don’t spend a nickel more. Show your love and
adoration for the people of your family, and allow your crafty side to take hold. Meet your people in the shadow of
the Holiday tree without a shade of stress in your mind. The old, materialistic ways of Holiday are past. Aim for a
rich, penniless future full of fun, hope, and lots of hot glue to keep it all together.

Table of Contents
Introduction
Chapter 1: Do-It-Yourself Beauty Gifts
DIY Vanilla Bean Bath Bombs
Peppermint Super Sweet Sugar Body Scrub
Pretty-Gift Felted Soap
DIY Natural Body Butter
Jasmine Clove Perfume
Soothing Lavender Bath Salts
Citrus Fresh Lemon Scrub
Chapter 2: Do-It-Yourself Around the Home Gifts
Iron-On Silhouette Personalized Tote Bags
Do-It-Yourself Essential Oil Diffuser
Personalized Notebook
Decorative Fabric-Covered Hat Boxes
Pretty Jewelry Dish
Monogrammed Puttin’-On-the-Ritz Glasses
Holiday Scrabble Tree Ornaments
Everyday Designer To-Do List
Classic Cake Stand
DIY Adorable Sock Snowmen Decorations
Chapter 3: Do-it-Yourself In-the-Kitchen Gifts
DIY Peppermint Flavored Coffee Syrup
DIY Vanilla Flavored Coffee Syrup
Kitchen-Ready Vanilla Extract
Bustling Holiday Brownie Mix in a Jar
Ultimate Wild West Cookie in a Jar
Sweet Treat Salted Caramel Sauce
Chocolate Holiday Toffee
Sugar Cookie Winter Wonderland Snow Globes
Winter Wonderland White Hot Chocolate in a Jar
Homemade Pumpkin Pie Spice in a Jar
Homemade Yellow Cake Mix in a Jar
Chapter 4: Do-It-Yourself For-the-Kids Gifts
DIY Fantasy No-Sew Teepee

Hanging “Balloon” Funky Kid Ornaments
DIY Gone Fishin’ Game
Lego Man Clock
Home-Made Chalkboard Town and City
Ready-Made Children’s Play-dough
Conclusion


Chapter 1: Do-It-Yourself Beauty Gifts


DIY Vanilla Bean Bath Bombs
Gift a sensational vanilla bean bath bomb for your friend who needs a relaxation
boost.
Supplies:
1 1/3 cups baking soda
2 tsp. apricot oil
1/3 cup citric acid
4 vanilla pods
1 tsp. water
15-20 drops essential vanilla oil
Estimated Cost for 7 Bath Bombs: $10.
Directions:
Begin by formulating the dry mixture. Mix together the citric acid and the baking soda.
Next, add the vanilla oils and the apricot oils. Bring the vanilla pod “guts” into the
inside of the bowl, and continue to stir. Add the water.

After you’ve completed mixed the mixture, form tiny balls with your hands.
Alternately utilize a Holiday cookie cutter for an exciting bath bomb formation. Place
these created bath bombs on wax paper to allow them to dry. This could take about
three days.
Afterwards, place each of the balls into a sealable container. When you want to gift
them, wrap them up in plastic wrap. Bring ribbon around the top of the plastic wrap
and curl the ribbon utilizing your craft scissors.


Peppermint Super Sweet Sugar Body Scrub
Create sweet-smelling peppermint sugar body scrub to pamper your friend in the midst
of Holiday stress. Remember that peppermint brings immediate stress relief, and sugar
is a proven exfoliator!
Supplies:
2 cups white sugar
1/3 cup coconut oil
7 drops peppermint essential oil
Raspberry juice OR red food coloring
1 jar
Estimated cost: $10.
Directions:
Begin by melting down the coconut oil in a saucepan or double boiler on medium heat.
To the side, place the white sugar in a small glass bowl. When the coconut oil has
melted completely, pour the coconut oil into the white sugar slowly. Continue to stir
slowly until you create a soft consistency. Afterwards, add the peppermint essential
oil and continue to stir.
After you’ve mixed together the body scrub, divide the scrub into two separate
containers. Sprinkle a few drops of either raspberry juice or red food coloring into
one of the containers, and stir well.
Next, create a wide paper funnel, and pour one layer of the red scrub at the bottom of
your clean jar. Tap the sugar well to yield a flat surface. Pour the white scrub in next
with an even width, and tap the sugar down, as well. Continue to create these stripes
until you’ve utilized the entire batch.

Create a beautiful label for your friend, and add a box to the top of the jar. Top the jar
with its cap—which you can decorate with some scrap fabric, and enjoy your gift-
giving experience.


Pretty-Gift Felted Soap
Supplies:
1 scented bar of soap
nylon stocking
wool roving
cold and hot water
Estimated Cost: $2.
Directions:
Begin by thinning your wool roving out until it’s almost transparent. Next, place the
scented bar of soap in the very middle of the wool roving. Wrap up the soap with the
wool roving, and tuck the wool into the ends, like you’re wrapping a sort of present.
You can wrap more colors of wool roving around the soap if you so choose.
Next, heat up just a bit of water and pour the hot water over the soap. Press the
different layers of wool together on the soap, and push the soap with the wool roving
overtop into a nylon stocking.
Add cold water over the soap in the nylon stocking, and wait until the soap begins to

foam. Next, start rubbing the wool on the soap. First bring hot water, then cold water
over the soap. Continue to rub and alternate the temperature of the water. After a few
minutes of rubbing, the soap will begin to lather, and the wool will begin to assimilate
into the soap. Continue to rub the wool until it is completely tight on the soap. It will
create a “casting.”
Afterwards, remove the soap from the stocking and remove the extra lather from the
soap with a napkin. Allow the soap to dry in the sun. Afterwards, wrap the soap with
a ribbon and a pretty label, and enjoy.


DIY Natural Body Butter
This super-simple DIY natural body butter is essential for your gift-giving needs. Your
friends and family will love smearing this moisturizing, scented body butter over their
bodies and reaping the rewards of their green lifestyle.
Supplies:
2/3 cup mango butter
1/3 cup Shea butter
½ cup coconut oil
½ cup Jajoba oil (or almond or olive)
15 drops lavender essential oil
10 drops orange essential oil
Estimated Cost: $10.
Directions:
Begin by bringing all the ingredients—except the essential oils—together in a double
boiler. Allow the ingredients to heat over medium and continue to stir until the mixture
has melded together.

Afterwards, remove the mixture from the heat and allow it to cool for a few minutes.
Add the essential oils, and stir well. Next, place the mixture in the fridge and allow it
to cool for an additional hour.
When you remove the mixture from the refrigerator, utilize a hand mixer to whip the
butter for ten minutes. It should be fluffy. Return the fluffed mixture back to the
refrigerator and allow it to set for fifteen minutes.
Afterwards, place the body butter in a sealable glass jar. Dress up the glass jar
however you would like, with ribbons and designs, and give the body butter to your
friends and family.


Jasmine Clove Perfume
This solid perfume is essential for the girly-girl you know. It’s all-natural and perfect
for an evening out.
Supplies:
2 tbsp. beeswax
2 tbsp. coconut oil
3 drops jasmine essential oil
2 drops vanilla extract
3 drops clove essential oil
1 clean container
Estimated Cost: $13.
Directions:
Begin by pouring the beeswax and coconut oil together in a small saucepan. Allow the
two ingredients to melt together on a medium-low stovetop.
Next, bring the melted ingredients into a small bowl and allow them to cool. Drip the
essential oils into the mixture and stir very carefully.
Afterwards, pour the mixture into the container you wish to gift it in. Allow the
mixture to harden. Decorate the container however you wish, and present the gift to
your friends and family. They can apply the solid perfume by rubbing it a bit with their
fingers and applying it to their skin.


Soothing Lavender Bath Salts
Create these lavender salts for your super-stressed best friend and your ever-worrying
mother to calm them mid-winter.
Supplies:
2 cups Epsom salt
1 cup sea salt
10 drops lavender essential oil
Estimated cost: $5.
Directions:
Brig together the Epsom salt, the sea salt, and the lavender essential oils. Blend the
ingredients until the salts are completely infused. Place the mixture in an attractive
muslin drawstring bag or another sort of jar, and tie a ribbon around the top.


Citrus Fresh Lemon Scrub
Bring summertime mood to your winter-hating friends and family with this lemon
scrub. The ingredients are all-natural, and the smell is divine.
Supplies:
¼ cup almond oil or coconut oil
1 lemon
2 ¼ cups white sugar
Estimated Cost: $4.
Directions:
Begin by placing the white sugar in a bowl. Set the bowl of sugar aside.
Next, if utilizing coconut oil, place the coconut oil in a saucepan and allow it to melt
over medium heat. Stir continuously, and pour the liquid over the sugar. Stir well.
Zest the rind of the lemon. Afterwards, slice the body of the lemon into two pieces,
and juice the lemon. Remember to remove the seeds.

Add both the seeds and the juice to the prepared mixture and continue to stir.
Place this prepared mixture in a clean mason jar and seal the jar tightly. Place a label
or design on the jar, and wrap a ribbon around the top. 

Chapter 2: Do-It-Yourself Around the Home Gifts


Iron-On Silhouette Personalized Tote Bags
Create a personalized iron-on silhouette tote bag for the woman who already has
everything. Create a never-before-seen design from a hand-picked clip art image, and
allow her personality to shine through her gift.
Supplies:
1 tote bag (dark or light)
Clip art of your choice, usable for its silhouette
Craft knife
ribbon
iron
Estimated Cost: $10.
Directions:
Begin by selecting a clip art piece from the internet or from a book. The image should
be appropriate for silhouette use. Therefore, it should be a well-known outline. Think
of a butterfly or a dragonfly: each has an intricate, specific shape.
Next, print the desired image onto transfer paper. (I used Inkjet Heat Transfer Paper.)

Cut carefully around the image with your craft scissors.
Arrange these images onto your tote bag to understand how you want to organize your
design. Remember that when you do this, you are creating a “mirror” image of what
the design will actually be.
Afterwards, place the images down onto an ironing board. Place the tote bag over the
images, and iron them. Start at the very edge of the image and utilize consistent
pressure.
After the transfer paper has cooled, remove the paper. If you like, you can cover the
tote bag’s handles with ribbon for an extra hint of color.


Do-It-Yourself Essential Oil Diffuser
Rid your friends and families of the unnecessary, artificially fragranced candles of
past Holidays and make them an Essential Oil Diffuser!
Supplies:
1 narrow-opening glass container
4 reed diffuser sticks
¼ cup sweet almond oil
25 drops of the essential oil of your choice
When choosing an essential oil, look to the following combinations:
Lavender and Eucalyptus
Cinnamon and Orange
Lavender, Lemon, and Rosemary
Bergamot and Patchouli
Estimated Cost: $7.
Directions:
Begin by mixing together the essential oils and the almond oil in the glass container.
Afterwards, place each of the diffuser sticks into the container. Remind the person to
which you give this gift that they must continually flip the sticks so as to reveal the
essential oils’ ultimate good-smelling power.
Prepare this gift just one day before your gift-giving so as to give your gift at its height
of smelling power.


Personalized Notebook
Design a notebook with found fabric to create a one-of-a-kind gift notebook that
screams the personality of the person you’re giving it to.
Supplies:
Super 77 spray adhesive
1 notebook, your choice
Fabric of your choice
Estimated Cost: $8.
Directions:
Begin by spraying the notebook of your choice with the Super 77 spray adhesive.
Place the fabric directly on the notebook utilizing whichever design you think best
suits your friend or family member. Trim the extra fabric around the notebook for a
clean edge. 


Decorative Fabric-Covered Hat Boxes
Decorate round “chipwood” boxes with decorative fabric that matches your friend or
loved one’s intricate taste. Place a gift inside the box, or simply allow the box to be
its own decoration!
Supplies:
1 Round 7” Chipwood Box
Assorted Fabrics of Your Choice
Mod Podge
Estimated Cost: $7.
Directions:
Begin by cutting the fabric of your choice to fit precisely around the box. Cut the fabric
just below the lid.
Next, mod podge the fabric to the box. Place the lid on the box, and send your Holiday
gift into the world!


Pretty Jewelry Dish
Quick-to-create ring or jewelry dish is incredibly beautiful and easily personalized.
Supplies:
Paint color of your choice
A random knickknack of your choice
super glue
1 small dish
Estimated Cost: $8.
When looking for your knickknack, you’ll want to find something that stands up a little
bit, is pretty skinny, and adds character to the jewelry dish. Think: a man, a woman, an
animal, a tree—anything! Remember that it doesn’t matter if the figurine doesn’t color-
match the dish. You’ll be painting everything the same color at the end.
Directions:
Begin by gluing your figurine knickknack to the middle of your chosen dish. After it’s
dried, paint the jewelry dish carefully with a stunning color: think bronze, gold, or
silver. (Obviously, the choice is up to you!) Use several coats, and allow each coat to
dry prior to adding an additional coat.


Monogrammed Puttin’-On-the-Ritz Glasses
Give your friends and family monogrammed glasses to glitz up the average kitchen-
ware.
Supplies:
$1 Dollar Store Glasses
Alphabet Dollar Store Letter Sticker
Round Dollar Store Stickers
Etching Cream
Estimated Cost Per Glass: $5.
Directions:
Begin by buying a few dollar store glasses, alphabet letters, and round stickers from
the Dollar Store. You can purchase etching cream from your local craft store.
Remove the stickers from the package, and keep the circle’s outline. Place this outline
in the center of the glass—wherever you want the etching to be. Next, place a letter
stick in the very middle of this outlined circle. For example, if you’re making an
etching for an April, you’d use an A. If you’re making an etching for a Westchester,
you’d use a W.
Next, paint the etching cream on the inside of the circle, directly over the letter sticker.
Allow the etching cream to stay on the glass for forty-five seconds. Next, rinse the
etching cream off the glass with water and soap. Peel off the sticker and the circle
outline. Continue to wash the glass in order to remove all the etching cream.
Afterwards, you will have a faint outline of your letter of choice—very professional
and ritzy looking.



Holiday Scrabble Tree Ornaments
Create scrabble tree ornaments for your scrabble-happy friends and family.
Supplies:
Scrabble letters of your choice
red ribbon
craft scissors
Hot glue gun
Estimated Cost: $8.
Directions:
Think of some potential words to utilize for your Scrabble ornaments. Think of words
like:
NOEL
BELIEVE
JOY
SANTA

or Personal Names.
Next, glue together the scrabble ties to formulate these decided words. Allow them to
dry together—but proofread your spelling before anything gets too permanent!
Glue the red ribbon to the back of your scrabble design to create a loop for the tree.
Give them to your friends and family members, or just decorate your own tree with
them!


Everyday Designer To-Do List
Create a pretty board for your scattered friends and relatives to write their weekly
tasks upon. Allow the pattern to match their kitchen or their personality!
Supplies:
1 12x12 frame with glass
Piece of scrapbook paper with interesting, pretty pattern.
Dry-erase marker
Estimated Cost: $10.
Directions:
Begin by choosing an inexpensive frame at your local Dollar Store or discount grocer.
The frame should have a glass front.
Next, make sure the cool patterned scrapbook page is appropriate for the person to
whom you’re gifting it. Plop the scrapbook paper in the frame and write something fun
on the glass of the frame: “Happy Holidays! May Your To-Do Lists Be Miniscule and
Your Smile Large!” Something like that. You probably have something better in mind.
This is a super-easy, personalized piece of decoration for any friend’s kitchen or
office.


Classic Cake Stand
Make a cake stand for your friend and family member’s great cake festivities!
Supplies:
1 candle holder
1 plate
super glue
paint (optional)
Estimated Cost: $3.
Directions:
Begin by placing glue at the exterior rim of the candleholder. Place the plate directly
on the candleholder and allow it to dry. Afterwards, if you want to paint the cake stand
a particular color, or create a design, you absolutely can! Jazz it up for gift-giving
festivities.


DIY Adorable Sock Snowmen Decorations
Create these adorable snowmen by yourself or with your children for delightful gifts
for teachers, best friends, grandmothers, and more!
Supplies:
1 white tube sock
Dry rice
3 Rubber bands
Glue gun
small craft buttons and balls for snowman decorating
small piece of fabric for scarf
Any other desired decorations
Estimated Cost: $4.
Directions:
Begin by filling your white tube sock with dried rice all the way to the heel. Tie a
rubber band above this rice to create a snug lower section. Repeat this process to
create your middle and upper head parts of the snowman. When you close off the head
of the snowman, make sure that you have four inches of sock left over on top.

Fold this extra bit of sock over to create a large winter hat on the snowman.
Next, decorate the snowman however you like. Give him eyes, a nose, a month, a scarf
—whatever—with a glue gun. Allow him to dry out and give him to your gift-receive
of choice.


Chapter 3: Do-it-Yourself In-the-Kitchen Gifts


DIY Peppermint Flavored Coffee Syrup
Supplies:
2 Cups Sugar
2 Cups Water
3 candy canes
Glass Bottle
Label
Estimated Cost: $3.
Directions:
Begin by pouring the sugar and the water together in a saucepan. Heat the sugar on
medium for three minutes prior to breaking up the pieces of candy cane into the
saucepan. Stir for a moment and continue to allow it to cook until the sugar is
completely melted. Allow it to cool.
Afterwards, pour the syrup into a glass bottle and label it with a pretty label and
ribbons.


DIY Vanilla Flavored Coffee Syrup
Supplies:
2 cups sugar
2 cups water
2 tsp. vanilla extract
Glass Bottle
Label
Estimated Cost: $3.
Directions:
Begin by bringing together the sugar and the water in a saucepan. Heat the sugar and
the water on medium for two minutes, stirring occasionally. Next, add the vanilla
extract. Stir it once and then allow the mixture’s sugar to melt completely. Afterwards,
allow the mixture to cool, and poor the syrup into a clean glass bottle. Decorate the
bottle however you like, and send the pretty, tasty gift to all the coffee lovers in your
life.


Kitchen-Ready Vanilla Extract
Bring your friend’s baking life into action with this DIY vanilla extract. It’s simple
and can be stored in beautiful, label-friendly jars for under-the-tree presentation.
Supplies:
4 vanilla beans
1 ½ cups vodka
sterilized jar
6 weeks
Estimated Cost: $7.
Directions:
Begin by slicing the vanilla beans and placing the vanilla beans in your sterilized jar.
Next, pour the vodka over the vanilla beans, and cap the jar tightly. Store the jar in a
cool, dark location for about six weeks. Afterwards, label the pretty jar with
whichever label you like, and wrap a ribbon around it for show.


Bustling Holiday Brownie Mix in a Jar
Supplies:
1 liter jar
½ tsp. salt
¾ cup cocoa powder
½ tsp. baking powder
2 ½ cups flour
½ tsp. baking powder
¾ cup dark chocolate chips
½ cups white chocolate chips
½ cups milk chocolate chips
1 ½ cups white sugar
1 ½ cups brown sugar
Estimated Cost: $9.
Directions:
Begin by washing and completely drying the liter jar. Afterwards, stir together the
baking powder, the flour, and the salt in a large bowl.

Next, begin your layering process in the jar. You can use a large paper funnel, if you
so choose. Pour half of the flour mixture into the bottom of the jar. Pat the powder so
that it lies flat. Next, add all of the cocoa powder to the top of the flour mixture. Pat
this, as well.
Add the rest of the flour mixture over the cocoa mixture, and top the flour mixture with
the brown sugar followed by a layer of the white sugar.
Add the dark chocolate chips followed by the milk chocolate chips. Next, add a layer
of the white chocolate chips. You can top the chips with nuts, if you like.
Add the following instructions to a cooking tag for your friend or family member:
Remember the remaining ingredients: 3 eggs, 1 tsp. vanilla extract, 4 tbsp. coffee, and
150 grams melted butter.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees Fahrenheit. Afterwards, pour the entire jar’s contents
into a large bowl. Stir well. Add the melted butter, eggs, vanilla, and the coffee. Stir
well, and pour the batter into a large pan. Allow the brownies to bake for thirty
minutes. If you insert a toothpick, the toothpick should come out clean.


Ultimate Wild West Cookie in a Jar
Supplies:
1 quart jar
1 1/3 cups oats
½ cup sugar
1 cup chocolate chips
½ cup brown sugar
1 tsp. baking powder
1 ½ cups flour
½ tsp. salt
1 tsp. baking soda
Estimated Cost: $5.
Directions:
Begin by washing and drying the jar you’re going to use for the gift.
Pour half of the oats in the bottom of the jar. Make sure it’s completely flat overtop.

Next, stir together the baking powder, flour, baking soda, and the salt. Pour half of this
mixture over the oats in the jar, and tap it until it’s completely flat.
Next, layer the other half of the oats over the flour followed by another layer of the
flour mixture. Again, make sure that each layer is completely flat.
Next, top the flour mixture with a layer of the brown sugar followed by a layer of the
white sugar. Top the sugar with the chocolate chips, and tie up the jar.
When you give this gift to your family member for friend, include the following card:
Ultimate Wild West Cookie in a Jar Recipe
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees and mix together 1 egg, 1 tsp. vanilla, and ½ cup
melted margarine in a large bowl. Pour the jar ingredients into the bowl and stir well.
Make cookie balls, and place the balls on a cook sheet. Allow the cookies to bake for
a full thirteen minutes, and enjoy!


Sweet Treat Salted Caramel Sauce
Make salted caramel sauce for your friends and family, and bring the joy and
sweetness of the holidays to their palates!
Supplies:
¼ cup water
¾ cup sugar
4 tbsp. butter, unsalted
¾ cup heavy cream
1 tsp. crushed sea salt
Estimated Cost: $6.
Directions:
Stir together the sugar and water in a saucepan over medium heat. The sugar will
dissolve. Afterwards, increase the heat to high and allow the water to boil. Do not
stir. The syrup will turn a deep reddish brown in about six minutes. Take it off the
heat.
Next, add the heavy cream to the syrup and whisk well. The ingredients will begin to
bubble. Add the butter and the salt, and continue to mix until it’s completely
assimilated. Pour the mixture into a cool dish and allow it to completely cool.
When it’s cooled, pour the caramel into a cleansed jar and decorate the jar as you
wish. Tell your family members that the caramel can be reheated prior to serving.


Chocolate Holiday Toffee
Make up some awesome chocolate Holiday toffee, wrap it up in a pretty jar, and give
your friends and family members exactly what they’ve always wanted: more dessert.
Supplies:
45 saltine crackers
1 cup brown sugar
2 ¼ cups chocolate chips
1 cup Holiday colored M&M’s
2 sticks of butter
Estimated Cost: $5.
Directions:
Begin by preheating your oven to 325 degrees Fahrenheit.
Next, place some aluminum foil over your baking pan. Line the aluminum foil with all
of the saltine crackers.

Next, bring together the butter and the sugar in a pot. Cook them on medium low, and
stir the ingredients until the butter is completely melted. Afterwards, allow the butter
for boil for about three minutes.
After it begins to bubble, remove the saucepan from the heat and pour the ingredients
directly over the saltine crackers. You can use a knife to spread the mixture more
evenly. Move rather quickly as the toffee will begin to harden.
Next, place this baking pan in the oven and bake the saltines for eight minutes.
Immediately when you remove the saltines from the oven, sprinkle the chocolate chips
over them. The chocolate chips will begin to melt. After it begins to melt, spread it
evenly over the saltine toffee crackers with a knife or spatula. Afterwards, sprinkle the
Holiday-colored M&M’s over the chocolate evenly. Place the saltines in the
refrigerator and allow them to cool for about forty minutes. Afterwards, you can break
up the pieces of the toffee from the pan and place them decoratively in a clean jar.
Decorate the jar with ribbons and a pretty design. Your friends and relatives will love
it!


Sugar Cookie Winter Wonderland Snow Globes
These fantastic winter wonderland snow globes are perfectly edible and so much fun!
Make one for every seat around your table for Holiday Eve dinner! Or, just make
enough for yourself to eat every 12 days of Holidays!
Supplies:
Sugar cookie dough (either purchased from the store in a tube or made on your own!)
Small holiday cookie cutters
Round cookie cutters
Baby food jars
Frosting (pre-made or made yourself! Holiday colors definitely escalate the entire
design.)
White sprinkles
Estimated Cost: $2 per cookie snow globe.
Directions:
Begin by preparing your cookie dough. When it’s completed mixed—or completely
taken out of your store-bought container—roll it out and cut it into small Holiday trees,
gingerbread men—whatever you like! Also, include the same number of regular circle
cookies. These have to be your base. Next, bake the cookies for the recipe-
recommended amount of time.
After the cookies have baked, decorate the festive ones with greens, reds, whites—
whatever you like! Allow the frosting to harden on the cookies.
After the frosting has hardened, frost the base round cookies and immediately place
the festive cookies into the “sticky” frosting of the round cookies. Prop the festive
cookies in the wet frosting with anything you can find nearby. Use some side-by-side
support from some sprinkles cans, or use some sort of standing-cookbook-action. Do

anything you can to keep the festive cookies standing upright in the round cookies.
After some time, the round cookie frosting will dry and keep the festive cookies in
their wraps.
Prior to fixing up your snow globe, paint the lid of the baby food jar in a festive color,
if you like. Allow it to dry. Next, dot a bit of icing for “glue” at the bottom of the lid.
Place the round, base part of the cookie on this icing, and allow it to dry. Do this with
all the cookies.
After you’ve allowed the cookies to dry sufficiently to the lid of the baby food jar,
pour about a ½ tbsp. or more of white sprinkles into the jar. Place the jar and the lid
together once more, and shake slowly. You’ve created a sprinkle, cookie winter
wonderland that’s perfectly edible and delicious!


Winter Wonderland White Hot Chocolate in a Jar
Create this white hot chocolate mix in a pretty mason jar for your friends, and allow
them to stay warm and happy all through winter!
Supplies:
1 ½ cups white chocolate chips
2 tsp. vanilla powder
Estimated Cost: $3.
Directions:
Begin by combining the above ingredients and pour it in a decorative mason jar. Place
the lid on the mason jar, and wrap a ribbon around the top. Attach a card with the
following instructions:
Pour a quarter of a cup of this white hot chocolate mix into a saucepan and add 1 ½
cups of milk. Heat the saucepan to medium heat, and stir the ingredients together until
the chocolate is completely assimilated into the drink. Enjoy.


Homemade Pumpkin Pie Spice in a Jar
Create this pumpkin pie spice for your baking friends for their great late winter kitchen
adventures!
Supplies:
4 tsp. ginger
4 tsp. nutmeg
4 tbsp. cinnamon
3 tsp. allspice
Estimated Cost: $3.50.
Directions:
Bring all the ingredients together in a mason jar, and stir well. Seal the mason jar and
place a pretty label over the glass. Add a ribbon around the top of the jar, and gift off
this wonderful spice! Pro Tip: Insist on partaking in all of their pumpkin-flavored
things for the rest of the season.


Homemade Yellow Cake Mix in a Jar
Create this homemade yellow cake mix for your friends so that they can create a cake
on a whim. Is there no greater dream?
Supplies:
2 ½ cups flour
2 tsp. baking powder
2 cups white sugar
½ tsp. salt
Estimated Cost: $2.
Directions:
Stir together these dry ingredients and pour them into a mason jar. Place a ribbon
around the mason jar, and add a cute note that allows the receiver of the gift to
understand the next instructions:
Begin by preheating your oven to 350 degrees Fahrenheit.
Next, stir together ¾ cup butter, 1 cup milk, 4 egg whites, 2 tsp. vanilla, and ½ tsp.
almond extract in a large bowl. Add the dry ingredients to this mixture, and stir well.
Fill a cake pan—or two smaller cake pans—with the prepared mixture. Bake the cake
for about twenty-five minutes or until a toothpick comes out clean. Enjoy.


Chapter 4: Do-It-Yourself For-the-Kids Gifts


DIY Fantasy No-Sew Teepee
Don’t spend one hundred dollars on the pretty teepees at the toy store. Instead, gather
together some pretty fabrics and make your own no-sew teepee! Your kids or your
friend’s kids will love the fantastical, beautiful teepee. Plus, you can personalize the
teepee to suit the needs of specific kids. Pink for a girly-girl? Check. Dark blue for an
adventurous young man or woman? Check. Plus, the entire teepee hones in at just
under $30!
Supplies:
5 2-inch by 1-inch by 8-feet wooden boards, cut down by workers at Home
Depot/Menards/Craft Place of your choice.
String
4 yards of 2 types of colorful fabric of your choice, all in one cut
Craft scissors
Tacks
Estimated Cost: $30.
Directions:
Begin by heading to your “Home Depot” and have the workers cut you 5 2-inch by 1-
inch by 8-feet wooden boards. These are going to form your frame.

Next, decide how you’d like to overlap your frame to create your teepee. Secure just
two boards at a time at the very top, with about a foot hanging over them to get the
right angle. Secure the boards with string. Wrap the string tightly around them, binding
them securely. Next, secure the rest of the boards in the same place. When you place
them all together, you’ll see that they naturally fall about two feet away from each
other on the ground. After you’ve brought all the boards together in the center, tie them
all together securely at the top.
Now, it’s time to dress up the teepee. You can pick out four feet of each of your
colors-of-choice.
Cut along the length of the fabric to make long, wide strips. Using one of your strips,
safely secure the very top of your teepee once more. Next, start at the back pole and
start wrapping your strips of fabric around the teepee. Cut your strip off when you
wrap all the way around in a single stripe. You can alternate colors. Secure each of
the pieces of fabric to the pieces of wood with tacks. After you’ve done two or three
“wraps” around the top, do the rest starting from the bottom. When you find your way
around the “open” part of the teepee, simply wrap the fabric around the wooden part at
the opening and don’t “seal” the teepee. Do this on the other side, as well, all the way
up to where you think the opening should close: around three feet up.
After you’ve reached the top of the opening, begin to seal up the rest of the teepee.
Continue to alternate your sheets of fabric to create the rest of the teepee. Enjoy the
fantasy you’ve created for the children in your life!


Hanging “Balloon” Funky Kid Ornaments
Create these balloon and starch funky kid ornaments for the fun-loving kid in your life.
Supplies:
Liquid starch
1 round and small balloon
a small bowl
cotton thread or a thin string
Estimated Cost: $10.
Directions:
Begin by inflating the small, round balloon. Tie the end in a knot to hold the air in the
balloon.
Next, place just a bit of liquid starch into the small bowl. Place the string in the liquid
starch, completely soaking it. Next, bring the string around the balloon. As you
maneuver around the balloon, creating interesting zig-zag and criss-cross patterns,
make sure that every inch of the string is coated in the liquid starch. Continue to refill
the liquid starch bowl as needed.
After you’ve created our desired pattern, hang the balloon over a bathtub to allow it to
dry. After it’s completely dried, pop open the balloon and remove it. You can wrap a
small piece of ribbon around a string of the ornament for easy hanging. Your kids will
love it!


DIY Gone Fishin’ Game
Create this awesome game for your children from just a few pieces of colorful
construction paper, some yarn, and a “fishing rod.” Your kids will LOVE having this
fun, colorful game to play.
Supplies:
Construction paper, different colors are great!
Yarn
Large needle
1 paper clip
1 dowel rod
Cotton balls
Estimated Cost: $10.
Directions:
Begin by cutting out several pieces of same-size “fish” from the construction paper.
You can do this by creating a template and doing some “tracing action” on all of your
chosen, colorful pieces. Try to create about five fish; therefore, you’ll need ten pieces
of fish paper.

Next, stab tiny holes at the edges of the fish, all around the exterior. Bring two of the
same colors together and begin to lace together the fish pieces. When you reach the
end of the fish, stuff the fish with a few cotton balls to make it look more three-
dimensional. When you are finished stuffing, continue “sewing” the fish together. Tie
up the end. At the “mouth” of the fish, you’ll want to create a loop. This loop should
be about one inch long and one inch wide: small enough to stand up on its own and big
enough to be “caught” by your child’s fishing rod.
After you’ve completed your fish creations, turn to your dowel rod. Tie a piece of
yarn to the end of the dowel rod. Next, open up a paperclip all the way to make a sort
of fishing rod “hook.” Tie this hook to the end of the piece of yarn, and voila!
You’ve created your fish and your fishing rod. They’re simplistic, but they’re fun and
easy for toddler-age children. Allow your child to swing the fishing rod with the
attached paperclip “hook” and catch each of the fish, one by one.


Lego Man Clock
Make this awesome Lego man or woman clock from the toys your kids already know
and love. Dress up a cheap-looking clock and make it look like a state-of-the-art kid’s
decoration.
Supplies:
1 inexpensive battery wall clock. Find one without number.
12 small Lego men and women. (Alternately, you could use army men!)
Estimated Cost: $20.
Directions:
Begin by searching for an inexpensive, battery wall clock that doesn’t have any
numbers. This shouldn’t be too difficult if you frequent the Wal-Marts, Targets, or
craft stores of the world. When you find this wall clock, make sure you choose one
with small arms. Longer clock arms might get caught on the figurines.
Mark on the clock where the figurines must go. Glue each of the figurines in their
place, working from 12 clockwise to 11 for precision. Allow the clock to dry, and
voila! A Lego Clock, fit for any imaginative child!


Home-Made Chalkboard Town and City
Allow your son or daughter to personalize their building blocks to create their very
own city!
Supplies:
Wooden blocks, any size
Chalkboard paint
chalk
Estimated Cost: $15.
Directions:
Begin by purchasing the light-weight wooden blocks from your regular hardware store
or craft store. You can find the chalkboard paint there, as well. Paint each of the
wooden blocks with the chalkboard paint, and allow them to dry.
When your child receives the gift, they’ll have a fabulous time designing their own
houses and building a unique, personalized city of their very own.


Ready-Made Children’s Play-dough
Create this easy childhood toy, play-dough, with just a few ingredients laying around
your house.
Supplies:
2 cups warm water
1 ¾ cups flour
2 tbsp. olive oil
¾ cup salt
Optional tbsp. cream of tartar
food coloring of your choice
essential oils of your choice
Estimated Cost: $9.
Directions:
Begin by bringing all of the ingredients together in a large saucepan. Stir the mixture
over a low heat setting. First, the dough will resemble a mashed potato consistency.
Keep cooking. After the dough begins to clump together in the very middle of the pan,
your dough is ready. Allow it to cool, and place the dough in a cute mason jar with a

nice design fit for children. Your kids will have a riot with this at-home, natural play-
dough!


Conclusion
DIY Holiday Gifts sends ripples of rich Holiday-time passion through your crafty self
after years of unfortunate materialism. Your days of struggling through department
store aisles are at an end. Reach toward your handy craft scissors and glue gun, and
prepare these personalized Holiday gifts. Render yourself as the artist of the family,
and bring beautiful decorations for your family members’ homes. Alternately, yield
several beautiful jars of natural beauty products, many of which are pulsing with
yummy-smelling essential oils. Furthermore, create super-easy brownie, cookie, and
spice mixes for your friends and family members to get through the harsh January and
February ahead with something sweet.
No matter your abilities, these super-simple Holiday on-a-budget gifts can work in
your life. None of the crafts require a single stitch in a sewing machine, and not a
single one requires much skill. You have to love your friends and love your family
members enough to give them personalized, beautiful gifts. We’ll help you with the
rest.

Table of Contents
DISCLAIMER
Introduction
CHapter 1 Do it yourself Beauty Gifts
Chapter 2 Do it yourself Around the Home Gifts
Chapter 3 Do it yourself in the kitchen Gifts
Chapter 4 Do it yourself For the Kids Gifts
Conclusion

