
Do-It-Yourself 
   PC UPGRADE  
  PROJECTS 
cInet

About the Author
Guy Hart-Davis is the author of more than 40 computer books, including CNET Do-
It-Yourself iPod Projects, How to Do Everything with Microsoft Office Word 2007, and How 
to Do Everything with Microsoft Office Excel 2007.

Do-It-Yourself 
   PC UPGRADE  
  PROJECTS 
24 cool things you didn’t know you could do!
Guy Hart-Davis
New York Chicago San Francisco 
Lisbon London Madrid Mexico City 
Milan New Delhi San Juan  
Seoul Singapore Sydney Toronto
cInet

Copyright © 2008 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Manufactured in the United States of America. Except as permitted under the
United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database
or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher. 
0-07-159569-4
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: 0-07-149628-9.
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use
names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such 
designations appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps. 
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or for use in corporate training programs.
For more information, please contact George Hoare, Special Sales, at george_hoare@mcgraw-hill.com or (212) 904-4069. 
TERMS OF USE 
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this
work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may
not decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or
sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any
other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms. 
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE 
ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY 
INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY
WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR 
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will
meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone
else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill has no responsibili-
ty for the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any indi-
rect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been
advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause 
arises in contract, tort or otherwise. 
DOI: 10.1036/0071496289

We hope you enjoy this
McGraw-Hill eBook! If
you’d like more information about this book,
its author, or related books and websites,
please click here.
Professional
Want to learn more?

This book is dedicated to my parents.

This page intentionally left blank 

vii
Contents
Foreword   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  
ix
Acknowledgments .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  
xi
Introduction 
  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  
xiii
 Part 1   Easy
 
Project 1 
Max Out Your Memory and Turbo-Charge It with ReadyBoost 
  .  .  .   
1
 
Project 2 
Get the Fastest Possible Internet Connection   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
15
 
Project 3 
Turn Your PC into a Free Phone 
.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
23
 
Project 4 
Turn Your PC into a Video Phone 
.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
34
 Part 1I   Intermediate
 
Project 5 
Turn Your PC into a Media Center 
  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
45
 
Project 6 
Learn to Work with Your PC’s BIOS   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
53
 
Project 7 
Replace Your Hard Disk—or Add Another Hard Disk 
  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
65
 
Project 8 
Set Up a Multimonitor Monster 
.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
79
 
Project 9 
Build a Wired Network in Your Home 
.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
90
 
Project 10 
Recover from Windows Disasters with Knoppix 
.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
105
 
Project 11 
Modify Your PC’s Case   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
117
 
Project 12 
Use Your PC as Your Home Theater 
  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
123
 
Project 13 
Share Your Household’s Music and Movies  
Easily and Effectively   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
131
 
Project 14 
Turn Your PC into a Recording Studio   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
147
For more information about this title, click here

 
Project 15 
Record Music on Your PC 
  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
163
 
Project 16 
Back Up and Restore Your Computer 
  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
176
 
Project 17 
Create a Wireless Network 
.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
184
 
Project 18 
Create an Ad Hoc Wireless Network   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
195
 
Project 19 
Digitize Your Paper Documents 
.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
202
 Part III   Advanced
 
Project 20 
Seal Your Private Data in an Uncrackable Virtual Locker 
.  .  .  .  .  .  .   
213
 
Project 21 
Stream TV to Your PC or Handheld Device Anywhere   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
226
 
Project 22 
Silence Your PC or Build an Ultra-Quiet PC 
  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
239
 
Project 23 
Run Other Operating Systems on Top of Windows   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
254
 
Project 24 
Install Another Operating System Alongside Windows 
  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
266
Index 
  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
275
viii
Contents

Foreword
T
he days of tinkering with our cars are largely over, but we wouldn’t have time 
anyway—the PC takes up our tinker time now! Instead of shade-tree mechan-
ics, we are now a nation of computer upgraders. Beefing up hard drives, RAM, and 
video cards has replaced carburetor tweaks and oil changes. (And we’re a less greasy 
nation for it!) 
McGraw-Hill and CNET have compiled the most asked-for upgrades in this very 
clear set of projects. This may be one of the most essential titles in our series because 
it’s still a tricky world inside your PC case and, unlike working on a ’69 Ford, you can’t 
just figure out PC upgrades by looking at the parts.
Some of this book’s projects are classic hardware jobs, like drive and memory up-
grades or dual-monitor setups. Others are more software oriented, like setting up your 
PC as an IP phone or a living-room media center. And some projects are almost more 
of a user upgrade—the project on good practices and technology for backups fits that 
category!
You may also want to enjoy the hottest project in PCs today: virtualization. The 
idea of running more than one operating system on a single computer has been catch-
ing on in a big way. Macs and PCs now run on the same CPUs, Linux operating sys-
tems are desktop-friendly, and a certain détente has been reached that admits some 
operating systems are just better at some tasks than others. Now the question, “Mac, 
Linux, or PC?” can often be answered, “Yes.”
One thing hasn’t changed and that’s the sharp metal edges inside your PC’s case! 
So put on some gloves, open your machine, thumb ahead in this book, and get ready 
to create a new PC out of your old one. We promise, your nails will still be clean when 
you’re done.
Brian Cooley
CNET Editor-at-Large
ix

This page intentionally left blank 

xi
Acknowledgments
I
’d like to thank the following people for their help with this book:
Roger Stewart for developing the book and making it happen
Carly Stapleton for handling the acquisitions end of the book
Jennifer Kettell for reviewing the manuscript for technical accuracy and con-
tributing many helpful suggestions
Bill McManus for editing the manuscript
Vasundhara Sawhney, Jean Bodeaux, and Janet Walden for coordinating the 
production of the book
International Typesetting and Composition for laying out the pages
WordCo Indexing Services for writing the index
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
xi

This page intentionally left blank 

xiii
Introduction
P
Cs are amazing. Every year, they become faster and their capabilities increase—
yet the prices keep coming down. These days, most PCs come so loaded with 
features that many people never come to grips with some of the most useful ones.
This book shows you how to make the most of your PC’s built-in features, from 
telephony to television, from networking to unbreakable encryption—and how to go 
far beyond them by adding further hardware and software to your PC.
What Does This Book Cover?
This book contains three sections of projects. Roughly speaking, the early projects are 
easy, and the later projects are harder.
Some of the early projects are general and form a good basis for the other projects. 
For example, the first two projects—increasing your PC’s memory, and getting the fast-
est possible affordable Internet connection—are ones you may want to tackle before 
progressing to the other projects. But if your PC is already fully loaded and hooked 
up to a blazingly fast Internet connection, you’ll already be set to dive into the other 
projects.
Most of the projects are independent, so you can tackle the projects that interest 
you in any order. However, some of the projects depend on other projects. For exam-
ple, Project 14 shows you how to set up your PC for recording live audio (such as music 
you play), and Project 15 shows you how to perform the recording. So if you want to 
work through Project 15, you’ll normally want to work through Project 14 first.
Here’s a breakdown of the projects.
Easy Projects
Project 1, “Max Out Your Memory and Turbo-Charge It with ReadyBoost,” shows you 
how to increase the amount of RAM in your PC to the max—and then add an extra 
kick by using Windows Vista rather than Windows XP, add an extra kick by using the 
ReadyBoost feature. For most PCs, memory is the least expensive and most effective 
way of making Windows run faster, so unless your PC is already stuffed to the gills 
with memory, you’ll probably want to start here.
Project 2, “Get the Fastest Possible Internet Connection,” explains your various 
options for Internet connections—depending on where you live and on how friendly 
your local utility companies choose to be. If you’ve already got the fastest Internet 

connection available, skip this project. Otherwise, upgrade your Internet connection, 
and you’ll upgrade your entire computing experience.
Project 3, “Turn Your PC into a Free Phone,” demonstrates how to install the Skype 
software and use it to make free phone calls (you’ll need a headset, or speakers and 
a microphone). You’ll find Skype easy to use and an easy way to save money on 
phone bills.
Project 4, “Turn Your PC into a Video Phone,” shows you how to use Windows 
Live Messenger to make video calls on your PC. As you’d imagine, you need a video 
camera and a broadband Internet connection to make calls. Whoever you’re calling 
needs the same.
Intermediate Projects
Project 5, “Turn Your PC into a Media Center,” explains how to add a TV tuner to your 
PC so that you can use the Windows Media Center program included with Windows 
Vista Home Premium Edition and Windows Vista Ultimate Edition. 
 Project 6, “Learn to Work with Your PC’s BIOS,” gets you started making changes 
to the Basic Input/Output System that makes your PC tick. The project walks you 
through booting your PC from the optical drive (as you’ll need to do for some of the 
other projects) and applying a BIOS password to protect your PC. The essentials you 
learn in this project will enable you to make other BIOS changes when you need to.
Project 7, “Replace Your Hard Disk—or Add Another Hard Disk,” covers the 
ways in which you can increase the amount of hard disk space on your PC. If your 
PC can contain only a single disk drive (as is the case with most laptops), you will 
need to replace the drive and install the operating system. But if your PC can contain 
multiple hard drives, you can simply add one or more extra drives to supplement 
your existing drive.
Project 8, “Set Up a Multimonitor Monster,” shows you how to increase the 
amount of screen real estate you have available for work or play. Almost any PC—
laptop or desktop—can run two monitors out of the box. But if you need even more 
space to spread out your documents, read this project’s advice for ways to connect the 
maximum possible number of monitors.
Project 9, “Build a Wired Network in Your Home,” explains how to choose net-
working materials and tools, and then build a cabled network that connects all your 
PCs so that you can share data, devices, and your Internet connection. Building a 
wired network throughout a home can be a major undertaking—but you will reap the 
benefits of the network for years.
Project 10, “Recover from Windows Disasters with Knoppix,” teaches you to use 
the “live” Linux distribution called Knoppix to fix problems that prevent your PC 
from booting Windows successfully. “Live” means that Knoppix boots and runs from 
your PC’s optical drive, which gives you a platform to attack problems on the hard 
drive that you wouldn’t otherwise be able to reach once problems have arisen.
Project 11, “Modify Your PC’s Case,” gets you acquainted with the tools you need 
if you’re planning to cut, gouge, or otherwise alter your PC’s case. This project gives 
you two examples of case-mod tasks, one practical and the other esthetic. 
xiv
Introduction

Introduction  xv
Project 12, “Use Your PC as Your Home Theater,” shows you how to connect a 
Media Center PC to a TV or projector so that you can enjoy your media files on a 
wider screen, with others, or both.
Project 13, “Share Your Household’s Music and Movies Easily and Effectively,” 
explains the best ways of sharing music and movies among the PCs in your house-
hold. You’ll learn how to share files via Windows Media Player and via iTunes—and 
even how to set up a media server for your household.
Project 14, “Turn Your PC into a Recording Studio,” shows you how to set up 
your PC as a recording studio for your home. You’ll learn how to prepare a room for 
recording and how to install and configure the software you need. This project works 
with Project 15, so you’ll probably want to go through the two in turn.
Project 15, “Record Music on Your PC,” carries on from Project 14. Now that 
you’ve set up your PC as a recording studio, it’s time to start recording audio. This 
project shows you essential recording maneuvers, from laying down tracks to mix-
ing them together and exporting a finished file, and gives you tips about achieving a 
polished and pleasing result.
Project 16, “Back Up and Restore Your Computer,” shows you how to use the 
über-backup features included in Windows Vista Business Edition and Windows 
Vista Ultimate Edition to create a backup of either a full drive or your PC’s entire 
contents so that you can restore everything at once if things go wrong. 
Project 17, “Create a Wireless Network,” teaches you how to set up a wireless 
network based around an access point—the kind of wireless network you’ll want 
to create for long-term use. You’ll learn about the various competing standards for 
wireless networks, choose suitable equipment for your needs, and then set up the 
network.
Project 18, “Create an Ad Hoc Wireless Network,” shows you how to set up a 
computer-to-computer wireless network that you can use to share files, devices, or 
your Internet connection temporarily. If your PCs already have wireless network 
adapters built in, you’re all ready to set up a network; if not, you’ll need to add a 
wireless network adapter before you can begin.
Project 19, “Digitize Your Paper Documents,” suggests strategies for getting rid of 
the heaps of paper that threaten to derail even the most determined digital lifestyle. 
You’ll need a scanner to scan your documents, and perhaps a shredder to dispose se-
curely of those you no longer want. Beyond that, you’ll need a system for managing 
your documents so that you can easily locate the ones you need. This project provides 
approaches that work for light numbers of documents, moderate numbers of docu-
ments, and stacks-of-boxes-full quantities.
Advanced Projects
Project 20, “Seal Your Private Data in an Uncrackable Virtual Locker,” explains how to 
use the encryption features built into Windows Vista Ultimate Edition to protect your 
important files against intrusion—even if someone else manages to get direct access 
to your PC’s hard drive. This project also steers you toward free encryption software 
you can use with versions of Windows that don’t have built-in encryption.

xvi
Introduction
Project 21, “Stream TV to Your PC or Handheld Device Anywhere,” covers getting 
a Slingbox and setting it up to stream the signal from your TV to either a PC or 
a handheld device. You can even access the Slingbox remotely over the Internet, 
which lets you watch your home TV signal from pretty much anywhere.
Project 22, “Silence Your PC or Build an Ultra-Quiet PC,” walks you through the 
process of eliminating as much noise from your PC as possible by silencing each 
of the noisy components in turn. And if you want a totally silent PC, you can have 
one—as long as you’re willing to pay the price.
Project 23, “Run Other Operating Systems on Top of Windows,” explains how to 
use virtual-machine software such as Microsoft’s Virtual PC to install another operat-
ing system right on top of Windows. You can then run that operating system, and the 
programs you install on it, while Windows is running. For example, you may want to 
install an older version of Windows so that you can use some ancient but still vital soft-
ware or play an older game that’s incompatible with Windows Vista or Windows XP.
Project 24, “Install Another Operating System Alongside Windows,” shows you 
how to set up a dual-boot or multiboot configuration on your PC so that you can start 
either Windows or another operating system. For example, you may want to switch 
between Windows Vista and Windows XP, or between Windows Vista and Linux.
Conventions Used in This Book
To make its meaning clear concisely, this book uses a number of conventions, three of 
which are worth mentioning here:
Note, Tip, and Caution paragraphs highlight information to draw it to your 
notice.
The pipe character or vertical bar denotes choosing an item from a menu. For 
example, “choose File | Open” means that you should pull down the File 
menu and select the Open item on it. Use the keyboard, mouse, or a combi-
nation of the two as you wish.
Most check boxes have two states: selected (with a check mark in them) and 
cleared (without a check mark in them). This book tells you to select a check 
box or clear a check box rather than “click to place a check mark in the box” or 
“click to remove the check mark from the box.” (Often, you’ll be verifying the 
state of the check box, so it may already have the required setting—in which 
case, you don’t need to click at all.) Some check boxes have a third state as 
well, in which they’re selected but dimmed and unavailable. This state is 
usually used for options that apply to only part of the current situation.
●
●
●
  Visit this book’s web page at http://diyupgrades.cnet.com to see related videos.

1
Project 1
Max Out 
Your Memory 
and Turbo-
Charge It with 
ReadyBoost
What You’ll Need
Hardware: New RAM modules; USB memory stick
Software: CPU-Z
Cost: $50–250 U.S.
E
ver feel like you’re losing your memory and could use a boost? If so, chances are 
you’re not alone. Three-to-one odds says your PC gets that feeling too as you 
open ever more applications and documents at the same time. When your PC 
runs low on memory, it starts using hard disk space as virtual memory, and your PC 
slows down more than enough for you to notice.
This project shows you how to find out how much memory your PC currently 
has and how much it can have, find suitable memory, and install it. If you’re using 
Windows Vista, you can also use a USB memory stick as virtual RAM, which can give 
your computer a kick. Microsoft calls this feature ReadyBoost. You can use ReadyBoost 
either, as well as, or instead of adding RAM.
Max Out Your PC’s Memory
Your first task is to find out how much RAM your PC has and how much it can con-
tain. If it can take more memory, you can then decide whether you want to add more 
memory. If it can’t, or if you decide the cost is too high, you may be able to improve 
your PC’s performance by using a USB memory stick to provide ReadyBoost memory. 
See “Turbo Charge Your PC with ReadyBoost” later in this project for details.
●
●
●

2  Part I: Easy
Step 1: Find Out How Much Memory Your PC Has
To find out how much memory your PC has, what type it is, and how it is configured, 
download and install the CPU-Z program, and then run it.
How Much Memory Do You Need?
Windows Vista needs at least 512MB RAM to run well, and Windows XP needs 
at least 128MB RAM. But both operating systems run much better, and feel far 
more responsive, if your PC has much more RAM than this. Your PC needs 
RAM to run the operating system (Windows itself)—in fact, that’s what the 
minimum RAM figures in the first sentence are for. But each application you 
run requires RAM too. And if you run two or more user sessions at the same 
time, by using Windows’ Fast User Switching feature, you’ll need enough 
RAM for all the applications and documents each user has opened.
Here are memory recommendations for good performance:
Single user, few applications If you’re the only user of your PC, and 
you run only a few applications (say Internet Explorer and Windows 
Mail), 1GB RAM should be enough for Windows Vista and 512MB 
should be plenty for Windows XP.
Single user, many or large applications If you’re the only user but 
you run large applications, aim for 2GB for Windows Vista or 1GB for 
Windows XP.
Several concurrent users, several applications each If you share 
your PC with several others and use Fast User Switching, aim for 2GB 
for Windows Vista or 1GB for Windows XP.
Several concurrent users, many or large applications Get the maxi-
mum amount of memory your PC can hold—anywhere from 2GB to 
4GB, depending on the model.
Memory generally comes in modules of 128MB, 256MB, 512MB, 1GB, 
and 2GB. At this writing, 512MB memory modules are the best value for 
most upgrades, with 1GB modules costing a little more per megabyte but 
still affordable. 2GB modules are significantly more expensive, but prices are 
gradually coming down.
4GB is the maximum amount of memory that 32-bit PCs can use. If you 
have a 64-bit PC (for example, one with an Athlon64 processor) and a 64-bit 
version of Windows, you should be able to use far more RAM. In theory, a 64-bit 
computer can use up to 16 exabytes (16 billion gigabytes) of RAM, although 
current hardware makes 32GB a practical maximum for any computer that’s 
still recognizable as a PC.
●
●
●
●

Project 1: Max Out Your Memory and Turbo-Charge It with ReadyBoost  3
If you simply want to find out how much memory your PC has, press WINDOWS KEY−BREAK. On 
Windows Vista, this key combination displays the System window; look at the Memory (RAM) 
readout, and then click Close (the × button) to close the window. On Windows XP, this key 
combination displays the General tab of the System Properties dialog box; look at the readout 
near the bottom that gives the processor speed and the amount of RAM, and then click OK to 
close the dialog box.
Download and Install CPU-Z
Open your web browser (for example, choose Start | Internet) and navigate 
to the CPUID web site, www.cpuid.com.
Click the link to download the latest version of the CPU-Z application. 
The download link is usually on the CPUID home page.
If Windows displays the File Download dialog box, prompting you to decide 
whether to open the file or save it, click Save, and then choose the folder in 
which to save it. For example, on Windows Vista, you might save the file 
in the Downloads folder in your user account.
When Windows has finished downloading the file, it displays the Download 
Complete dialog box. Click Open.
If Windows displays an Internet Explorer Security dialog box, warning you 
that “A website wants to open web content using this program on your com-
puter,” click Allow. This dialog box appears because CPU-Z is distributed in 
a zip file, and Windows Explorer needs to unzip it.
Follow through the process of unzipping the file to a folder of your choosing. 
If Windows opens a Windows Explorer window showing you the folder’s 
contents, keep that window open for the next section.
Run CPU-Z and Find Out about Your PC’s Memory
To use CPU-Z, follow these steps:
In the Windows Explorer window showing the unzipped files, double-click 
the cpuz.exe file to launch CPU-Z.
If Windows displays the Open File – Security Warning dialog box, warning 
you that “The publisher could not be verified,” click Run, and then authenti-
cate yourself to User Account Control. The CPU-Z window then appears.
If you have set Windows to hide file extensions, you’ll see two files named cpuz in the folder to 
which you’ve extracted the zip file’s contents. One is the application file, the other a text file 
containing configuration settings. The file you want is the application file, which is much larger 
than the text file. (It’s no big deal if you double-click the wrong file—you’ll just see a text 
document in Notepad.)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
1.
2.
note
note

4  Part I: Easy
Click the Memory tab (see the left screen in Figure 1-1), and then look at the 
Size readout in the General group box at the top. This is the total amount of 
RAM—in the figure, 2048MB, or 2GB. (1GB equals 1024MB.)
In the upper-left corner of the General group box, check whether the Chan-
nels readout says Single or Dual:
Single If your PC uses single-channel memory, you can safely put 
different-sized memory modules in different slots. Provided that the 
memory is compatible, the only issue is the total amount of memory 
installed.
Double If your PC uses dual-channel memory, you may need to install 
identical memory modules in each pair of memory slots to get the best 
performance. If your PC has four memory slots, you can have different-
capacity memory modules in each pair—for example, 512MB modules in 
one pair, and 1GB modules in the other pair.
Click the SPD tab (see the right screen in Figure 1-1). The Memory Slot Selection 
drop-down list should show the first memory slot that contains memory. Note 
the details of the memory module:
Module Size Shows the size of the memory module—for example, 
512 MBytes (512MB) or 1024 MBytes (1GB).
Max Bandwidth Shows the memory’s speed and its “PC” rating—for 
example, PC3200 or PC5300. This is one of the terms you’ll use when 
searching for memory.
Depending on your PC’s configuration, CPU-Z may not be able to detect any memory information 
on the SPD tab except the module size.
3.
4.
●
●
5.
●
●
Figure 1-1  
The Size readout 
shows the total 
amount of RAM 
installed in your PC. 
The SPD tab lets you 
examine the size and 
type of each memory 
module. Use the 
Memory Slot Selection  
drop-down list to 
select the module you 
want to view.
note

Project 1: Max Out Your Memory and Turbo-Charge It with ReadyBoost  5
Manufacturer Shows the name of the memory manufacturer. You may 
need this information to identify the type of memory your PC needs.
Part Number Shows the part number of the memory. You may need 
this information when searching for more memory.
In the Memory Slot Selection drop-down list, select the next memory slot, 
and then note the details of the memory module. Repeat the process for each 
of the memory slots.
Most laptops have two memory slots, while most desktops have two, three, or four memory slots.
Use Other Information Sources if Necessary
If CPU-Z can’t tell you which type of memory your PC needs, use one of these two 
approaches:
Consult your PC’s documentation. This will tell you both the type of memory 
and the PC’s maximum capacity. If you’ve lost the documentation, search the 
manufacturer’s web site for it.
Use a tool such as those provided by Micron Technology, Inc.’s Crucial memory 
division:
Open your web browser and go to www.crucial.com.
 To find out which memory type is installed on your PC, click Scan My 
System, and then agree to the terms and conditions. The Crucial System 
Scanner displays a recommendation of compatible upgrades together 
with details of your current memory and configuration.
Figure 1-2 shows an example of the Crucial System Scanner’s output. While the 
scanner has read the PC’s memory accurately and provides useful information (the PC 
takes DDR2 PC2-5300 memory and has two memory slots), the upgrade recommenda-
tion is not a good choice—a cost of $599 for a 1GB memory module that provides only 
a 512MB increase (because it involves removing a 512MB module) is not worthwhile.
Figure Out Your Memory Options
From what you’ve learned in the previous sections, figure out whether your PC can 
contain more memory. Here are examples of two configurations you may run into.
Laptop PC, Two Slots, 512MB RAM in One Slot Say you have a laptop PC with 
two memory slots, one of which currently contains a 512MB memory module. You 
have three choices for increasing the memory:
Add 512MB to the second slot By installing a 512MB memory module in 
the second slot, you get 1GB RAM. This is an inexpensive upgrade that will 
improve your PC’s performance significantly.
●
●
6.
●
●
1.
2.
●
note

6  Part I: Easy
Add 1GB to the second slot By installing a 1GB memory module in the 
second slot, you get 1.5GB RAM. This upgrade is more expensive than the 
preceding option, but you’ll be able to run even more programs.
Switch to two 1GB modules To get the most RAM, you must remove the 
512MB memory module and install a 1GB memory module in each slot. This 
upgrade gives you the best possible performance but is also the most expen-
sive. Treat the surplus memory module gently, and you may be able to sell 
it on eBay.
Another option is to buy 2GB modules. These tend to be expensive, and some laptops don’t support 
them—so verify that your laptop does before you buy them.
Desktop PC, Three Slots, 512MB in Each of Two Slots Say you have a desktop PC 
with three memory slots, two of which contain a 512MB memory module each. The 
third memory slot is empty. Again, you have three main choices for increasing the 
memory—but there’s an extra option in this case:
Add 512MB to the third slot By installing a 512MB memory module in the 
third slot, you get 1.5GB RAM. This is an inexpensive upgrade that will give 
your PC an appreciable performance boost—but you may well want more.
●
●
●
Figure 1-2  
The Crucial System 
Scanner can tell you 
your PC’s memory 
configuration and  
recommend compatible  
memory. Evaluate its 
recommendations 
carefully before  
implementing them.
note

Project 1: Max Out Your Memory and Turbo-Charge It with ReadyBoost  7
Add 1GB to the third slot By installing a 1GB memory module in the third 
slot, you double the memory to 2GB. This is an affordable upgrade that will make  
a big difference without you needing to discard any of the existing memory.
Add 1GB to the third slot and replace one or two of the 512MB modules 
If 2GB memory isn’t enough, you’ll need to not only add a 1GB memory mod-
ule to the third slot but also replace either one or both of the 512MB memory 
modules. You can go to 2.5GB or 3GB total. Again, you may be able to sell the 
memory modules you remove—or, better, use them in another of your PCs.
Another option is to buy one or more 2GB modules. These are available for most desktop PCs, 
but they tend to be more than twice as expensive as 1GB modules. There’s also another problem 
you need to know about: most normal PCs can have a maximum of 4GB of memory. This is enough 
for all conventional computing needs, but because of hardware limitations in the ways PCs are 
designed, the PC cannot actually use the full amount of memory. If you install 4GB of memory, 
typically between 3GB and 3.5GB will actually be available.
Step 2: Buy the Memory
Armed with the information you’ve gathered so far, you’re ready to buy the memory 
for your PC. Your local computer store probably has suitable memory, but you’ll 
almost certainly find a wider selection—and perhaps better prices—online, either 
from a major online retailer such as CDW (www.cdw.com) or PC Connection (www 
.pcconnection.com) or directly from a memory company such as Crucial (www.crucial 
.com) or Kingston Technology Company (www.kingston.com).
●
●
Get the Most Bang for Your Memory Buck
Here are two strategies for getting the maximum amount of memory for the 
money you pay:
Max out the memory when you buy If you have enough money, 
get the maximum amount of memory installed when you buy the PC. 
This way, you’ll enjoy the best possible performance from the start, 
and you can be sure that you’ll never need to discard memory 
modules in order to upgrade.
Leave some memory slots free If you can’t max out the memory when 
you buy your PC, don’t fill up the memory slots with low-capacity 
modules. Instead, put higher-capacity modules in one or more of the 
slots, and leave the remaining slots empty until you can afford to stuff 
high-capacity modules into them. For example, if you buy a laptop that 
has two memory slots, it’s better to buy a 1GB module for one slot 
(and then be able to upgrade to 2GB by adding another 1GB module) 
than to reach 1GB by putting 512MB in each of the slots and needing to 
discard one or both modules when you upgrade.
●
●
note

8  Part I: Easy
Step 3: Install the Memory
With the memory in hand, you’re ready to install it:
Desktop PC The installation process is usually straightforward, as shown in 
the first example that follows. However, if you have a small or specially shaped 
PC, you may have to remove some components in order to access the RAM.
Laptop PC Laptops have widely varying designs. If you’re lucky, your 
laptop’s memory is in an easily accessible location—for example, under a 
screwed-down hatch on the bottom of the laptop, as in the following second 
example. If you’re unlucky, you may have to partly disassemble the PC to in-
stall the memory—for example, flipping back the keyboard and then remov-
ing components under it. Consult your PC’s manual to learn the details.
Install the Memory in a Desktop PC
To install the memory in a desktop PC, follow these general steps:
Shut down Windows, turn off your PC, and disconnect all the cables.
Put your PC on a table or other suitable surface.
Open the side opposite the motherboard. For example, you may need to 
undo a latch, unscrew a couple of thumb-screws (the knurled kind you turn 
with your fingers), or unscrew case screws with a screwdriver.
Touch a metal part of the PC’s case to discharge any static from your body.
If you need to remove one of the existing memory modules:
Lay down a sheet of paper or an antistatic bag (the kind computer com-
ponents come in) so that you have somewhere to put the module.
Press down and out with a thumb on each of the spring clips at the ends 
of the socket, as shown in Figure 1-3. When the clips release, they push 
the memory module up and out.
●
●
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
●
●
Figure 1-3  
Normally you press 
down on a spring clip at 
each end of the memory 
socket to release the 
memory module.

Project 1: Max Out Your Memory and Turbo-Charge It with ReadyBoost  9
Remove the module using your fingers, and then put it on the bag or 
sheet of paper. Avoid touching the contacts on the module—they’re 
sensitive.
Insert the new memory module:
Remove the memory module from its protective bag.
Align the memory module with the memory slot, making sure the notch 
in the module matches the break in the socket, as shown in Figure 1-4.
Press the memory module down gently but firmly, so that it slides into 
the socket and the spring clips engage.
Close the PC, restore it to its normal place, and then reconnect the cables.
While your PC is open, you might want to give it a quick spring clean—especially if the fan is as 
dusty as the fan in the sample PC is.
Install the Memory in a Laptop PC
To install the memory in a laptop PC, follow these general steps:
Shut down Windows, turn off your PC, and disconnect any cables.
Remove the battery.
Touch a metal object to discharge any static from your body.
Following the instructions in the PC’s documentation, open the memory area.
If you need to remove one of the existing memory modules:
Lay down a sheet of paper or an antistatic bag (the kind computer com-
ponents come in) so that you have somewhere to put the module.
●
6.
●
●
●
7.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
●
Figure 1-4  
Place the memory 
module’s corners in the 
guides in the spring clips 
so that you can press it 
down into place.
tip

10 
Part I: Easy
Press out with a thumb or finger on each of the spring clips at the ends 
of the socket. (If the space is confined enough to make using your hands 
awkward, use the eraser ends of a couple of eraser-tipped pencils.) When 
the clips release, they push the memory module up and out.
Remove the module using your fingers, and then put it on the bag or 
sheet of paper.
Insert the new memory module:
Remove the memory module from its protective bag.
Align the memory module with the memory slot, making sure the notch 
in the module matches the break in the socket. For many laptop memory 
slots, you need to insert the memory module at an angle, as shown in 
Figure 1-5.
Press the memory module down gently but firmly, so that the spring 
clips engage. Figure 1-6 shows an example.
Close the laptop, replace the battery, and then reconnect any cables needed.
Step 4: Restart Your PC and Verify It Recognizes the Memory
Restart your PC and verify that it recognizes the memory you have added. The easiest 
way to do this is to run CPU-Z again after Windows has loaded.
If your PC doesn’t recognize the memory, consult the documentation to learn whether you must 
make a change in the BIOS to tell the PC to find the memory. (Project 6 discusses what the BIOS 
is and how to access it.) Failing that, you may need to open your PC again to make sure the 
memory is properly seated in its socket.
●
●
6.
●
●
●
7.
Figure 1-5  
Insert the memory 
module carefully.  
Usually it goes in at  
an angle, like this.
note

Project 1: Max Out Your Memory and Turbo-Charge It with ReadyBoost  11
Turbo Charge Your PC with ReadyBoost
Apart from RAM, Windows Vista provides a second way that you can add memory 
to your PC: ReadyBoost.
Step 1: Understand What ReadyBoost  
Is and How It Can Help
ReadyBoost is a new memory technology that Microsoft introduced in Windows Vista. 
Earlier versions of Windows cannot use ReadyBoost; nor can other operating systems 
(for example, Mac OS X or Linux). ReadyBoost allows you to plug a USB memory stick 
or similar memory device into your PC and assign it for use as extra memory. (You can 
use only one memory device for ReadyBoost at a time.) Windows stores small chunks 
of frequently needed data on the ReadyBoost device, from which Windows can 
retrieve the data more quickly than if the data were stored on the hard disk.
Step 2: Decide Whether to Use ReadyBoost
Look to use ReadyBoost in any of the following situations:
You’ve already installed the maximum amount of RAM that your PC can 
have, and performance is still disappointing.
Your PC doesn’t have its maximum amount of RAM, but to increase the RAM, 
you would need to replace some or all of the existing memory modules.
●
●
Figure 1-6  
Press the memory 
module into place. The 
spring clips are the 
shiny metal pieces just 
above each fingernail.
Spring clip
Spring clip

12 
Part I: Easy
If you can easily add RAM to your PC, do so before trying ReadyBoost. RAM will give you a far 
greater performance improvement. However, ReadyBoost is well worth trying, especially if you 
already have a spare memory device you can use.
You’ve borrowed someone’s PC and find performance lacking.
Step 3: Find Memory That Will Work for ReadyBoost
ReadyBoost requires memory that can store and return data quickly enough to sup-
plement RAM effectively. Many USB 2.0 memory devices are fast enough to use for 
ReadyBoost, but others are not, including some that claim to be very fast. The problem 
is that ReadyBoost requires all the memory in the memory device to be consistently 
fast, while some devices use a special high-speed memory gateway to get better per-
formance out of a larger bank of slower memory. Such an arrangement doesn’t work 
for ReadyBoost.
Some companies market memory devices as being suitable for ReadyBoost. With 
such devices, you’re on safe ground—although the prices tend to be higher than for 
regular memory devices. If a device isn’t marked as being suitable for ReadyBoost, 
make sure all its memory can provide at least 1.75 megabytes per second (Mbps) for 
512KB random writes, and 2.5 Mbps for 4KB random reads. Finding out this information 
usually involves reading the manufacturer’s specification sheet.
If you already have a USB 2.0 memory stick, it’ll cost you nothing to find out 
whether it works for ReadyBoost.
Step 4: Configure ReadyBoost on Your PC
Once you’ve chosen your device, configure ReadyBoost on your PC. Follow these steps:
Plug the drive into a USB port on your PC. (You can also use a USB hub, but 
plugging it directly into a port usually gives more consistent results.) Win-
dows displays the AutoPlay dialog box for the drive.
●
1.
note

Project 1: Max Out Your Memory and Turbo-Charge It with ReadyBoost  13
If Windows doesn’t display the AutoPlay dialog box for the drive, choose Start | Computer to 
open a Computer window. Right-click the icon for the USB drive and choose Properties. Windows 
displays the Removable Disk Properties dialog box. Click the ReadyBoost tab.
Click the Speed Up My System Using Windows ReadyBoost link. Windows 
displays the ReadyBoost tab of the Removable Disk Properties dialog box. 
If you’re lucky, the ReadyBoost tab will look like the one shown on the 
left in Figure 1-7. 
If the ReadyBoost tab looks like the one shown on the right in Figure 1-7, 
bearing the message “This device does not have the required performance 
characteristics for use in speeding up your system,” click the Test Again 
button once or twice. Windows seems to find some USB devices margin-
ally too slow on the first or second read, but passes them on a retest. If 
Windows gives you this message persistently, try a different device.
Select the Use This Device option button.
If you want to adjust the amount of space that Windows uses on the drive, 
drag the Space To Reserve For System Speed slider or change the value in 
the text box. Windows recommends setting ReadyBoost to a value between 
1× and 2.5× the amount of RAM in your PC—the higher the value, the more 
performance boost you should get. For example, if your PC has 1GB RAM, 
you might set anywhere from 1024MB to 2536MB of ReadyBoost memory.
The biggest ReadyBoost value you can set is 4096MB (4GB), assuming your USB memory device 
is capacious enough. The smallest is 256MB.
2.
●
●
3.
4.
Figure 1-7  
If the ReadyBoost 
tab looks like the left 
screen here, you’re 
ready to proceed. If it 
looks like the screen on 
the right, try testing the 
USB device again.
note
note

14 
Part I: Easy
Click OK. Windows closes the Removable Disk Properties dialog box and 
starts using the drive for ReadyBoost.
You should now see a performance improvement, especially during long com-
puting sessions or when you have many applications and documents open. However, 
the difference may not be dramatic.
Step 5: Remove a ReadyBoost Device
For best effect, you should leave the memory device attached all the time you use 
your PC. This is easy to do with a desktop PC, where you can plug in a USB memory 
stick and simply leave it, but having a memory stick protruding from a laptop PC 
tends to be awkward—so you’ll probably want to remove it.
To remove the memory device, follow these steps:
Click the Safely Remove Hardware icon in the notifi-
cation area (the icon with the green circle containing 
a white check mark).
On the menu that appears, click the Safely Remove USB Mass Storage Device 
item for the drive.
When Windows displays the Safe To Remove Hardware dialog box, click 
OK, and then unplug the device.
Windows mirrors all the data that’s stored on the ReadyBoost device in a file on 
your hard disk, so removing your ReadyBoost device doesn’t have any bad effects—
Windows simply retrieves the data it needs from the hard disk rather than from the 
ReadyBoost device.
Now that you’ve maxed out your memory, and maybe turbocharged performance 
using ReadyBoost, your PC should be running well. It’s time to turn your attention to 
your Internet connection—is it fast enough, and if not, could it be faster?
5.
1.
2.
3.

15
Project 2
Get the Fastest 
Possible Internet 
Connection
What You’ll Need
Hardware: Modem, router, or satellite dish
Software: None
Cost: $10–50 U.S. per month
T
o get the most use and enjoyment out of your PC these days, you’ll want to connect 
it to the Internet. And not just with any old connection—preferably with the fastest 
connection possible. 
This project discusses your options for choosing a fast Internet connection and 
shows you how to proceed. 
Step 1: Find Out How Fast Your Internet Connection Is
First, find out how fast your Internet connection is—if you haven’t already checked. 
You can find various utilities and sites on the Internet for checking connection speed 
and throughput. Here, we’ll use one of the easiest sites, the CNET Bandwidth Meter. 
To use the Bandwidth Meter, follow these steps:
Launch your web browser and go to http://reviews.cnet.com/7004-7254_ 
7-0.html (see Figure 2-1).
Type your area code in the Area Code text box.
In the Choose Your Current Connection Type area, select the appropriate option 
button.
In the Select Your ISP drop-down list, choose your current ISP. This step is  
optional but may enable the Bandwidth Meter to make better recommendations 
of Internet connection upgrades available to you.
●
●
●
1.
2.
3.
4.

16 
Part I: Easy
Click Go. The Bandwidth Meter runs the test, during which it displays an 
information screen, and then displays the results page. Figure 2-2 shows an 
example.
If you want, click one of the Find ISP or ISP name links in the Faster Provid-
ers column to find out about faster connections. But before you do, it may be 
a good idea to assess the different types of Internet connection available and 
decide which would suit you best—assuming it’s available.
Step 2: Assess Your Options for a Faster Connection
In the beginning was the modem—and for many people, that’s still as far as Internet 
connectivity has progressed. But in most places you can get a much faster connec-
tion, even if it costs more than you would like to pay. This section walks you through 
5.
6.
Figure 2-1  
The CNET Bandwidth 
Meter Speed Test lets 
you check your Internet 
connection’s throughput 
via a web page.

Project 2: Get the Fastest Possible Internet Connection  17
the commonly available Internet connection technologies, starting with the slowest 
and speeding up to the fastest. Once you know your options, you’ll be able to decide 
which connection type makes sense for you.
Table 2-1 provides a generalized summary of widely available connection options 
in descending order of preference—in other words, with the best connections first.
Dial-Up Connections
A dial-up connection using a modem is normally the slowest form of Internet connec-
tion, but it works almost anywhere you can find a phone line and is usually reliable. 
On the downside, a dial-up connection is not only slow at transferring data but also 
slow to connect, typically taking 10–30 seconds to establish a connection.
Figure 2-2  
The Bandwidth Meter 
results page shows you 
an estimate of your  
current connection 
speed, together with 
faster options and 
providers.

18 
Part I: Easy
These days, a dial-up connection is practical for e-mail or text-only instant messag-
ing, but for most other Internet activities you will find its limitations difficult. See the 
sidebar “Get the Most Out of a Dial-up Connection” for suggestions on maximizing the 
use of a dial-up connection while minimizing the irritation its slowness can cause.
The fastest dial-up connection you can get is 53.6 Kbps using a 56 Kbps modem. 
However, even this speed requires a good-quality telephone line and suitable equip-
ment at the exchange. In practice, speeds of 33.6 to 48 Kbps are normal. The longer the 
distance from your modem to the ISP, and the greater the number of devices between 
the two, the slower the connection is likely to be.
Get the Most Out of a Dial-Up Connection
If you’re stuck with a dial-up connection, first make sure that your connection 
is working as well as possible. Here are three suggestions:
Keep your connection open Get a flat-rate (“all you can eat”) con-
nection from your ISP and telephone provider. Configure Windows 
never to drop the connection and to redial if the connection does get 
dropped (for example, if the ISP drops it or if there’s a problem on the 
phone line). Turn off call waiting so that incoming calls don’t knock 
you offline. You’ll need a second phone line or a cell phone if you 
want to be able to make phone calls as well.
Ensure your modem is tuned correctly Type modem tune-up into 
your favorite search engine to find recommendations for configuring 
a modem manually or modem-boosting utilities that do the tweaking 
for you.
●
●
Location
Connection types
Urban or suburban
1. Fiber 
2. DSL or cable 
3. Wireless 
4. Satellite 
5. ISDN 
6. Dial-up
Rural
1. DSL (if near to a substation) 
2. Satellite 
3. ISDN 
4. Dial-up
Table 2-1 Typical Connection Options in Descending Order of Preference

Project 2: Get the Fastest Possible Internet Connection  19
Bond two or more modems together If you’ll be using dial-up long-
term and you have (or can get) two or more phone lines, consider 
bonding two or more modems together to form a single faster con-
nection. There’s some overhead on such connections, so you don’t get 
the full bandwidth of the first modem plus the full bandwidth of each 
other modem—but you should see a considerable improvement. (For 
example, bonding two modems each capable of a 48 Kbps connection 
might yield a 90 Kbps connection.) Your operating system, your mo-
dems, and your ISP all need to support modem bonding.
Next, make sure your Internet applications are using your meager band-
width sensibly. Here are four suggestions:
Web browser Turn off as much multimedia—pictures, sounds, and 
videos—as you can bear. For example, in Internet Explorer 7, follow 
these steps:
Choose Tools | Internet Options. Internet Explorer displays the 
Internet Options dialog box.
Click the Advanced tab, and then scroll down to the Multimedia 
section (about halfway down).
Clear the Play Animations In Webpages check box if you can dis-
pense with animations.
Clear the Play Sounds In Webpages check box if you can do with-
out sounds.
Select the Show Image Download Placeholders check box to make 
Internet Explorer display placeholders for images.
Clear the Show Pictures check box if you can dispense with pic-
tures. (You can display a picture by right-clicking its placeholder 
and choosing Show Picture.)
Click OK. Internet Explorer closes the Internet Options dialog box.
If you cleared the Play Animations In Webpages check box in step 3, 
close and restart Internet Explorer.
E-mail If possible, set up your e-mail program so that it consults 
you before downloading attachments greater than a certain size (for 
example, 50KB). You can then decide whether to download the lat-
est picture of your aunt’s dog rather than have it hog your Internet 
connection when you need to retrieve time-critical messages. Some 
e-mail programs offer this option, while others do not. Depending on 
your e-mail service provider, you may also be able to read your e-mail 
on the Web. This allows you to choose which e-mail headers to open 
and avoid downloading all the spam along with genuine messages.
●
●
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
●
(Continued)

20 
Part I: Easy
ISDN Connections
ISDN, which stands for Integrated Services Digital Network but is usually referred to 
by its abbreviation, is a digital telephone line that provides modest speeds but greater 
range than DSL (discussed later in this section) from the telephone exchange. 
A normal consumer-grade ISDN line provides two 64 Kbps bearer channels and 
a delta channel that’s used mostly for signaling. Depending on your ISP and phone 
company, you can use one bearer channel, use both bearer channels (giving 128 Kbps), 
or use the first bearer channel and add the second bearer channel on the fly when the 
first channel becomes busy.
Because the phone line is digital, connections take only moments to set up—so 
even if you do not keep the line open, you can establish a connection much faster 
than with a modem. If you do keep one channel open all the time (as you will prob-
ably want to do if you’re paying a flat rate for the ISDN connection), you will find 
that even though 64 Kbps sounds slow, it is adequate for e-mail and web browsing. 
However, downloading large files will be slow, even if you add the second channel 
for the duration of the download.
Consider ISDN only if you can’t get a faster type of connection.
DSL Connections
DSL, which stands for Digital Subscriber Line but is also usually referred to by its 
abbreviation, is a digital telephone line. DSL comes in various implementations, but 
most consumer ones are variations of ADSL—asymmetrical DSL—in which down-
load (or downstream) speeds are much higher than upload (or upstream) speeds.
A typical DSL implementation splits off a part of the analog telephone line for 
digital use, leaving the still-analog part of the phone line for voice use—so with DSL, 
you don’t need to get a second phone line. However, DSL works only within a certain 
distance of the telephone exchange (the exact distance depends on the implementa-
tion), so DSL is not usually available in rural areas.
DSL speeds vary depending on the implementation, with downstream speeds of 
384 Kbps to 6 Mbps being common. High-speed DSL, which typically is available only 
Queue your downloads Rather than downloading files while 
you’re performing other activities online, schedule your downloads 
for a time when you won’t be using the computer—for example, in 
the early hours of the morning. Some web browsers provide down-
load managers. Alternatively, use a third-party download manager 
such as GetRight (www.getright.com).
Close Internet applications you’re not using If you’re not using an 
Internet program, close it to make sure it’s not using your bandwidth 
surreptitiously. For example, IM clients such as Windows Live Mes-
senger tend to lurk in the background, checking in to the IM server to 
see if there’s anything new for you.
●
●

Project 2: Get the Fastest Possible Internet Connection  21
in cities, can provide up to 24 Mbps. Most DSL connections are “always-on”—once 
you’ve configured and powered up the DSL router (often referred to as a “DSL 
modem”), it maintains the Internet connection permanently or until a problem occurs.
DSL can be great for home connections and small offices, because there is enough 
bandwidth to have multiple computers accessing the Internet at the same time. In 
many cases, your main choice will be between DSL and a cable connection.
Cable Connections
If you have cable television (or can get it), you can probably get cable Internet as well 
from your cable provider. Cable connection speeds vary depending on the cable com-
pany and its hardware and how far your house is from the cable connection point. 
But in general, speeds are comparable with DSL—for example, from 512 Kbps up to 
several megabits per second.
Like DSL connections, cable connections are always-on and provide a good solu-
tion for home connections and small offices, with enough bandwidth for multiple 
computers to connect to the Internet simultaneously.
Wireless Connections
Wireless Internet connections are very convenient, especially if you need to be able to 
connect from any point within the area covered by the wireless network. At this writ-
ing, many coffee shops, libraries, and similar institutions provide wireless Internet ac-
cess for their patrons, but few wide-area wireless Internet connections are available.
In 2006, Google launched the first citywide wireless network in the United States, 
in Mountain View, California. Google and other companies are looking to create city-
wide wireless networks in other cities as well.
Satellite Connections
Satellite tends to be the most expensive form of Internet connection, but it is worth 
considering if you are in a rural area where the only alternatives are ISDN and 
dial-up—or perhaps only dial-up. For example:
StarBand (www.starband.com) offers a 512 Kbps service for $49.99 a month 
and a 1 Mbps service for $129.99 a month—after you’ve paid $299 for the 
satellite dish that’s needed.
HughesNet (www.hughesnet.com) offers a service of up to 1.5 Mbps for 
$99.99 a month with no upfront fee, but you’ll need to commit to a two-year 
contract.
Fiber-Optic Connections
If your building or street is wired for fiber-optic connections, you should jump at 
the chance to get one. This is the fastest form of connection, providing bandwidth 
of 100 Mbps or so. You’ll probably be sharing the circuit with your neighbors, but 
even so, you’ll get great performance.
●
●

22 
Part I: Easy
The drawback to fiber-optic connections is that they are normally available only 
in new communities or refitted buildings (for example, apartment blocks). However, 
they are gradually becoming more widespread.
Step 3: Order and Install Your Faster Connection
Once you’ve decided which Internet connection type will suit you best, research In-
ternet service providers (ISPs) who offer that connection type where you live. Here 
are some pointers:
To find out which broadband technologies are available where you live, put 
your area code into a broadband search engine. For example, click one of the 
Find ISP links or ISP name links in the CNET Bandwidth Meter (discussed 
earlier in “Step 1: Find Out How Fast Your Internet Connection Is”).
Consult your neighbors, colleagues, or friends about what Internet connec-
tion type they have, how well it works, and whether they’re happy with it.
If you’ve decided to get a cable connection, you may find that your only 
choice is your existing cable company—in which case, the decision-making 
process shouldn’t take long.
After selecting a provider, order the service and either install it yourself or have it 
installed (depending on the technology).
Step 4: Find Out How Fast Your New Connection Is
After establishing your Internet connection, run the CNET Bandwidth Meter again to 
check how fast your connection is. If you’ve upgraded from a slow connection (such 
as dial-up) to a broadband connection, you should be able to see the difference easily 
without measuring the speed.
Your fast Internet connection is just crying out to be used—and use it you will. The 
next project shows you how to turn your PC into a free VoIP phone, and the project 
after that shows you how to use your PC for videoconferencing over the Internet.
●
●
●

23
Project 3
Turn Your PC 
into a Free 
Phone
What You’ll Need
Hardware: Broadband Internet connection; headset or speakers and 
microphone; webcam (optional)
Software: Skype
Cost: Free to $75 U.S.
H
aving a broadband Internet connection opens up all sorts of possibilities to 
you. Not only can you download massive files in minutes and upload files 
at a respectable speed, but you can also make phone calls over the Internet. 
This project shows you how to make Internet phone calls by using the Skype software 
and service. Skype uses a data-transfer called Voice Over Internet Protocol, or VoIP for 
short, so you’ll often see the term VoIP in connection with Internet phone calls.
Step 1: Line Up Your Audio Hardware
If you’re considering this project, you’ll need a fast Internet connection. If you don’t yet 
have one, go straight to Project 2 to find out your options.
Next, you need audio hardware—either speakers and a microphone or a headset 
that includes a microphone. If you plan to make family calls, speakers and a micro-
phone can be a good solution. Otherwise, a headset is normally a better choice, as it lets 
anyone nearby overhear only the half of the conversation that you control.
If you decide to buy a headset, your main choice is between wired and wireless mod-
els. Go with wireless (for example, Bluetooth) if you may feel the need to leave your PC 
and gesticulate wildly during calls. If you’re content to remain tethered, a wired headset 
should do fine. Using a USB connection is normally easier than using audio jacks—but 
if you already have a headset that uses audio jacks, it should work fine.
●
●
●

24 
Part I: Easy
Whichever type of audio hardware you choose, plug it in and install it. As an added  
bonus, Windows Vista identifies most current USB headsets correctly and installs 
them automatically, although for some headsets you may need to provide a software 
driver manually.
Step 2: Download and Install the Skype Software
Next, download and install the Skype software. Follow these steps:
Open your web browser. For example, choose Start | Internet.
Click in the Address bar, type www.skype.com, and then press ENTER or 
click Go.
Click the Download Skype button, and then follow the directions to start the 
download. Internet Explorer then displays a File Download – Security Warning 
dialog box.sss
Click the Run button. Internet Explorer may display the Internet Explorer –  
Security Warning dialog box, telling you that “The publisher could not be 
verified.”
Click the Run button. Windows displays a User Account Control dialog box 
warning you that “A program needs your permission to continue.”
If you’ve turned off User Account Control, you won’t see the User Account Control dialog 
box—but be warned that turning off User Account Control removes one of Windows Vista’s 
main layers of defense against malware (malicious software). No matter how annoying you find 
User Account Control’s constant naggings for reassurance that you’re the one running potentially 
dangerous software, keeping User Account Control on is a good idea.
Click the Continue button. The Skype Install routine launches and displays 
the first screen.
In the Select Your Language drop-down list, choose you language. Click the 
links to read the End User License Agreement and the Skype Privacy State-
ment, and then select the Yes, I Have Read And Accept check box.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
note

Project 3: Turn Your PC into a Free Phone  25
Click the Options button. The Skype Install routine displays the Options 
screen.
The Select Where Skype Should Be Installed text box shows the default in-
stallation folder for Skype—in a \Skype\Phone folder inside your Program 
Files folder. For most computers, this is a good choice. However, if you want 
to use a different folder, click the Browse button, use the Browse For Folder 
dialog box to select the folder, and then click the OK button.
Select the check boxes for the options you want:
Create A Desktop Icon Select this check box if you want an icon for 
Skype on your Desktop. Having the icon there is handy if you want to be 
able to launch Skype directly from your Desktop rather than using the 
Start menu.
Start Skype When The Computer Starts Select this check box if you 
want Windows to launch Skype automatically whenever you log on. 
This setting is handy if you intend to use Skype in every Windows ses-
sion. If you plan to use Skype less frequently, clear this check box.
Install Skype Extras Manager Select this check box if you want to in-
stall the Skype Extras Manager, a feature for using additional Skype fea-
tures (such as games).
Click the Install button. The Skype Install routine installs the features you 
chose and then displays the Thank You For Installing Skype screen.
If you want to use the Skype add-on for Internet Explorer, which allows you 
to use Skype to easily call the phone numbers shown on websites using Skype, 
leave the Also Install The Skype Add-On For Internet Explorer check box 
selected. Otherwise, clear this check box.
Click the Start Skype button. Windows launches Skype. Go straight to the 
next step.
Step 3: Set Up Your Skype Account
The first time you run Skype, you need to create a Skype account (unless you have 
one already) and then configure Skype to use that account. Follow these steps:
If you’re continuing directly from the previous step, you should have Skype 
open with the Skype – Create Account Wizard running and the first Create 
A New Skype Account screen displayed. If not, double-click the Skype icon 
on your Desktop or choose Start | All Programs | Skype | Skype to launch 
Skype.
Click the Skype End User License Agreement link, the Skype Terms Of Ser-
vice link, and the Skype Privacy Statement link, and then read each in turn. 
If you can accept the terms, continue with this list. If not, click the Cancel 
button to stop installing Skype.
8.
9.
10.
●
●
●
11.
12.
13.
1.
2.

26 
Part I: Easy
Type your name in the Full Name text box. This is optional, but it’ll help 
identify you to the people you call.
In the Choose Skype Name text box, type the Skype username you want to 
request. The name you want may well be taken already, so it’s a good idea to 
think of several alternatives before you start.
Type the password you will use for Skype in the Password text box and in 
the Repeat Password text box (to make sure you get it right). The password 
must be at least four characters long, but you’ll get much greater security if 
you use six characters or more.
Select the Yes, I Have Read And I Accept check box for all the items you read 
in step 2, and then click the Next button. The wizard displays the second Cre-
ate A New Skype Account screen.
Type an e-mail address in the E-mail text box. You’re required to enter an 
address here; and if you want to be able to retrieve your password, you need 
to use a real address.
Clear the Yes, Send Me Skype News And Special Offers check box unless you 
want to receive e-mail news and offers.
Optionally, choose your country or region in the Country/Region drop-
down list, and enter your city in the City text box.
Select the Sign Me In When Skype Starts check box if you want Skype to sign 
you into the service automatically as soon as you launch Skype. If you want 
people to be able to contact you easily, signing in automatically is a good idea.
Click the Sign In button. If Windows Vista displays a Windows Security Alert 
dialog box, to tell you that “Windows Firewall has blocked some features of 
this program,” verify that the name is Skype, and then click the Unblock but-
ton and authenticate yourself to User Account Control.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

Project 3: Turn Your PC into a Free Phone  27
If the wizard displays a screen telling you that “The Skype name you chose 
is already taken,” select the option button for one of the alternative names 
offered, or select the last option button and type a different username that 
you want to try. Click the Sign In button.
When you’ve chosen an unused name, Skype registers that name for you, 
and then displays the Skype – Getting Started tutorial. Go through it as 
described in the next section.
Step 4: Make Sure Your Sound Equipment  
Works with Skype
To make those calls, you need to make sure your headset, or your speakers and 
microphone, work with Skype. Follow these steps:
If you’re following on directly from the previous section, you should have 
the Skype – Getting Started Wizard running and showing its Hello screen. If 
not, choose Help | Getting Started from the main Skype window to launch 
the wizard.
Select the Do Not Show This Guide At Startup check box to prevent the 
wizard from running again automatically, and then click the Start button. 
The wizard displays the Check That Your Sound Works In Skype screen:
12.
13.
1.
2.

28 
Part I: Easy
Arrange the window so that you can see both the Skype window and the 
wizard, and then follow the instructions. Click the Call Me To Test Your 
Sound item in your Contacts. Skype displays the Profile For Skype Test Call 
window:
Click the Call Skype Test Call button. Skype opens the call window:
3.
4.

Project 3: Turn Your PC into a Free Phone  29
Click the Call button to place the test call. Listen to the audio message (change 
the volume if necessary), record a message of your own after the tone, and 
verify that the audio volume and quality are acceptable when Skype plays 
the message back to you.
Click the Hang Up button to end the call.
You’re now ready to make some calls—as soon as you have some people to call.
If you don’t want the Skype Test Call contact to appear in your Contacts list, click it, click the 
Menu button, and choose Remove From Contacts. Alternatively, leave the test contact in place 
in case you need to check your Skype setup again.
Step 5: Add Contacts to Skype
The easy way to make calls with Skype is to create a contact (an entry in the address 
book) for each person you want to call. To create a contact, follow these steps:
In the main Skype window, click the Contacts tab if it’s not already dis-
played.
Click the Add Contact button. Skype launches the Add A Contact Wizard, 
shown in Figure 3-1, after a successful search.
5.
6.
1.
2.
tip

30 
Part I: Easy
Type the person’s Skype name, full name, or e-mail address in the text box, 
and then click the Find button. Skype searches its user list and displays 
matches.
Select the right person, and then click the Add Skype Contact button. The 
wizard displays the Say Hello! dialog box:
3.
4.
Figure 3-1  
Searching by a person’s 
“real” name may turn 
up 24 or more aliases.

Project 3: Turn Your PC into a Free Phone  31
Type a message to the contact in the text box.
If you want to prevent the contact from seeing your contact details, click the 
Show Options button, and then select the Do Not Share Your Contact Details 
With Them option button instead of the Share Your Contact Details With 
Them option button. Normally, you’ll want to share your own details with 
your contacts so that they can be clear on who you are.
Click the OK button. Skype sends the message to the contact and returns you 
to the wizard.
Add further contacts as necessary, and then click the Close button to close 
the wizard.
Step 6: Call a Contact
To call a contact, follow these steps:
In the main Skype window, click the Contacts tab if it’s not already dis-
played.
Click the contact you want to call. Skype displays the contact’s details:
Click the Call button in the contact’s details. Skype places the call.
5.
6.
7.
8.
1.
2.
3.

32 
Part I: Easy
If the contact answers the call, you can start talking. The Call Duration read-
out shows the length of the call so far:
Click the Hang Up button when you want to end the call.
Step 7: Receive a Call
When someone calls you, Skype displays a pop-up 
window showing who is calling. Click the Answer 
button if you want to answer the call. Skype then 
establishes the call, and you can start talking.
Step 8: Make Calls to Conventional Phones
Internet telephony can be wonderful, but you’ll probably sometimes need to call stan-
dard phones, be they landlines or mobiles. To do so, you can use Skype’s SkypeOut 
feature. Unless you’re calling a free phone number (for example, an 800 number), you 
must first buy Skype Credit. Choose File | Skype Account | Go To Account Page, and 
then follow through the procedure for buying credit. Once you have credit, to make a 
call to a conventional phone, follow these steps:
4.
5.

Project 3: Turn Your PC into a Free Phone  33
In the main Skype window, click the Call Phones tab to display its contents.
In the Select The Country/Region You Are Dialing drop-down list, choose 
your country or region—for example, United States.
In the Enter [Country/Region] Phone Number (With Area Code) text box, 
type the phone number.
Click the Call button. Skype places the call.
VoIP phone calls are great—but what if you want to be able to see the person into 
whose ear you’re whispering sweet somethings? Your PC can help you out here as 
well. Turn the page to find out how.
1.
2.
3.
4.

34
Project 4
Turn Your PC 
into a Video 
Phone
What You’ll Need
Hardware: Video camera with microphone, broadband Internet 
connection
Software: Windows Live Messenger
Cost: $50 U.S.
T
urning your PC into a free phone, as described in the previous project, is great. 
But what if you want to catch the wave of the eternal future, the video phone? 
Various programs let you use your webcam, microphone, PC, and Internet con-
nection to do this. This project shows you how to get, install, and use Windows Live 
Messenger, one of the easiest of these programs—and one that doesn’t cost you a cent. 
You’ll need a broadband Internet connection to be able to enjoy video phone calls. If 
you’re still mulling broadband, read Project 2 to learn about your options.
Step 1: Get a Suitable Video Camera and Microphone
If your computer came with a video camera and microphone, you’re all set. These 
days, most laptops have a built-in microphone, and increasing numbers of laptops 
have a basic video camera built in as well. Many desktop computer bundles include a 
webcam and a microphone, so you may not have to buy anything.
Having a webcam built into a laptop is handy, because you won’t forget to take the webcam with 
you, and Windows should already have configured the camera, so that you don’t need to configure 
it manually. However, having the webcam fixed like this means you can’t change its placement in 
order to give your best profile to the person at the other end of the connection.
If you need to buy a camera, you’ll find a wide variety of options available. Use the 
following points as a brief shopping list:
●
●
●
note

Project 4: Turn Your PC into a Video Phone  35
note
Resolution 640×480 resolution is adequate for Internet telephony; unless you 
have a fast connection, 320×240 resolution may be enough. Some as web-cams 
go up to 1600×1200 resolution, but you will not normally be able to transmit 
this much data at a reasonable frame rate.
USB connection USB is the best way to connect a webcam to a PC. You 
can get other connection types (for example, FireWire), but your first choice 
should be USB.
Stand or monitor clip Some webcams clip onto a laptop’s lid or a flat-panel 
monitor. Others include stands or have a tripod thread that lets you mount 
them on a standard tripod.
Microphone Many webcams include a built-in microphone. These can be 
useful for simplicity, but you will get better audio quality from either a head-
set microphone or a microphone that you can position freely.
Windows Vista or Windows XP compatibility Most webcams sold nowa-
days include drivers for both Windows Vista and Windows XP, so compatibility 
is seldom a concern. However, if you dig up an old webcam designed for 
Windows 9x, you may have a hard time finding a driver for it. The main 
thing to avoid is buying a webcam designed specifically for Mac OS X.
If you don’t already have audio hardware, see “Step 1: Line Up Your Audio Hardware” in Project 3 
for suggestions on choosing suitable audio hardware for making audio calls from your PC.
Step 2: Download and Install Windows Live Messenger
Your computer’s manufacturer may have included Windows Live Messenger with 
Windows on your computer, so have a quick look on the Start menu before you down-
load and install it. Choose Start | All Programs, and then look for a Windows Live 
Messenger item. If you don’t see one, you need to download and install Windows 
Live Messenger. Follow these steps:
Choose Start | Internet, and then go to the Windows Live Messenger website 
(http://get.live.com/messenger/overview).
Find the link to download Windows Live Messenger, and then click it. Inter-
net Explorer displays the File Download – Security Warning dialog box.
Click the Run button. Internet Explorer downloads the Windows Live Mes-
senger installation file, and then starts to run it. Internet Explorer then dis-
plays a Security Warning dialog box.
Click the Run button, and then follow through the installation process. Read 
the license agreement, and make sure that you are prepared to comply with 
its many stipulations before you agree to it. For example, the agreement 
makes you state that you will not use Windows Live Messenger to share other 
people’s intellectual property without authorization, and that Microsoft may 
monitor your communications to verify that you’re being a good citizen and 
●
●
●
●
●
1.
2.
3.
4.

36 
Part I: Easy
may disclose any evidence against you to the appropriate authorities. (I para-
phrase lightly here, but in truth, you’re agreeing to a lot—so you should read 
the license agreement.)
Apart from the license agreement, the part of the installation where you 
should pay attention is the Choose Additional Features And Settings screen. 
Windows Live Messenger usually tries to install several features that you 
may well prefer not to have. Here’s what you need to know:
Windows Live Messenger Shortcuts You can launch Windows Live 
Messenger from the Start menu the way you would any other program. 
But if you leave this check box selected, you also get a Windows Live 
Messenger shortcut on the Desktop (which you probably won’t need) 
and one on the Quick Launch toolbar (which is usually a useful way of 
launching Windows Live Messenger).
Windows Live Sign-in Assistant This feature is confusing at first, 
but it can be very helpful. What the Assistant does is allow you to use 
multiple Windows Live IDs from the same user account in Windows, 
rather than requiring you to keep one Windows Live ID associated with 
a single user account. For example, you may have one Windows Live 
ID for business and another for personal, but use them both from the 
same Windows user account. The Assistant lets you save the password 
for each Windows Live ID inside the user account. (This may not sound 
like a big deal, but it is much better than the arrangement that earlier ver-
sions of Messenger used.)
MSN Home Clear this check box unless you want the installation rou-
tine to change your existing home page in Internet Explorer to the MSN 
Home page.
Windows Live Toolbar Select this check box only if you want to install 
the Windows Live Toolbar, which offers instant searching, newsfeeds, 
course charting, and more. See the Windows Live Toolbar Features page 
(http://toolbar.live.com/features.aspx) for details to help you decide 
whether to install Windows Live Toolbar.
Click the Close button when the installation routine has finished. The in-
staller then launches Windows Live Messenger. Go to the next step.
Step 3: Run and Configure Windows Live Messenger
At the end of the installation process, the installer opens Windows Live Messenger au-
tomatically. After that, you can open Windows Live Messenger in any of these ways:
Start menu Choose Start | All Programs | Windows Live Messenger.
Quick Launch toolbar Click the icon (if you let the installer create it).
Desktop Double-click the icon (again, if you let the installer create it).
5.
●
●
●
●
6.
●
●
●

Project 4: Turn Your PC into a Video Phone  37
Whichever way you start Windows Live Messenger, you see the main Windows 
Live Messenger window (see Figure 4-1). Windows Live Messenger uses separate 
windows for conversations with other users, as you’ll see in a minute.
Create a Windows Live ID
To use Windows Live Messenger, you need a Windows Live ID, an electronic identi-
fier with Microsoft’s Windows Live service. Windows Live ID is the new name for the 
electronic ID that started life as Microsoft Passport and then became Microsoft .NET 
Passport.
If you have created a Hotmail account or an MSN (Microsoft Network) account, 
you do not need to create a Windows Live ID, because you already have one. Other-
wise, follow these steps to create a Windows Live ID:
Click the Sign Up For A Windows Live ID link near the bottom of the main 
Windows Live Messenger window. Messenger opens an Internet Explorer 
window to the Windows Live ID sign-up page.
Click the Sign Up button, and then follow through the process of creating an 
account.
1.
2.
Figure 4-1  
The main Windows Live 
Messenger window  
appears like this the first 
time you run Windows 
Live Messenger.

38 
Part I: Easy
Sign Into Windows Live Messenger
Once you have a Windows Live ID, you can sign into Windows Live Messenger:
Type your Windows Live ID name in the E-mail Address text box.
Type your password in the Password text box.
Normally, you’ll want to make Windows Live Messenger remember your 
Windows Live ID, so select the Remember Me check box. That’ll save you 
having to type the Windows Live ID name into Messenger in the future.
If you want to be able to log onto Messenger quickly and easily, and you’re 
not worried about security, select the Remember My Password check box.
Saving your password compromises your security, because if someone else can access your Windows 
user account, they can log onto Messenger using your ID and impersonate you. If you’re the only 
person who has access to your PC, or if you protect your user account with a hard-to-break password, 
someone else accessing your user account may not be a concern.
If you want Messenger to sign you in automatically each time you log onto 
Windows, select the Sign Me In Automatically check box. If you prefer to 
sign in manually, make sure this check box is cleared.
Click the Sign In button. Messenger signs you in, and then displays a Welcome 
window, as shown in Figure 4-2.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Figure 4-2  
Messenger displays 
a Welcome window 
when you sign in.
caution

Project 4: Turn Your PC into a Video Phone  39
On subsequent logins, Messenger displays the Windows Live Today window, 
which provides quick access to news headlines and Hotmail e-mail. You may find the 
Windows Live Today window helpful, but you can also access Hotmail from Messenger 
itself, so you don’t need to keep the window open just for Hotmail.
Configure Windows Live Messenger for Audio and Video
You can use Messenger for text-only chat, but this project assumes that you want to 
use its audio and video capabilities. To set them up, follow these steps:
In the main Messenger window, click the Show Menu button (the button to 
the left of the Minimize button on the title bar), and then choose Tools | Audio 
And Video Setup to launch the Audio And Video Setup Wizard. 
Close all audio and video programs. For example, close Windows Media 
Player if you’re listening to music.
Make sure your webcam, microphone, and speakers are connected.
Click the Next button. The wizard displays the Speaker Setup screen.
In the Select The Speakers Or Headset You Would Like To Use drop-down 
list, make sure that the wizard has selected your speakers or headset. (If you 
have only speakers, there’s a good chance that the wizard will have made 
the right choice.)
If you’re using headphones, select the Click Here If You Are Using Head-
phones check box.
Click the Play Sound button to start playing a sample sound, and then drag 
the Speaker Volume slider to set the volume to a reasonable level.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

40 
Part I: Easy
Click the Next button. The wizard displays the Microphone Setup screen.
In the Select The Microphone You Would Like To Use drop-down list, make 
sure that the wizard has selected the correct microphone.
Read the sample text in a normal speaking voice to allow the wizard to set a 
suitable input volume.
Click the Next button. The wizard displays the Webcam Setup screen.
8.
9.
10.
11.

Project 4: Turn Your PC into a Video Phone  41
In the Select The Webcam You Would Like To Use drop-down list, make sure 
that the wizard has selected the correct webcam.
Check that the webcam preview is showing you as you want it to. If the webcam 
is movable, you may want to move it; if it’s fixed to your laptop, you may want 
to move the laptop or move yourself.
Click the Options button, and then use the Properties dialog box to apply 
any options you want. Click the OK button when you’re content with the 
choices. The contents of the Properties dialog box vary depending on your 
webcam’s capabilities (Figure 4-3 shows examples of two tabs), but you may 
be able to make changes such as these:
Flip the image or mirror it.
To see the effects of the changes you’re making, drag the Properties dialog box so that you can 
see the Webcam Setup page of the wizard.
Change the brightness, contrast, or gamma correction.
Apply effects such as making the picture look like an aged photo or mak-
ing you look like an alien.
Zoom in or out, or apply face tracking.
Click the Finish button to close the wizard and to apply the settings you chose.
12.
13.
14.
●
●
●
●
15.
Figure 4-3  
Your webcam may let 
you change the color 
balance or lighting—or 
distort your face in  
assorted ways.
note

42 
Part I: Easy
Figure 4-4  
The five tabs of the 
Add A Contact dialog 
box let you maintain a 
full set of information 
about the contact. The 
key settings for creating 
a contact are on the 
General tab.
Step 4: Add Contacts
You’re all set to make a call—but you don’t have any contacts to call. In order to call 
someone using Messenger, you need to add a contact for them:
Click the Add A Contact button, 
shown here, to display the Add A 
Contact dialog box (see Figure 4-4).
On the General tab, type the essential 
information for the contact:
Instant Messaging Address  
You need this address to reach 
the contact.
Personal Invitation Type a message that will enable the contact to 
identify you if they don’t recognize your instant-messaging name and 
that will persuade them to add you as a contact. Select the Also Send An 
E-mail Invitation To This Contact check box if you want to send an e-mail 
invitation as well as the instant-messaging invitation.
1.
2.
●
●

Project 4: Turn Your PC into a Video Phone  43
Figure 4-5  
Once Messenger  
establishes the  
connection, you see 
your contact’s video 
feed.
Your video
Switch To 
Full Screen 
button
Mute your contact
Emoticon
Wink
Nudge
Message 
area
Mute 
yourself
Start or stop 
your webcam
Options 
for your 
contact
Options for 
yourself
Start Or 
Stop A 
Video Call 
button
Send 
button
Your contact’s video
Nickname Type the name by which you want to refer to the contact.
Group Choose the group to which you want to assign the contact.
If you want to add further information, click one of the other four tabs, and 
then type the information you want. For example, you may want to click the 
Contact tab so that you can enter the contact’s first, middle, and last names.
When you’ve entered all the information you want to enter now (you can 
enter more information about the contact later if you want), click the Add 
Contact button. Messenger closes the Add A Contact dialog box and adds the 
contact to the main Messenger window.
Step 5: Make a Video Call to a Contact
To make a video call, follow these steps:
Right-click the contact’s name in the main Messenger window and choose 
Video | Start A Video Call. Messenger opens a Conversation window and 
displays advertisements at you until your contact accepts the call.
When your contact accepts the call, the video of him or her appears in place 
of the advertisements (see Figure 4-5). You can then start talking, smiling, 
gesticulating—whatever you need to convey your meaning.
●
●
3.
4.
1.
2.

44 
Part I: Easy
If you want to send a text message, type it in the message area, and then press 
ENTER or click the Send button. You can also send an emoticon (for example, 
a smiley) by clicking the Emoticon button or send a wink by clicking the Wink 
button. Some winks are free, while others cost you dearly.
You can also click the Nudge button to send a nudge—which makes the Messenger window 
bounce gently on the recipient’s screen—if you think you’ve lost someone’s attention. Nudges 
can be useful (if annoying) for text chat. If you’ve established a video call with someone, you 
should be able to tell whether they’re ignoring you.
If you want to change the size of your contact’s video panel, click the Options 
button next to their picture, highlight Size on the menu, and then choose 
Small, Medium, or Large.
If you want to change the size of your video panel, click the Options button 
next to your video picture, highlight Size on the menu, and then choose Small, 
Medium, or Large.
If you want to give your contact your undivided attention, click the Switch 
To Full Screen button. To return the call to a window, click the Switch To 
Window button in the lower-left corner of the full screen.
To end the call, click the Hang Up link in the Conversation window, press 
ALT-Q, or click the Start Or Stop A Video Call button on the toolbar.
If you’re not certain that your contact has a webcam or a fast enough Internet connection for a video 
conversation, start a text conversation, and then add video if the contact thinks it’s a good idea. To 
start a text conversation, simply double-click the contact’s name in the main Messenger window.
Step 6: Receive an Incoming Call
When one of your contacts calls you, 
Messenger displays a pop-up message 
above the notification area, as shown 
here, and flashes a Taskbar button for the 
Conversation window. Click the Answer 
button if you want to take the call.
Step 7: Sign Out or Close Windows Live Messenger
Even when you close the main Messenger window by clicking its Close button (the × 
button), Messenger keeps running so that you can receive incoming calls. If you don’t 
want to receive any calls, sign out by right-clicking the Windows Live Messenger icon 
in the notification area and then choosing Sign Out. To close Messenger fully, right-
click the Windows Live Messenger icon in the notification area and then choose Exit.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
note
tip

45
Project 5
Turn Your PC 
into a Media 
Center
What You’ll Need
Hardware: TV tuner (if your PC doesn’t have one)
Software: Windows Vista Home Premium Edition or Windows Vista 
Ultimate Edition
Cost: $100–300 U.S.
I
f your computer is running Windows Vista Home Premium Edition or Windows 
Vista Ultimate Edition, you’ve got all the software you need to watch and record 
TV right on your PC. If your PC included a TV tuner board, Windows Vista prob-
ably came configured to use it—in which case, you can simply run Windows Media 
Center without further ado. (If you haven’t already set up Windows Media Center, see 
“Step 3: Set Up Windows Media Center.”)
But TV tuners don’t come free, so it’s perhaps more likely that your PC doesn’t have 
a TV tuner even if it has Vista Home Premium or Vista Ultimate. This project shows you 
how to add a TV tuner to your PC so that you can enjoy Windows Media Center.
If your computer has any other version of Windows Vista, you need to upgrade to 
Home Premium (from Home Basic) or to Ultimate (from Business) if you want to run 
Windows Media Center. Upgrading is simple, as you need only buy a new product key 
and then apply it to unlock the hidden depths of your current installation of Windows 
Vista, but you may find the price too high. To learn what an upgrade will cost, press 
WINDOWS KEY–BREAK, and then click the Upgrade Windows Vista link near the top of the 
System window.
Windows XP Media Center Edition has many of the same Media Center capabilities as Windows 
Vista Home Premium Edition and Windows Vista Ultimate Edition—so if your PC is running 
Windows XP Media Center Edition, you can largely follow the advice in this project to add a TV 
tuner (if needed) and set up and use Windows Media Center. However, this project concentrates 
on Windows Vista, as this is the version of Windows on which you will most likely want to watch 
TV at this writing.
●
●
●
note

46 
Part II: Intermediate
Step 1: Choose a TV Tuner
Your first step is to add a TV tuner to your PC if it currently lacks one. Your nearest 
electronics paradise should offer you plenty of options, but if you want to see the full 
range of what’s available, visit one of the major retailers on the Web—for example, 
Amazon.com (www.amazon.com) or CDW (www.cdw.com).
Your first decision when buying a TV tuner is which connection type to use:
In many cases, the best type of TV tuner is one that connects via USB, be-
cause you can quickly and easily disconnect it from one PC and connect it to 
another.
For a desktop PC, the alternative to USB is to insert a PCI TV card in a PCI 
slot on the motherboard. This involves opening your PC’s case, but, assum-
ing you install the card successfully, you shouldn’t need to open the case 
again. Having the card inside the case like this makes for a neat solution, as 
you don’t have the USB device outside the PC’s case.
For a laptop PC, the alternative to USB is to use a PC Card or ExpressCard 
TV Card. However, given that most laptops have far more USB ports than PC 
Card or ExpressCard slots, and given that there is a far wider choice of USB 
TV devices, USB is usually a better choice.
Apart from the connection type, the following are the main considerations when 
you’re choosing among TV cards:
How many tuners do you need? The most basic tuners come with a single 
TV tuner, letting you watch or record a single channel at a time, or record 
a show on one channel while playing back a show you’ve recorded earlier. 
Dual tuners give you far more flexibility but increase the cost.
Which kind of signal do you need the tuner to handle? To receive standard 
TV signals over the air, you need an analog tuner. To receive high-definition TV 
signals over the air, you need a TV tuner capable of receiving digital signals. 
To receive cable, both your cable system and the tuner card must support 
QAM (quadrature amplitude modulation, a kind of digital cable tuner).
Which forms of video input do you need? Most TV tuners accept standard 
forms of input such as S-Video and composite video, but it’s wise to verify 
that the tuner has a connector for the type of input you’re planning to use.
Do you need a remote control? Many TV tuners come with a remote con-
trol for controlling playback from across the room. A remote control is espe-
cially important if you plan to watch the TV shows on your TV rather than 
on your PC, as described in Project 12.
You can install two or more TV tuners in the same PC, and you can have both standard tuners 
and digital tuners. However, you cannot install a digital cable tuner and a standard TV tuner at 
the same time. If you have a standard TV tuner and want to upgrade to a digital cable tuner, you 
must remove the standard TV tuner first.
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
caution

Project 5: Turn Your PC into a Media Center  47
You must also make sure the TV tuner supports Windows Media Center in 
Windows Vista. Before buying a bargain TV tuner designed for Windows XP Media 
Center Edition, make sure that a Windows Vista driver is available.
As with much technology, you don’t necessarily need to buy the latest and greatest TV tuner—which 
will usually be the most expensive—to get good results. You can save money without sacrificing 
quality by buying a short way behind the cutting edge.
Step 2: Install a TV Tuner
Once you’ve got your TV tuner, the next step is to install it:
USB With Windows still running, plug the TV tuner into a spare USB port. 
Some tuners plug in directly; others connect via a cable; and others yet give 
you the choice of plugging in directly or using a cable if the area around the 
USB port is too crowded to let the tuner plug in directly.
PC Card or ExpressCard With Windows still running, plug the card into 
the slot.
PCI card Shut down Windows before you install the card:
Unplug the power cable and other cables.
Put the PC on a work surface. 
Open the case.
Touch a part of the metal chassis to discharge any static electricity that 
you have accumulated.
Locate an unused PCI slot, and then unscrew or remove the tab that closes 
the slot’s opening on the outside of the case.
Insert the tuner card, and then screw in the retaining screw.
Close the case, reconnect the cables, and then restart Windows.
For any type of TV tuner, connect its cables. For example:
If your building has an existing antenna, connect that to the TV tuner. If the 
tuner came with its own antenna, you can use that instead, but reception will 
be weaker.
Connect any other TV source that you will be using via the appropriate type 
of cable—for example, S-Video or composite. (If you’re not clear on cable 
types, see Step 1 in Project 12 for a quick reference.)
If the TV tuner has an infrared extender for controlling an input source, con-
nect that cable and position the extender within striking distance of the input 
source’s infrared receiver.
●
●
●
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
●
●
●
tip

48 
Part II: Intermediate
When Windows Vista notices the TV tuner, it launches the Found New Hard-
ware Wizard. Click the Locate And Install Driver Software button, go through User 
Account Control for the Device Driver Software Installation feature (unless you’ve 
turned User Account Control off), and then follow through the procedure of identify-
ing and installing the driver for the TV tuner.
If the TV tuner included a CD containing drivers for Windows Vista, insert the 
CD in your computer’s optical drive. Otherwise, allow the wizard to search Windows 
Update for the drivers, download them, and then install them.
In some cases, you may need to download the drivers manually from the TV tuner manufacturer’s 
web site, unzip them, and then tell the wizard where to find them.
When the wizard has finished installing the software, click the Close button. If 
Windows prompts you to restart your PC, do so.
Step 3: Set Up Windows Media Center
Now that you’ve installed your TV tuner, you’re ready to set up Windows Media 
Center. This takes a while because of the many different options, but Windows Media 
Center makes the process as straightforward and painless as possible. The following 
instructions outline the key steps:
Launch Windows Media Center Choose Start | All Programs | Windows 
Media Center. The first time you launch Windows Media Center, the applica-
tion displays the first Welcome screen.
Choose between Express Setup and Custom Setup Express Setup signs 
you up automatically for the Customer Experience Improvement Program, 
which allows Windows Media Center to share your data anonymously with 
Microsoft. If you’re not comfortable with this, choose Custom Setup, which 
lets you decide whether to join the Customer Experience Improvement Pro-
gram. With either setup type, click the OK button. Windows Media Center 
verifies that you have a functioning Internet connection, and then (provided 
you do) downloads the latest configuration and programming information.
Decide whether to use enhanced playback On the Enhanced Playback 
screen, decide whether to allow Windows Media Center to connect to the 
Internet periodically to download TV program guides, music and movie 
information, and cover art for CDs and DVDs. Doing so greatly improves 
your experience of Windows Media Center at a minimal cost to your privacy. 
Click the Next button.
Configure your tuner, signal, and Guide On the Optional Setup screen 
(see Figure 5-1), select the Configure Tuners, TV Signal, And Guide option 
button, and then click the Next button. On the TV Signal: Confirm Your 
Region screen, verify that Windows Media Center has chosen the correct 
region—for example, United States. If not, select the No, I Want To Select 
A Different Region option button, click the Next button, and then choose 
1.
2.
3.
4.
note

Project 5: Turn Your PC into a Media Center  49
the region on the Select Your Region screen. Windows Media Center then 
downloads the latest TV setup options for your region.
Choose whether to use the Guide On the Guide Privacy screen, choose 
whether to use the Guide, which provides TV program listings. Normally, 
you’ll want to select the Yes option button here and then agree to the Guide 
Terms Of Service, but you should be aware that when you use the Guide, 
Windows Media Center sends anonymous information to Microsoft about 
your use of the service (so that Microsoft can improve the service). If this 
reporting bothers you, select the No option button.
Identify the television service type, and then scan for services Windows 
Media Center walks you through the process of choosing the type of televi-
sion service the tuner will receive, and then scans for services you can re-
ceive. The scan may take a while, but when it is complete, click the Next 
button, and then click the Finish button. Windows Media Center returns you 
to the Home screen, the screen with a vertical scrolling menu of major cat-
egories (such as Music, TV + Movies, and Sports) and a horizontal scrolling 
menu of choices within those categories.
Step 4: Watch TV
After you finish setting up Windows Media Center, you should be ready to watch TV. 
Follow these steps:
From the vertical scrolling menu, select the TV + Movies item.
From the horizontal scrolling menu, select the Live TV item. Windows Media 
Center starts showing a TV picture.
Change to the channel you want by using the controls displayed on the 
window.
5.
6.
1.
2.
3.
Figure 5-1  
On the Optional Setup 
screen, you’ll normally 
want to go through 
the Configure Tuners, 
TV Signal, And Guide 
process.

50 
Part II: Intermediate
Step 5: Record TV
You can start to record a TV show that you’re watching by simply clicking the Record 
button, but what you’ll probably want to do is schedule recordings to record your 
favorite TV shows that are on at times that aren’t convenient for you to watch TV.
Choose Suitable Recording Settings
Before you do much recording, it’s a good idea to check that Windows Media Center’s 
recording settings are suitable for you. To do so, follow these steps:
From the vertical scrolling menu on the Home screen, select and click the 
Tasks item.
From the horizontal scrolling menu, select and click the Settings item.
On the next menu, select and click the TV item.
On the TV menu, select and click the Recorder item.
On the Recorder menu, select and click the Recorder Storage item to display 
the Recorder Storage screen (see Figure 5-2).
Use the Record On Drive control to pick the drive on which you want Windows 
Media Center to save recorded TV files.
Use the Maximum TV Limit control to specify how much of the drive you 
want to devote to recorded TV.
Click the Save button to apply your choices and to return to the Recorder 
menu.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Figure 5-2  
Use the Recorder 
Storage screen to tell 
Windows Media Center 
which drive to use and 
how much space to take.

Project 5: Turn Your PC into a Media Center  51
Select and click the Recording Defaults item to display the Recording De-
faults screen. Figure 5-3 shows the top part of this screen. (You click the 
down-arrow button in the lower-right corner to move to the settings lower 
down the screen.)
Choose settings for recording. The key settings are Start When Possible and 
Stop When Possible, which let you specify how much extra recording time to 
allow at the beginning and end of shows in case the timings are not accurate. 
For example, you may choose to start recording 4 minutes before the sched-
uled beginning of the show when possible. (An early start or late finish may 
not be possible when you’re recording on other channels around the same 
time.) You can also choose settings for recording series and decide how long 
to keep shows.
Click the Save button to apply your choices and to return to the Recorder 
menu.
Click the Back button in the upper-left corner three times to return to the 
Home screen.
Record a Show from the Guide
To record a show from the Guide, follow these steps:
From the vertical scrolling menu on the Home screen, select the TV + Movies 
item.
From the horizontal scrolling menu, select the Guide item.
Move to the show you want to record.
Right-click the show, and then choose Record.
9.
10.
11.
12.
1.
2.
3.
4.
Figure 5-3  
The Recording Defaults 
screen lets you choose 
when to start and stop 
recordings—and con-
trol how long Windows 
Media Center keeps 
them. 

52 
Part II: Intermediate
Record a TV Show by Time and Channel
To record a TV program by time and channel, follow these steps:
From the vertical scrolling menu on the Home screen, select and click the 
TV + Movies item.
From the horizontal scrolling menu, select and click the Recorded TV item.
Select and click the Add Recording button to display the Add Recording 
screen.
Select and click the Channel And Time button to display the Manual Record 
screen.
Choose the channel, date, start time and stop time, and frequency of recording.
Click the Record button.
Click the Back button to return to the Home screen.
Watch Recorded TV
To watch recorded TV on your Media Center PC, follow these steps:
From the vertical scrolling menu on the Home screen, select the TV + Movies 
item.
From the horizontal scrolling menu, select the Recorded TV item.
Click the item you want to view. Windows Media Center starts playing it.
You should now be set to watch, record, and maybe enjoy TV on your PC. But if 
you find family members or friends crowding around jockeying for viewing positions, 
you may need to switch to a bigger screen. See Project 12 for advice on doing so.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
1.
2.
3.

53
Project 6
Learn to Work 
with Your  
PC’s BIOS
What You’ll Need
Hardware: None
Software: None
Cost: Free
T
his project shows you how to work with your PC’s BIOS—the essential software 
that makes the hardware usable. PC BIOSes are complex (more on this shortly), 
but the underlying principles tend to be the same. This project shows you how 
to make two simple changes on the two most widely used types of BIOSes: First, boot 
your PC from the optical drive (as you’ll need to do in Project 10), and second, apply a 
BIOS password to protect your PC.
If you work through these examples—without actually applying the changes if you 
don’t want to—you will be in good shape for making other BIOS changes as needed. 
For example, you may need to adjust specific BIOS settings in order to troubleshoot 
certain problems on a particular type of PC—or to achieve special effects.
Step 1: Understand What the BIOS Is  
and Why You Should Treat It Gently
The BIOS (pronounced “buy-oss”) is the Basic Input/Output System of the PC. Briefly, 
the BIOS is data stored in chips on the motherboard that enables the operating system 
(for example, Windows) to communicate with the PC’s hardware.
When you start the PC, the BIOS springs into action. First, the BIOS checks that it 
itself is intact and hasn’t been attacked by a virus. Then, it sees whether the hardware 
components it’s expecting to be available are actually present and correct, and counts 
the RAM. Around this point, before it actually starts to boot the PC from the boot de-
vice (for example, the hard drive), the BIOS gives you a chance to interrupt the boot 
●
●
●

54 
Part II: Intermediate
process so that you can access the BIOS’s settings. If you don’t interrupt the boot pro-
cess, the BIOS locates the boot device, and your operating system starts.
Know Where Most PC BIOSes Come From
At this writing, the two predominant manufacturers of BIOSes for PCs are
Phoenix Technologies Ltd Produces the PhoenixBIOS
American Megatrends Inc. (AMI) Produces the AMIBIOS
Understand How Your PC’s BIOS May Vary  
from the Examples Shown Here
This project shows examples using a PhoenixBIOS and an AMIBIOS, as the chances 
are pretty good that your PC’s BIOS will be based on one or the other.
Wait a minute… “based on”?
That’s right—and it makes the topic of dealing with BIOSes more complicated 
than would be ideal. A PC’s BIOS is actually specific to the PC’s motherboard, be-
cause different motherboards have different capabilities. This specificity means that 
even closely related models of PCs from the same manufacturer may have different 
BIOS setups, because the computers have different motherboards. So you’ll always 
need to keep your wits about you while making changes in your PC’s BIOS.
Even if your PC has a PhoenixBIOS or an AMIBIOS, use the examples in this proj-
ect as a means of getting an idea of what you need to do, not as specific instructions 
to follow. And if the PC has a BIOS from a different manufacturer, use these examples 
simply as an idea of what you’ll need to look for in that BIOS.
To balance that bad news about the BIOS being specific to the motherboard, there’s some good 
news: Many modern computers have far fewer options in the BIOS than older computers had, 
because manufacturers have whittled down the amount of hardware on the motherboard. This 
is especially true of laptops, which typically are less expandable than desktops. For example, the 
BIOS of a laptop designed to have only one hard drive and one optical drive doesn’t suffer the 
configuration anxieties that plague the BIOSes of most desktop computers, so the laptop BIOS 
tends to have fewer options. On the downside, the laptop is less configurable—but you knew 
that when you bought it. On the upside, it’s much easier to find those settings that you’re  
actually allowed to adjust.
Treat Your PC’s BIOS Gently
Without the BIOS, your PC is a collection of (usually ugly) parts that do nothing. 
With the BIOS correctly configured, your PC is a silver machine that zips you along 
the information superhighway or conjures up hordes of detailed and vicious mutants 
for you to annihilate. And with the BIOS incorrectly configured, your PC may be a 
mess—unstable, balky, and with key components not functioning as they should.
●
●
note

Project 6: Learn to Work with Your PC’s BIOS  55
If your PC is working correctly, you should make BIOS changes only with caution 
and only when necessary. Before making a change, write down the current settings so 
that you can restore them if the changes have any unfortunate effects.
If you’ve made a change to the BIOS that seems to have caused trouble, and you’ve lost your 
notes about how the settings were beforehand, you may need to load the BIOS’s default settings 
to recover. These settings may not be exactly what you had before you made changes, but they 
should provide a stable and functional configuration. To load the default settings, look for an  
option such as Setup Defaults or Load Setup Defaults in the BIOS, and then execute it.
Step 2: Reach Your PC’s BIOS
To reach your PC’s BIOS, you typically have to press a designated key during startup. 
Which key that is depends on the BIOS, but many BIOSes use one of these keys:
 DELETE
 F2
 F10
●
●
●
 ESC
 ALT, F1
 ESC, F1
●
●
●
To find out which key to use, boot your PC and watch the messages that appear 
on the screen. If you’re lucky, you’ll see a message such as the AMIBIOS message 
shown at the top of Figure 6-1 or the PhoenixBIOS message shown below it.
tip
Figure 6-1  
Watch the beginning of 
the boot process like 
a hawk to learn which 
key to press to access 
the BIOS—and then 
strike that key like a 
snake.
In some PCs, the BIOS may load so quickly that you can’t catch the message. 
Other PCs may have a “quiet boot” option that suppresses messages, including the 
message that tells you which key to press. If your PC seems not to tell you which key 
to press, either consult the documentation (what, you’ve lost it?), try the keys in the 
previous list one at a time, or search the Web for advice on your model of PC.

56 
Part II: Intermediate
If you hit the magic key (or key sequence) before the boot process moves along, 
the BIOS screen appears after a moment. Figure 6-2 shows an example of what you 
see first when you access a PhoenixBIOS. Figure 6-3 shows an example of what you 
see first when you access an AMIBIOS. As you can see, a typical BIOS screen presents 
several categories of settings and requires you to navigate using the keyboard rather 
than the mouse.
Figure 6-2  
The opening screen of 
a typical PhoenixBIOS 
shows you an overview 
of the system settings, 
including the memory.
Figure 6-3  
The opening screen 
of a typical AMIBIOS 
includes the version, 
the build date, the  
system memory,  
and the system time 
and date.

Project 6: Learn to Work with Your PC’s BIOS  57
Step 3: Navigate the BIOS Screens
Nowadays, you can find BIOSes that let you navigate with a mouse, but most BIOSes 
still insist you use the keyboard. Using the keyboard tends to feel clumsy at first, but 
you’ll get the hang of it quickly if you practice. 
In a typical BIOS, you use the following keys to navigate:
To Do This
In PhoenixBIOS, Press
In AMIBIOS, Press
Move left by one screen or tab
LEFT ARROW
LEFT ARROW
Move right by one screen or tab
RIGHT ARROW
RIGHT ARROW
Move the selection down
DOWN ARROW
TAB
Move the selection up
UP ARROW
SHIFT-TAB
Expand the current selection or  
open a selection window
ENTER
ENTER
Collapse the current selection or  
return to the previous screen
ESC
ESC
Change the current setting
+ or − 
F5 or F6 
PAGE UP or PAGE DOWN
+ or −
Get help
F1
F1
Exit the BIOS, saving changes
F10
F10
That may look complicated, but it’s easy enough when you try it out. (Even if you 
don’t want to make the changes described in the examples, work through the moves 
for practice—and then don’t save the changes.) Besides, enough people have gotten 
stuck in BIOSes so that most screens include a quick reference chart of keys you can 
press from wherever you are.
If you do get stuck on a BIOS screen, try pressing ESC to collapse the current selection or to 
go back to the previous screen. If you’re at the top level of an AMIBIOS, pressing ESC typically 
causes the BIOS to prompt you to decide whether to discard changes and exit the BIOS. If you 
get this prompt unintentionally, simply press ESC again to get rid of it.
Step 4: Boot Your PC from the Optical Drive
Under normal circumstances, your PC boots, or starts, from its hard drive, loading 
Windows (or another operating system) from there. Once Windows starts, you can 
log in, and then you’re computing as usual.
But sometimes you may need to boot your PC from a different drive. For example, 
you may need to boot from the optical drive (the CD, DVD, or similar drive) in order 
to troubleshoot your PC or to install another operating system, or you may need to 
boot from a USB device in order to run another operating system.
tip

58 
Part II: Intermediate
To set your PC to boot from the optical drive, you usually need to change boot 
settings in the BIOS. The examples in this section show you how to make this change 
using a typical PhoenixBIOS and a typical AMIBIOS. Depending on the specific BIOS 
your PC uses, you may need to take somewhat different steps—even if the BIOS is 
one of these types.
Set a PhoenixBIOS PC to Boot from the Optical Drive
To set a PhoenixBIOS-based PC to boot from the optical drive, follow these steps:
Access the BIOS. For example, start your PC, and then press F2 when prompted. 
The PhoenixBIOS Setup Utility screen appears, as shown in Figure 6-3 (earlier 
in this project).
Press RIGHT ARROW four times (moving the gray highlight along the top row 
under “PhoenixBIOS Setup Utility”) to select the Boot tab:
Examine the order in which the devices appear. In the preceding illustration, 
the devices appear in the following order:
Removable Devices These are devices such as floppy disks. Booting 
from a floppy disk used to be a handy fallback in the old days, but now, 
few operating systems can boot from a floppy disk. (Worse, more and 
more new PCs come without a floppy drive.)
If a removable device or an optical drive doesn’t contain a bootable disk, the BIOS continues to 
the next device. For example, in the setup shown here, the PC boots from the hard drive unless 
a removable device such as the floppy drive contains a bootable disk. A bootable disk is one that 
contains instructions for starting the PC.
Hard Drive The hard drive is the device from which the PC usually 
boots. Right now, though, you want to tell the BIOS to boot the PC from 
the optical drive rather than the hard drive if the optical drive contains 
a disk.
CD-ROM Drive Despite its name, this category describes both stan-
dard CD-ROM drives (and burners) and DVD drives (and burners), so 
it refers to the optical drive on your PC. To make the PC boot from this 
drive, you must insert a bootable CD or DVD in it.
Network Boot From [Device Name] Many PCs are designed so that 
they can boot from a network device. This capability is very useful in 
managed networks, such as a corporate network, but you probably won’t 
want to use it at home.
1.
2.
3.
●
●
●
●
note

Project 6: Learn to Work with Your PC’s BIOS  59
Move the CD-ROM Drive item up to the top of the list. Follow these steps:
Press DOWN ARROW twice to move the highlight down to the CD-ROM 
Drive item.
Press + twice to move the CD-ROM Drive item up to the top of the list, 
as shown here:
Press F10 to invoke the Save And Exit 
command. The BIOS displays this 
Setup Confirmation screen.
Make sure the black highlight is on 
the Yes button. (It should be there by 
default.) If not, press TAB to move it 
there.
Press ENTER to “click” the Yes button. Your PC restarts. This time, it boots 
from the optical drive if that drive contains a bootable disk.
Set an AMIBIOS PC to Boot from the Optical Drive
To set an AMIBIOS-based PC to boot from the optical drive, follow these steps:
Access the BIOS. For example, start your PC, and then press DELETE when 
the BIOS prompts you. The BIOS Setup Utility screen appears, as shown in 
Figure 6-3 (earlier in this project).
Press RIGHT ARROW three times (moving the gray highlight along the top row 
under “BIOS Setup Utility”) to select the Boot tab:
With the Boot Device Priority item selected, press ENTER to open the Boot 
screen.
4.
●
●
5.
6.
7.
1.
2.
3.

60 
Part II: Intermediate
With the 1st Boot Device item selected, press ENTER to open the menu of boot 
devices:
Press DOWN ARROW to select the CDROM item, and then press ENTER to make 
that item the 1st Boot Device and to close the menu. The BIOS moves the 
Floppy Drive item down the list to the 2nd Boot Device:
Press F10 to invoke the Save And Exit command. The BIOS displays the Save 
Configuration Changes And Exit Now screen:
Make sure the black highlight is on the OK button. (It should be there by 
default.) If not, press TAB to move it there.
Press ENTER to “click” the Yes button. Your PC restarts. This time, it boots 
from the optical drive if that drive contains a bootable disk.
Step 5: Set a Supervisor Password and User Password
To prevent other people from making changes to the PC’s BIOS without your permis-
sion, you can set a supervisor password and make the BIOS challenge anyone who 
tries to access the BIOS. You can also set a user password that allows the user to access 
the BIOS but gives the user limited access, so that the user can see BIOS settings but 
not change them. (This can be useful if you need the user to be able to report BIOS 
settings to a remote help desk.) The steps for setting a supervisor password and user 
password are similar on the PhoenixBIOS and the AMIBIOS. The first section shows 
the PhoenixBIOS, and the second shows the AMIBIOS.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Project 6: Learn to Work with Your PC’s BIOS  61
Set a Supervisor Password on a PhoenixBIOS PC
On a PhoenixBIOS-based PC, you can set two passwords:
Supervisor password This password is required to access the BIOS and 
make changes.
User password This password is required to view the BIOS.
You can also set the BIOS to require a password before anyone—whether supervi-
sor or user—can use the PC at all.
To set a supervisor password on a PC that has a PhoenixBIOS, follow these steps:
Access the main BIOS screen as usual.
Press RIGHT ARROW twice to display the Security tab, shown here. The BIOS 
selects the Set Supervisor Password item at first, because this is the master 
setting.
To set the supervisor password, follow these steps:
Press ENTER to display the Set Supervisor Password screen:
Type the password in the Enter New Password field (where the cursor 
appears at first). Press ENTER to move the cursor to the Confirm New 
Password field, type the password again, and then press ENTER again. 
The BIOS displays the Setup Notice message box.
Press ENTER to dismiss the Setup Notice message box. The Security tab 
now shows Supervisor Password Is: Set at the top to indicate that you’ve 
set a supervisor password.
If you want to set the user password, follow these steps:
Press UP ARROW to select the Set User  
Password item.
Press ENTER to display the Set User  
Password screen, shown here.
●
●
1.
2.
3.
●
●
●
4.
●
●

62 
Part II: Intermediate
Type the password in the Enter New Password field (where the cursor 
appears at first). Press ENTER to move the cursor to the Confirm New 
Password field, type the password again, and then press ENTER again. 
The BIOS displays the Setup Notice message box.
Press ENTER to dismiss the Setup Notice message box. The Security tab 
now shows User Password Is: Set at the top to indicate that you’ve set a 
user password.
If you want to set the BIOS to require a password when the PC is booted, 
follow these steps:
Press DOWN ARROW once or twice (as 
needed) to select the Password On 
Boot item.
Press ENTER to display the available 
values.
Press DOWN ARROW to select the Enabled item.
Press ENTER to apply the change.
Press F10 to invoke the Save And Exit command. 
The BIOS displays this Setup Confirmation 
screen.
Make sure the black highlight is on the Yes but-
ton. (It should be there by default.) If not, press TAB to move it there.
Press ENTER to “click” the Yes button. Your PC restarts, with the password 
protection in place.
Set a Supervisor Password on an AMIBIOS PC
On an AMIBIOS-based PC, you can set two passwords:
Supervisor password This password is required to access the BIOS as a 
supervisor. The supervisor has the freedom to make changes.
User password This password is required to log on or access the BIOS as 
a user. The supervisor can permit the user to have different levels of access 
to the BIOS—for example, only being able to view the BIOS but not make 
changes, being able to make limited changes, or having full access.
You can also set the BIOS to require a password before anyone—whether supervi-
sor or user—can use the PC at all.
To set a supervisor password on a PC that has an AMIBIOS, follow these steps:
Access the main BIOS screen as usual.
●
●
5.
●
●
●
●
6.
7.
8.
●
●
1.

Project 6: Learn to Work with Your PC’s BIOS  63
Press RIGHT ARROW four times to display the Security tab, shown here. The 
BIOS selects the Change Supervisor Password item automatically if no pass-
word is currently applied.
To set the supervisor password, follow these steps:
Press ENTER to display the Enter New Password 
screen, shown here.
Type the password, and then press ENTER. The BIOS displays the Confirm 
New Password screen:
Type the password again, and then press ENTER 
once more. The BIOS displays the Password 
Installed message box.
Press ENTER to dismiss the message box.
If you want to set a user access level and password, 
follow these steps:
Press DOWN ARROW to select the User Access Level item.
Press ENTER to display the Options list:
Choose the option you want: No Access to prevent the user from access-
ing the BIOS at all, View Only to allow the user to view the BIOS but not 
make changes, Limited to allow the user to view the BIOS and change 
largely innocuous settings such as the time and date but not settings that 
affect the PC’s operation, or Full Access to allow the user to change the 
BIOS freely.
2.
3.
●
●
●
●
4.
●
●
●

64 
Part II: Intermediate
Press ENTER to apply the selection.
Press DOWN ARROW to select the Change User Password item.
Press ENTER to display the Enter New Password screen.
Type the password, and then press ENTER. The BIOS displays the Confirm 
New Password screen.
Type the password again, and then press ENTER once more. The BIOS 
displays the Password Installed message box. Press ENTER to dismiss the 
message box.
To specify when the BIOS should check the password, follow these steps:
Press DOWN ARROW as many times as needed to select the Password  
Check item.
Press ENTER to display the Options list:
Select Setup if you want the BIOS to demand a password when the user 
tries to enter the BIOS Setup program. Select Always if you want the 
BIOS to require the password each time someone tries to start the PC.
Press ENTER to apply your choice.
Press F10 to invoke the Save And Exit command. The BIOS displays the Save 
Configuration Changes And Exit Now screen.
Make sure the black highlight is on the OK button. (It should be there by 
default.) If not, press TAB to move it there.
Press ENTER to “click” the Yes button. Your PC restarts, with the security 
options now in place.
After working your way through the examples in this project, you should have 
developed the skills you need to apply any specific BIOS changes your PC needs—no 
matter exactly which BIOS your PC is using.
●
●
●
●
●
5.
●
●
●
●
6.
7.
8.

65
Project 7
Replace Your 
Hard Disk—or 
Add Another 
Hard Disk
What You’ll Need
Hardware: New hard disk, USB hard disk enclosure, USB cable, 
Philips screwdriver, Torx wrenches
Software: Windows Vista DVD or Norton Save & Restore
Cost: $50–150 U.S.
C
hances are that all too soon you’ll find yourself running out of space on your 
PC. When this happens, you can attach an external hard disk via USB easily 
enough, but in many cases a better solution is to add a new internal hard disk 
to your PC.
If your PC can contain only one hard disk, you’ll need to replace the existing 
disk—and then either reinstall Windows on the new disk or clone your existing operating 
system installation to the new disk. But if you can add a hard disk to your existing 
disk, the upgrade is faster and more convenient, and you’ll end up with even more 
hard disk space.
Step 1: Check How Many Hard Disks Your  
PC Has—and How Many It Can Have
Your first step is to check how many hard disks your PC currently has—and how many 
disks it can hold. If you have a laptop, you can probably skip this step, because almost 
all laptops contain only a single hard disk. If you have one of the monster laptops that 
can contain two or more hard disks, you probably are well aware of the fact because 
the manufacturer likely trumpeted it to the skies—and that may even be one of the 
reasons you decided to buy this particular laptop.
●
●
●

66 
Part II: Intermediate
Similarly, if you have a standard model of desktop PC, most likely it has a single 
disk. But if you’re not sure, or if you want to make sure that the hard disk doesn’t 
contain unused space on which you could create another drive, follow these steps:
Press WINDOWS KEY–R. Windows displays the Run dialog box.
Type diskmgmt.msc and press ENTER or click the OK button. On Windows XP, 
you’ll see the Disk Management window immediately. On Windows Vista, 
when the User Account Control dialog box appears (unless you’ve turned 
off User Account Control), make sure the component mentioned is Microsoft 
Management Console, and then click the Continue button. Windows displays 
the Disk Management window. Figure 7-1 shows an example.
In the lower part of the window, look at each Disk readout. The figure shows 
one disk, called Disk 0 (because computer counting starts at zero rather than 
one), which is divided into three drives (100GB, 100GB, and 98.09GB). There’s 
also a drive called CD-ROM 0, which is the first optical drive on the system. 
As the DVD designation indicates, this optical drive is actually a DVD drive 
rather than a CD drive.
Click the Close button (the × button) or choose File | Exit to close the Disk 
Management window.
Okay, that’s how many disks your PC currently holds. But how many can it hold? 
At this point, we’re probably talking about a desktop rather than a laptop. If you 
have the PC’s documentation on hand (or if you can locate it on the Web), look up the 
number of disks. Otherwise, shut down Windows, turn the PC off and disconnect the 
cables, open the case, and take a look. Figure 7-2 shows an example of what you may 
see in a sparsely populated case.
1.
2.
3.
4.
Figure 7-1  
The Disk Management 
window lets you see 
both, how many hard 
disks (and other types 
of disks) are installed on 
your PC, and how they 
are partitioned.

Project 7: Replace Your Hard Disk—or Add Another Hard Disk  67
Look for three things here:
An empty drive bay It may be either 3.5 inches wide (the width of most 
desktop hard disks) or 5.25 inches, the width of optical drives and some 
heavyweight hard disks. It’s easiest to mount a 3.5-inch disk in a 3.5-inch 
bay, but you can also mount it in a 5.25-inch bay if you buy 
mounting rails.
A power connector Unless your PC is loaded with drives 
and extras, you’ll probably find several power connectors 
available, though they may be wrapped up in a tight bundle 
with a plastic tie. This illustration shows a power connector.
A drive cable with a free connector Drive 
cables are the flat, wide ribbons that go from 
the hard drive and optical drive to the mother-
board. Usually, you’ll find a connector free.
●
●
●
DVD drive
Three 5.25-inch bays
Three 3.5-inch bays
Hard disk
Figure 7-2  
Most tower-style PCs 
offer you the choice of 
3.5-inch bays for hard 
disks or 5.25-inch bays 
that can contain optical 
drives, hard disks, or 
other components.

68 
Part II: Intermediate
Step 2: Decide Whether to Add a Disk  
or Replace the Disk
By this point, you should be in a position to decide whether you’re adding a hard disk 
to your PC or replacing the existing hard disk. (If your PC can contain only one hard 
disk, you have had no choice all along.) If you haven’t yet decided, you’re probably 
better off adding a disk, because you don’t need to reinstall Windows or transfer your 
data—you simply get the extra storage space that the new disk provides.
Step 3: Buy the Hardware
Buy a suitable hard disk for your PC. Make sure it has the right physical size, enough 
capacity for your needs, and a fast enough rotational speed, as explained next.
Choose the Disk’s Physical Size
Most laptop PCs use 2.5-inch disks. You’ll find a wide variety of these at a good com-
puter store. Some subnotebooks use 1.8-inch disks. The selection of these tends to be 
smaller; capacities tend to be lower; and prices tend to be higher.
For a laptop, you must also check the disk height. Some slim-line laptops can use 
disks only up to 9mm high, while others accept 12mm disks. You can use a 9mm disk 
in a 12mm space easily enough, but the other way around doesn’t fit.
Replacing a Laptop’s Hard Disk Can Be a Nightmare
Before you commit to replacing the hard disk on a laptop, it’s a good idea 
to check how serious an operation the disk replacement is. Some laptops are 
designed to be easy to maintain and upgrade, but others are designed to be 
opened only by trained technicians armed with special tools. You can get the 
special tools yourself, but buying them increases the total cost of the upgrade. 
And if you end up wrecking your PC, the cost becomes far too high.
So consult your laptop’s user manual and find out exactly what is involved. 
If you see the magical words “field replaceable unit” or “FRU” describing the 
hard disk, that’s great news. If not, carefully review the steps involved in open-
ing the PC.
If you find that you have to remove several internal components before 
you can even access the hard disk, you may want to save the time and effort 
and solve your disk-space problem another way. For example, you can archive 
older files or move seldom-used files to an external hard disk to make more 
space on the internal hard disk so that you do not need to replace it.

Project 7: Replace Your Hard Disk—or Add Another Hard Disk  69
Most desktop PCs can use either 3.5-inch disks or 5.25-inch disks; 3.5 inches is 
normally the best choice, as you’ll find a good range of disk capacities at affordable 
prices, but you may have to go to 5.25 inches if you want a monster disk.
Choose the Disk’s Capacity
You may simply want to choose the highest-capacity disk you can afford, but typi-
cally you’ll get the best value from buying a little way back from the cutting edge. 
For example, instead of buying a 200GB disk for a laptop, you might get a better deal 
on a 160GB disk. In some cases, you need to balance the disk’s capacity against its 
rotational speed—if you want the highest capacity available, you may need to settle 
for a lower rotational speed.
Choose the Disk’s Rotational Speed
The disk’s rotational speed controls to a large extent how fast it can deliver data to the 
PC: the faster the rotational speed, the faster the data gets transferred. It also affects 
how much energy the disk uses, how hot it becomes, and how much noise it makes.
At this writing, 5400 rpm disks are the best choice for laptop PCs. 4200 rpm disks 
are less expensive but slower and are seldom worth buying; however, if your laptop 
uses a 1.8-inch disk, you may need to settle for a 4200 rpm disk. 7200 rpm laptop disks 
are also available, but they tend to have lower capacity than the 5400 rpm disks and 
produce more heat and noise.
For desktop PCs, 7200 rpm disks are normally the best choice, giving good per-
formance with high capacity. Many 7200 rpm 3.25-inch disks are also impressively 
quiet, which can be welcome when you need to concentrate. Faster disks (for ex-
ample, 10,000 rpm or 15,000 rpm) are typically designed for servers and tend to be 
too noisy for desktop use.
A factor that most people ignore when buying hard disks is the amount of noise they make. 
Given how close your laptop is to you while you are using it, a quiet or silent hard disk is usually 
a good idea. Even on a desktop PC that normally is several feet away from you, a quiet or silent 
hard disk can make the difference between peaceful work and struggling to concentrate through 
an irritating noise. Look for a disk that’s specifically marketed as low-noise, quiet, or silent, and 
read users’ reviews if possible to see if they support the manufacturer’s claims. (Also, see Project 
22 for more information about silencing your PC.)
Step 4: Buy Any Software Needed
If you’re adding a hard disk to your PC, you won’t need to buy any extra software, 
as your current operating system remains in place. But if you’re replacing your hard 
disk, you need to set up the new disk with your operating system.
tip

70 
Part II: Intermediate
There are two main ways of putting the operating system onto your new disk:
Reinstall Windows from scratch The basic way is to reinstall Windows 
from scratch on the new hard disk. You then need to apply any Windows 
updates and install all the programs you use. To reinstall Windows, you need 
your Windows DVD.
Clone your PC’s hard disk Cloning your PC’s existing operating system 
onto the new disk can save you plenty of time and effort, as you don’t need 
to reinstall Windows and your programs. But to clone the disk, you need 
cloning software such as Norton Save & Restore. 
Step 5: Install the New Hard Disk
At this point, you should be ready to install the new hard disk in your PC. The pro-
cedure is different depending on whether you’re adding the hard disk to the PC or 
replacing the existing disk.
The first of the next two sections shows the steps for adding a hard disk. This section 
uses a desktop PC as the example. The second section shows the steps for replacing 
the hard disk. This section uses a laptop PC as the example.
Add a Hard Disk to Your PC
To add a hard disk to your PC, follow these steps:
Save any unsaved documents, close your programs, and shut down Windows.
Disconnect the cables from your PC, and put the PC on a suitable work surface.
Open the case. What this involves depends on how your PC is designed and 
built, but here are three examples:
Tower-style PC Unscrew any retaining screws, and then remove the 
side panel on the side of the case away from the motherboard. If you’re 
not sure which side this is, look at the back of the PC and see which 
side the parts and expansion cards are up against. That side is where the 
motherboard is, so you want the other side.
Desktop-style PC Unscrew any retaining screws, and then remove the 
top panel or the entire cover. In a miniature case, you may need to re-
move other components before you can access the hard drive. In this 
case, consult the PC’s manual to see which components you must re-
move, and how to remove them.
Laptop PC Consult the documentation.
After opening the case, touch a metal part of the case to discharge any static 
electricity you may have built up.
Identify a suitable drive bay, insert the drive, and then screw it in place. 
Figure 7-3 shows the second disk in place.
●
●
1.
2.
3.
●
●
●
4.
5.

Project 7: Replace Your Hard Disk—or Add Another Hard Disk  71
Connect a drive cable and a power cable to the drive.
Close the case again.
Restore your PC to its usual location, and reconnect the cables.
Start the PC, and then log onto Windows.
Replace the Hard Disk in Your PC
To replace the hard disk in your PC, follow these steps (the example PC is a laptop):
Save any unsaved documents, close your programs, and shut down Windows.
Disconnect the cables from your PC, and put the PC on a suitable work sur-
face. For a laptop, you may want to put down a cloth or a large mouse mat to 
prevent the PC getting scratched.
Turn the laptop so that you can access the cover or hatch that allows access 
to the inside or the hard disk. The example PC has hatches on the bottom 
for its field-replaceable units (see Figure 7-4), which makes the replacement 
procedure far easier.
6.
7.
8.
9.
1.
2.
3.
Figure 7-3  
If you have plenty of 
space, allow a gap  
between the disks 
rather than placing 
them right against each 
other.

72 
Part II: Intermediate
Open the hard disk compartment, as 
in this example. Normally, the hard 
disk is obvious when you’re in the 
right place.
Touch a metal part of the case to dis-
charge any static electricity you may 
have built up.
4.
5.
Dealing with Masters, Slaves, and Jumpers
These days, you can often simply connect a disk to a drive cable without wor-
rying about its configuration. This is because many PCs and disks use the 
Cable Select method of choosing the disk’s role. With Cable Select, the cable 
connection used to connect the disk determines the drive’s role.
If your PC doesn’t use Cable Select, you need to check that the disk is set to 
the correct role, master (primary) or slave (secondary). To change the configura-
tion, you use a jumper (a small connector) to connect two pins. This illustration 
shows the back of a disk drive with a jumper in place connecting two pins:
Jumper
Drive cable connector
Configuration pins
Power connector
Normally, you’ll find on the disk’s label a small and confusing diagram 
indicating which jumper configuration means what. Sometimes, you’ll need 
to consult the disk’s documentation or the manufacturer’s website to find that 
small and confusing diagram.
When you’re adding a disk, check the existing disk’s configuration to de-
termine how to configure the new disk. For example, if you’re adding a second 
disk on the same cable, and you find the existing disk is configured as a master, 
configure the second disk as a slave.
When you’re replacing a disk, the best approach is normally to set the 
same type of jumper configuration on the new disk as on the old disk, and to 
connect the new disk to the same connector on the same cable. For example, if 
the old disk is jumpered to the Cable Select position, jumper the new disk to 
Cable Select, and use the same connector on the same drive cable. That should 
give you the correct result.

Project 7: Replace Your Hard Disk—or Add Another Hard Disk  73
Detach the hard disk from its connector, and then remove it. The illustra-
tion shows an example of a drive that is held by its connector and by spring 
clips.
If the hard disk uses an enclosure, as in 
the example shown here, unscrew any re-
taining screws and then remove the disk 
from the enclosure. Insert the replace-
ment disk, and then apply the retaining 
screws.
Insert the hard disk or enclosure in the 
bay or area that contains it, and then se-
cure its connector.
Close the case again.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Figure 7-4  
This laptop is  
designed to allow you 
to replace the hard disk 
and memory easily.

74 
Part II: Intermediate
Step 6: Format the New Hard Disk
Before you can use the new hard disk, you must format it to apply a file system to it 
that enables Windows to access it.
If you’ve replaced your PC’s existing hard disk with the new hard disk, format-
ting it is no problem: When you install Windows (or another operating system), the 
installation routine automatically prompts you to format the disk.
If you’ve added a hard disk, you need to format it manually. Follow these steps in 
either Windows Vista or Windows XP:
Start your PC. When Windows starts, you may see a notification-area pop-up 
message announcing that it is installing a device driver for your new hard-
ware. This should be the new disk.
Press WINDOWS KEY–R. Windows displays the Run dialog box.
Type diskmgmt.msc, and then press ENTER or click the OK button. If you’re 
using Windows Vista, go through User Account Control (unless you’ve 
turned User Account Control off) for the Microsoft Management Console 
feature. The Disk Management window opens. When Disk Management 
notices the new hard disk, it displays the Initialize Disk dialog box, as 
shown here.
If Disk Management doesn’t notice the new disk, choose Action | Scan Disks.
Make sure the correct disk is selected in the Select Disks list box. (Disk Man-
agement should select the correct disk unless you’ve just added multiple 
new disks.)
Make sure the MBR (Master Boot Record) option button is selected rather 
than the GPT (GUID Partition Table) option button.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
note

Project 7: Replace Your Hard Disk—or Add Another Hard Disk  75
Click the OK button. Disk Management closes the Initialize Disk dialog box 
and initializes the disk, which then appears as Unallocated, as shown next 
for Disk 1 (the new disk).
Right-click anywhere in the new disk’s graphic and choose New Simple Vol-
ume. Disk Management launches the New Simple Volume Wizard, which 
displays its Welcome screen.
A volume is a defined section of a hard disk that enables Windows to access it. A volume is also 
called a partition.
Click the Next button to display the Specify Volume Size screen. If you want 
to use less than the maximum space available on the disk for this volume, 
change the value in the Simple Volume Size In MB text box. This text box 
shows the full amount of space available by default, so if you want to create 
a single volume using all that space, you needn’t make any change. This is 
often the easiest option.
Click the Next button to display the Assign Drive Letter Or Path screen. With 
the Assign The Following Drive Letter option button selected, choose the 
letter in the drop-down list that you want to assign to the drive. The wizard 
suggests the next available letter.
6.
7.
8.
9.
note

76 
Part II: Intermediate
If you prefer, you can mount the drive in an empty folder instead of assigning it a letter. This 
means that, for example, you can make the drive appear as a folder within your user folder, 
which can be handy if you’re using the drive to store your documents or media files. To do this, 
select the Mount In The Following Empty NTFS Folder option button, click the Browse button, 
and use the resulting Browse For Drive Path dialog box to select the folder. As the option says, 
the folder must be empty, and it must be on a drive formatted with the NTFS file system (which 
both Windows Vista and Windows XP use as the default file system for hard disks).
Click the Next button to display the Format Partition screen:
Make sure the Format This Volume With The Following Settings option 
button is selected, so that the File System drop-down list shows NTFS, and 
that the Allocation Unit Size drop-down list shows Default.
Type the name you want to use for the drive in the Volume Label text box. 
You can use up to 20 characters.
Clear the Perform A Quick Format check box. This option speeds up the for-
matting at the risk of missing bad sectors in the disk. This is a risk not worth 
taking with your data.
Select the Enable File And Folder Compression check box if you want to com-
press the contents of the drive. Compressing the contents slows down the 
drive’s performance a little but enables you to store more data on the drive.
Click the Next button to reach the Completing The New Simple Volume Wizard 
screen, which summarizes the choices you have made.
Click the Finish button to close the wizard. The wizard creates the volume 
you specified. Disk Management formats the drive.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
note

Project 7: Replace Your Hard Disk—or Add Another Hard Disk  77
When the formatting is complete, Disk Management opens a Windows Ex-
plorer window showing the drive, so that you can begin using it.
Step 7: Turn Your Old Hard Disk into a Portable Disk
If you replaced your hard disk, and the reason you replaced it was because it was too 
small rather than because it had begun to lose data, you’ll probably want to reuse 
it. If you have another PC with a smaller disk, one possibility is to use the disk you 
removed to replace that PC’s disk. But what’s usually a better bet is to turn your old 
hard disk into a portable disk. To do so, all you need do is buy an enclosure and install 
the hard disk in it.
Check the Disk’s Dimensions
First, check the dimensions of the disk. The measurement given is the diameter of the 
disk’s platter, so the dimensions of the disk case are somewhat bigger. Normally, the 
measurement is written on the disk.
Buy an Enclosure
Buy a suitable enclosure. You may find one at your local electronics paradise, but 
you’ll find a better selection at online merchants such as CDW (www.cdw.com) or PC 
Connection (www.pcconnection.com).
There are three main criteria for choosing a disk enclosure:
Size Make sure the enclosure is the right size for the disk. You should also 
look for an enclosure that offers the degree of protection that you want.
2.5 inches
Most laptop hard disks are this size. (Some are 1.8 inches.)
3.5 inches
Most desktop hard disks are this size.
5.25 inches
Some desktop hard disks are this size.
Connection type The standard connection type is USB 2, which gives 
good performance as long as your PC has a USB 2 connector. (Most PCs 
built since 2004 have USB 2 connectors.) However, if your PC has FireWire 
rather than USB 2, or if you want to be able to use the drive with such  
a PC (or with a Mac), find an enclosure that offers both USB 2 and FireWire 
interfaces. They’re a little more expensive, but the convenience is usually 
worth paying for.
Power supply Small enclosures, such as those used for low-powered 
laptop disks, are usually powered by the USB bus. Large enclosures that 
run hungrier disks normally have their own power adapters—so you’ll 
probably need to plug in another “wall wart” when you use the disk.
17.
●
●
●

78 
Part II: Intermediate
Install the Drive in the Enclosure
Once you’ve bought an enclosure, installation should be straightforward. Follow 
these general steps:
Open the enclosure. You may need 
to unscrew it. The example enclosure 
came with its screws in a separate 
packet, so you can simply pop the top 
off without having to unscrew (and 
maybe lose) them.
Connect the drive’s pins to the con-
nector, making sure you get them 
aligned and keep them straight. 
(Push slowly and evenly.) If there’s a 
power connector for the drive, con-
nect it as well.
Slide the drive into the enclosure, and then close it using the screws or other 
means provided.
Connect the enclosure to the PC via USB or FireWire. If the enclosure has a 
power supply, connect that too.
Windows detects the disk and mounts it. You can then access the disk by 
choosing Start | Computer to open a Computer window showing your PC’s 
drives.
Now you should have plenty of space to store all your files. But do you have 
enough space to view them satisfactorily? Maybe you need another monitor…or sev-
eral more. Read on.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

79
Project 8
Set Up a 
Multimonitor 
Monster
What You’ll Need
Hardware: Extra monitor or monitors (required), extra graphics card 
or cards (optional), external video interface (optional)
Software: None
Cost: $100–$1500+ U.S.
T
o use a PC at all, you need a monitor—but to use your PC to the max, you may 
need two monitors…or maybe many. Most people find that the more they can 
see onscreen, the faster they can get their computing done.
Even if you’ve got a laptop, you should be able to add two or three monitors to 
it—and that’s even if it doesn’t have an external display port.
This project starts at the sane end of the spectrum by assessing your options and 
discussing how to add one more monitor to your desktop or laptop. But then the proj-
ect veers across to the enthusiast extreme—adding three monitors to a laptop and up 
to ten monitors to a desktop.
Step 1: Assess Your Options
First, figure out your options for adding monitors to your PC. If you’re lucky, your PC 
is already equipped to drive another monitor, and all you need do is connect it.
Assess What Your PC’s Graphics Card Can Manage
Your PC’s graphics card should have at least one video connector, and may have two. 
PCs use two main types of video connector for their monitors:
Analog Also called VGA or D-sub, this uses a D-shaped 15-hole socket into 
which a corresponding D-shaped 15-pin plug connects. (In “D-sub,” the D 
●
●
●
●

80 
Part II: Intermediate
stands for the D shape, and “sub” is short for “subminiature,” as other connec-
tors were even larger.) The illustration here shows a D-sub connector.
Digital Usually called DVI (for Digital Visual Interface), this uses a 29-pin 
socket and plug. The pins are split into a bank of 24 (three rows of eight pins) 
and a group of five—four pins in a square around a cross-shaped pin, as 
shown here.
Some PCs use other kinds of connectors for monitors, but D-sub and DVI are by 
far the most widely used.
Desktop PC
Many recent desktop PCs have graphics cards with two video connectors—usually 
one DVI connector and one D-sub connector, but sometimes two DVI connectors. If 
your PC has two connectors, and one is currently free, you can easily add a second 
monitor.
If the spare connector is DVI, and you want to use it to drive a monitor that has a 
D-sub connection, get a DVI-to–D-sub converter cable such as the following:
Laptop PC
Most laptop PCs have an external graphics connector that allows you to connect a 
monitor—for example, so that you can give a presentation. On high-end laptops, the 
external graphics connector is a DVI connector, but on most laptops, it’s a D-sub.
Work Out How to Add Monitors
If you have a desktop PC with a graphics card that can drive a second monitor, or if 
you have a laptop PC with an external graphics connector, you’re all set to buy that 
monitor (as discussed in the next step) and connect it.
●

Project 8: Set Up a Multimonitor Monster  81
If all your PC’s graphics connectors are already in use, you need to add another 
graphics connector:
Desktop Install another graphics card or use special hardware. See  
“Step 6: Add Serious Numbers of Monitors to a Desktop,” later in this project, 
and then return to Step 2.
Laptop Use an external-monitor PC card or other special hardware. See 
“Step 7: Add Two or More Monitors to a Laptop,” later in this project, and 
then return to Step 2.
Step 2: Find a Suitable Monitor
Buy, beg, or borrow a suitable monitor. There are three main choices: monitor type, 
size, and resolution.
Choose Between LCD and CRT
You’ll probably want to start by choosing a monitor type:
CRT (cathode ray tube) CRTs are the old-technology, TV-style monitors 
that have a large tube at the back. CRTs are inexpensive but bulky, almost all 
use an analog signal, and give a less sharp picture than LCDs. Apart from 
price, CRTs’ only advantage is being able to show a good picture at various 
different resolutions. For example, you may need to set a lower resolution to 
run some software (such as children’s educational programs).
LCD (liquid crystal display) LCDs are the newer, flatter monitors. LCDs 
are more expensive than CRTs, but prices have now fallen far enough for 
LCDs to be of better value than CRTs. LCDs come in three types: analog, 
digital, or capable of both. Digital LCDs give the best picture. Apart from 
price, LCDs’ main disadvantage is that they normally can show only one 
resolution (the native resolution) crisply; you can use other resolutions, but 
the picture becomes “blocky” and jagged.
Unless you’re certain that you will use the monitor only with an analog input, it’s usually worth 
paying the modest extra amount to get an LCD that can accept both analog and digital input.
Choose a Monitor Size
Monitors come in sizes from modest to monster. Table 8-1 lists the most common sizes 
for external monitors and the maximum resolutions they typically support.
The bigger the monitor you get, the more you’ll probably appreciate how much 
lighter LCDs are than CRTs. For example, a 21-inch CRT may well weigh 75lb, so you 
might need to reinforce your desk. By contrast, a 23-inch LCD typically weighs 20lb 
or less.
●
●
●
●
tip

82 
Part II: Intermediate
30-inch LCDs typically require a graphics card that supports dual-DVI output. These graphics 
cards are much more expensive than conventional cards.
Choose a Monitor Resolution
Along with monitor size, consider the resolution you need—the number of pixels 
(“picture elements” or dots) you want to have displayed at the same time. The greater 
the number of pixels, the more information you can see.
Different people prefer different resolutions and window sizes, but here are some 
illustrations of resolution:
At 1024×768, you can have one good-size window open or two squashed 
windows.
At 1280×1024 or (better) 1440×900, you can comfortably have two useful-size 
windows open.
At 1600×1200 resolution, you can display two letter-size (8.5×11-inch) pages 
at an easy-to-read size.
Step 3: Add a Second Monitor to a Desktop
If your desktop PC has an unused video connector, you’re all set to add a second 
monitor. Follow these steps:
Close all the applications you’re running, and then shut down Windows.
●
●
●
1.
Monitor Type
Monitor Size 
(Diagonal)
Maximum Resolutions 
(Pixels, Horizontal ë Vertical)
LCD or CRT
15 inches
1024×768
LCD or CRT
17 inches
1280×1024
LCD or CRT
19 inches
1280×1024
LCD
19 inches (widescreen)
1440×900
LCD or CRT
20 inches
1600×1200
LCD
20 inches (widescreen)
1680×1050
CRT
21 inches
1600×1200
LCD
22 inches (widescreen)
1680×1050
LCD
23 inches
1900×1200
LCD
24 inches
1900×1200
LCD
30 inches
2560×1600
Table 8-1 Common Monitor Sizes and Resolutions
caution

Project 8: Set Up a Multimonitor Monster  83
On many modern PCs, you can hot-plug a monitor—that is, plug it in while the PC is running. 
However, some PCs are not capable of hot-plugging monitors, so unless you know that your PC is 
capable of hot-plugging, it is usually best to shut down the PC before connecting another monitor.
Connect the second monitor to the unused connector on your video card. 
Use a DVI-to–D-sub cable if needed.
Turn the PC on. As Windows loads, it detects the new monitor.
Once you’ve logged in, Windows may open the Display Settings dialog box 
for you to arrange the monitors. Skip ahead to “Step 5, Tell Windows Where 
Your Monitors Are.”
Step 4: Add a Second Monitor to a Laptop
This section describes how to add a second monitor to your laptop by using the ex-
ternal graphics connector. If your laptop doesn’t have an external graphics connector, 
you’ll need a more expensive solution. Go to the section “Step 7: Add Two or More 
Monitors to a Laptop,” later in this project.
To add a second monitor to your laptop, follow these steps:
With the laptop running, connect the monitor to the laptop’s graphics con-
nector and to a power supply.
Turn the monitor on. If Windows notices the monitor, it displays the New 
Display Detected dialog box, shown here. When this happens, Windows 
may change the resolution of your laptop’s screen to match the resolution it 
uses on the external monitor. As a result, your laptop’s screen may go fuzzy. 
Don’t worry; this is only temporary.
2.
3.
4.
1.
2.
note

84 
Part II: Intermediate
Select the appropriate option button:
Duplicate My Desktop On All Displays (Mirrored) Select this option 
button if you want the external monitor to show the same picture as your 
laptop’s screen. You’d choose this setting when giving a presentation on 
an external monitor, but it’s no use for getting more screen real estate.
Show Different Parts Of My Desktop On Each Display (Extended) Se-
lect this option button if you want to use both the laptop’s screen and the 
external monitor. This is the choice you’ll usually make. When you select 
this option button, Windows displays the Extend Your Desktop controls 
in the upper-right corner of the New Display Detected dialog box. Select 
the Right option button if the external monitor is positioned to the right 
of your laptop; select the Left option button if the external monitor is to 
your laptop’s left.
Show My Desktop On The External Display Only Select this option 
button if you want to use the external monitor but not your laptop’s 
screen. This setting is useful if your laptop’s screen is much smaller than 
the external display, or if you’re connecting an external keyboard and 
mouse to your laptop and using it as if it were a desktop PC.
Click the Apply button. Windows applies the settings. If your laptop screen 
went fuzzy in step 2, the sharpness should return now if you selected the 
Show Different Parts Of My Desktop On Each Display (Extended) option 
button.
Click the OK button. Windows closes the New Display Detected dialog box.
Step 5: Tell Windows Where Your Monitors Are
Once you’ve installed your monitors, make sure that Windows knows how many 
monitors there are and where they are positioned relative to each other. Follow these 
steps:
Right-click the Desktop and choose Personalize. Windows displays the Per-
sonalization window.
Click the Display Settings link near the bottom of the window. Windows 
displays the Display Settings dialog box, which shows the monitors of which 
Windows is aware:
3.
●
●
●
4.
5.
1.
2.

Project 8: Set Up a Multimonitor Monster  85
In the Drag The Icons To Match Your Monitors box, drag the monitor icons to 
show Windows where your monitors are positioned. For example, if you’ve 
positioned your second monitor to the left of the first monitor rather than to 
its right (as in the illustration), drag the monitor marked 2 so that it is posi-
tioned to the left of the monitor marked 1.
If you need to tell Windows which of the monitors is your primary monitor, 
click the monitor, and then select the This Is My Main Monitor check box. The 
main monitor is the monitor on which Windows displays the Start menu.
If Windows has disabled one of the monitors, and you want to enable that 
monitor, click the monitor, and then select the Extend The Desktop Onto This 
Monitor check box.
To change the resolution for a monitor, click the monitor, and then drag the 
Resolution slider along the Low–High axis.
When you’re ready to apply the settings you’ve chosen, click the Apply but-
ton. Windows applies the settings and then opens the Display Settings mes-
sage box to ask if you want to keep the settings.
Click the Yes button if you want to keep the settings. If you want to revert to 
the previous settings, either click the No button or wait for the timer at the 
bottom of the message box to count down to zero seconds, at which point 
Windows reapplies your previous display settings.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

86 
Part II: Intermediate
After positioning the monitors in the Display Settings dialog box, move the mouse pointer from 
one monitor to another to make sure the mouse pointer travels in a straight line rather than 
jinking up, down, or sideways as it moves to the other monitor. If your monitors are different sizes, 
you’ll often need to adjust their horizontal or vertical placement to get a straight transition.
When you’ve finished choosing monitor settings, click the OK button. If there 
are any unapplied changes, Windows applies them and then opens the Dis-
play Settings dialog box to make sure the screen looks okay. If there are no 
unapplied changes, Windows simply closes the Display Settings dialog box.
Step 6: Add Serious Numbers of Monitors to a Desktop
Two monitors are enough for most mortals, but if you’re one of the folks who has 
no wish to be mortal, there’s no need to confine yourself to two monitors. Windows 
lets you add up to ten monitors to your PC—assuming you have enough connectors, 
monitors, and desk space.
You have two main choices for adding extra monitors to a desktop PC: by adding 
conventional graphics cards or by using special hardware.
9.
Identify the Different Slots on Your Motherboard
Your PC’s motherboard may contain any of three different types of slots that 
can accept a graphics card:
AGP Aperture Graphics Port is a widely used technology for graph-
ics cards. Normally, a PC has only one AGP slot. If this slot is already 
in use, you need to add another type of graphics card—for example, 
PCI. AGP slots are normally colored brown. Most AGP cards have a 
locking tab at the end of the card that goes toward the middle of the 
PC, as shown in the lower-right corner here:
●
tip

Project 8: Set Up a Multimonitor Monster  87
Add Graphics Cards to Your PC
The conventional way to add extra monitors is to install extra graphics cards in your 
PC. Provided that the cards all work together with your motherboard and Windows 
to create an extended desktop, you can then connect a monitor to each graphics-card 
connector you want to use. You then have a multiple-monitor desktop.
To add extra graphics cards, follow these general steps:
Shut down Windows.
Disconnect the cables from your PC.
Open the case on the side opposite the motherboard.
1.
2.
3.
PCI Peripheral Component Interconnect is a widely used technol-
ogy for connecting various PC components, including graphics cards, 
network cards, and sound cards. PCI graphics cards are not as fast as 
AGP graphics cards but can work alongside AGP graphics cards. PCI 
slots are often colored white. The following illustration shows a PCI 
card:
PCI Express PCI Express is a newer technology for connecting pow-
erful graphics cards. PCI Express slots are different lengths, depend-
ing on the version of PCI Express, and are usually colored yellow.
Motherboard configurations vary widely, so it’s a good idea to consult 
your PC’s manual to determine which types of slots the motherboard con-
tains. If one of them is an AGP or PCI Express slot, you should also check the 
version used—for example, AGP 4X or PCI Express x16—so that you can get a 
compatible graphics card.
●
●

88 
Part II: Intermediate
Touch part of the case to discharge any static electricity that you have 
built up.
Locate an unused slot on the motherboard, insert a card of the appropriate 
type, and then fasten it with a screw. (See the sidebar “Identify the Differ-
ent Slots on Your Motherboard” for information on identifying the different 
types of slots.)
Close the PC’s case.
Reconnect the cables to your PC.
Restart the PC.
Use Special Hardware to Add Extra Monitors
If you’ve already installed as many graphics cards as your PC will take, or if for other 
reasons you need to take an alternative approach, you can install special hardware that 
enables you to use extra monitors without installing extra graphics cards in your PC.
If you need the extra monitors, evaluate products such as the following:
Zenview Digital Tigers’ Zenview series ranges from dual-monitor setups 
to eight-monitor arrangements. Prices start at $749 and go impressively high. 
See the Digital Tigers website (www.digitaltigers.com/multi-monitors.shtml) 
for details.
X-Top 9X Media’s X-Top series provides a huge variety of multimonitor 
configurations, ranging from two-monitor models (starting at about $1500) 
to complete video walls (which cost five figures). See the 9X Media website 
(www.9xmedia.com) for details.
Step 7: Add Two or More Monitors to a Laptop
To add two or more monitors to a laptop, you need to use special hardware. As you 
might expect, such hardware is expensive, so it’s suitable only for those who must use 
a laptop rather than a desktop—for example, because they travel—but who also need 
to have more screen real estate than a laptop, plus one external monitor, can provide. 
Figure 8-1 shows a typical arrangement using an external video interface.
If you need to add two or more monitors to a laptop, evaluate products such as 
the following:
VTBook VTBook from Village Tronic (www.villagetronic.com/vtbook/ 
index.html) is an external video interface for laptops. VTBook lets you add 
one or two extra monitors to your laptop, so you can have up to four monitors 
total: your laptop’s own screen, a monitor connected to the laptop’s external 
graphics port, and either one or two monitors connected to the VTBook. 
VTBook costs around $249.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
●
●
●

Project 8: Set Up a Multimonitor Monster  89
DualHead2Go and TripleHead2Go DualHead2Go and TripleHead2Go 
from Matrox (www.matrox.com/graphics/en/home.php) are external video 
interfaces that let you connect two or three monitors (respectively) to your 
laptop. DualHead2Go and TripleHead2Go connect to your laptop via the 
external graphics port; you then connect the monitors to the Matrox device. 
DualHead2Go and TripleHead2Go each come in an analog version and a 
digital version. Prices range from $169 for DualHead2Go Analog Edition to 
$299 for TripleHead2Go Digital Edition.
Unlike VTBook and SideCar, DualHead2Go and TripleHead2Go are driven by your laptop’s video 
card, so before you buy either product, make sure that your laptop’s video card is powerful 
enough to drive the external monitors at the resolution you want. Go to www.matrox.com/ 
graphics/en/home.php, click the Support Center tab, click the GXM System Compatibility 
Wizard link under Support Options, and then follow the wizard steps.
SideCar SideCar from Digital Tigers (www.digitaltigers.com/sidecar 
.shtml) is an external video interface for laptops. You connect SideCar to 
your laptop via the PC Card slot, and then connect the monitors to SideCar. 
SideCar models start at $1299 for a model that adds two analog displays to 
your laptop’s existing display or displays (giving three or four displays total) 
and go up to $1999 for a model that adds four digital displays (giving five or 
six displays total).
By now, you should at last be seeing enough of what’s on your computer—or on 
the Internet. But what if you want to see what’s on your other computers? Turn the 
page. It’s time to network your home.
●
●
caution
Figure 8-1  
You can add extra 
monitors to a laptop by 
using an external video 
interface.
One monitor connected
to the laptop’s external
graphics connector
External video interface
with two monitors
connected

90
Project 9
Build a Wired 
Network in Your 
Home
What You’ll Need
Hardware: Switch, cables, reel of cable (optional), cable crimper  
(optional), punch-down tool (optional), cable stripper (optional), cable 
tacker (optional)
Software: Windows Vista or Windows XP
Cost: $50–300 U.S.
T
his project shows you how to create a wired network in your house or other 
dwelling so that your PCs can communicate with each other and share your In-
ternet connection. A wired network can transmit large amounts of data quickly 
and reliably and requires no maintenance once you have set it up. Installing the net-
work takes some time and effort, but you will find that the usefulness and convenience 
of the network will repay these soon enough.
Time and effort…you may be wondering whether you should set up a wired net-
work or take the easier route and set up a wireless network. I recommend that you 
choose a wired Ethernet network, because it is far faster and far more secure than a 
wireless network, and once you have installed the cables and other equipment, the 
network normally will run without trouble for several years. However, if you are still 
undecided, read through this project and then read Project 17, which explains how to 
set up a wireless network for home use, and then make your decision.
Step 1: Choose Hardware for a Wired Network
If you’re lucky enough—or organized enough—to keep all your PCs in the same 
room, and you don’t mind having cables in view, you can set up a wired network 
in minutes by connecting each PC and your Internet router to a switch. More likely, 
though, your network will be more extensive than this, either now or in the future. So 
this project shows you how to get cables discreetly from room to room and from floor 
to floor. Figure 9-1 shows an example of such a network, with dashed lines showing 
●
●
●

Project 9: Build a Wired Network in Your Home  91
approximately where hidden cables run. You will use some or all of the equipment 
shown, as discussed in the following sections.
Network Switch
The switch forms the center point of your network. This is the device into which you 
plug the cables that connect the PCs and other devices to the network. Figure 9-2 
shows an eight-port Gigabit Ethernet switch.
Normally, you should buy a switch that has enough ports to connect not only all 
of your current computers and network devices but also any others that you may buy 
in the foreseeable future.
Figure 9-2  
The switch is the device 
at the center of the 
network into which 
you plug the Ethernet 
cables.
Figure 9-1  
If your PCs are in 
different rooms, you 
need to run cables from 
room to room.
Internet
ADSL or
Cable Router
Switch
Printer
Desktop PC
Desktop PC
Laptop PC
Laptop PC

92 
Part II: Intermediate
You can connect one switch to another easily enough, but each switch still re-
quires its own power supply. So having, say, one 16-port switch is a neater solution 
than having two 8-port switches—at least, assuming that you want to have all the 
ports in the same place. If you need to have one set of ports in one room (or area of 
your home) and another set in a separate room, having two separate switches will be 
much easier, as you will be able to connect the PCs and other devices to each switch 
with short cables rather than needing to use longer cables.
You can also use a hub instead of a switch, but there’s no point in doing so unless you already 
have an old hub that you want to reuse. Hubs are slower than switches, and whereas they used 
to be substantially less expensive, now they are only marginally less expensive at best. (FYI, 
“switch” is actually short for “switching hub”—in other words, a switch is a smarter kind of hub 
that switches data from one port to another.)
Cables
Cables carry the Ethernet data from each PC to the switch, and vice versa. You also 
normally connect other devices, such as your cable or ADSL router or your printer, to 
the network with cables.
Computer stores offer precut cables in various lengths, including 30 meters 
(100 feet) or longer. These cables already have a network connector at each end, so 
you can plug one end into your PC’s network adapter, plug the other into a port on 
the switch, and be in business.
Simply buying long cables lets you create a network throughout the house with-
out much effort. The drawback is that the network connector on the end of the cable 
is substantially larger than the cable itself, so when you need to pass the connector 
through a baseboard, wall, or floor, you must drill a much larger hole than the cable 
itself would need.
Depending on the laws where you live, you may need to follow building codes or fire regulations 
when running cables around your dwelling.
If you’re prepared to drill (and perhaps then fill) these holes, creating a network 
with precut cables is quite viable. But normally, your best option is to buy a reel of ca-
ble, and then cut from it the lengths that you need. If you’re creating a network of any 
size, the reel of cable will work out to be less expensive than buying individual cables; 
and if you also buy RJ-45 plugs and a crimping tool, you can also create patch cables, 
shorter cables for connecting the computers to the wall plates (discussed next).
Buy Category 5E Cable or Category 6 Cable
The cable comes in different categories that set standards for the cable’s perfor-
mance. What you should normally buy is either Category 5 Enhanced (“Cat 5E”) 
or Category 6 (“Cat 6”) cable. Either of these cable types will handle both Fast 
Ethernet (100 Mbps) and Gigabit Ethernet (up to 1 Gbps) speeds—plenty even 
for streaming video. Cat 5E is fine for Gigabit Ethernet networks, but having Cat 6 
cable may allow faster data rates with other technologies in the future.
note
caution

Project 9: Build a Wired Network in Your Home  93
Wall Plates
When you bring a cable into another room, you can simply crimp an Ethernet connec-
tor onto the end, and then plug that connector into your PC. But what’s neater and 
more flexible is to use a wall plate, a plate or box that attaches to the wall and contains 
one or more Ethernet sockets. You then plug an Ethernet cable into the wall plate and 
into your PC. Because you can use different lengths of Ethernet cable, you can place 
the PC wherever you need it in the room.
You can buy wall plates with a single socket, two sockets, four sockets, and so on. 
Figure 9-3 shows a four-socket wall plate with cables plugged into two sockets. Each 
socket requires its own cable running to the wall plate and back to the switch—you 
can’t share cables among the sockets. You can leave surplus sockets unconnected if you 
don’t need them for the time being, but given the effort you’re probably putting into ca-
bling the network, connecting them all at the same time normally makes most sense.
Raceways or Conduits
Where you need to run a cable along a baseboard or floorboard, you have two main 
choices: To simply tack it down using clips or staples, or to enclose it in a raceway, an 
enclosure that protects the cable and keeps it aligned. Raceways are good for keep-
ing cables neat and hidden, especially when you’re running several cables parallel to 
each other for a distance.
If you need to run a cable anywhere that it needs protection from the elements 
or wildlife, you can use a conduit. Conduits come in different types, but what you’ll 
typically need is a kind of pipe or tube that shields the cable from where it enters the 
conduit at one end to where it emerges at the other end. For example, if you need to 
route a cable out through the wall of your house, around a corner, and then down 
into the basement, you can use a flexible plastic conduit that runs from one hole in 
the wall to the other.
Tools
For working with cable, you need some or all of the following tools, depending on 
exactly how much cabling you are doing.
Figure 9-3  
A wall plate provides 
one or more Ethernet 
sockets, much like a 
telephone socket.

94 
Part II: Intermediate
You may also need an electric drill, sheet-rock saw, hammer, and other standard do-it-yourself 
tools. Wire cutters will cut cable easily, but so will strong scissors or a sharp pocket-knife. If you 
are looking to pull many cables inside walls or under carpets, also consider getting a wire snake, 
a flexible but protective guide that helps you steer the cables from their insertion point to where 
you want them to appear.
Punch-down Tool
If you are using wall plates, you need a punch-down tool to connect the wires of each 
Ethernet cable to the connectors in the wall plate. Figure 9-4 shows a punch-down 
tool.
Cable Tester
A cable tester is a device that allows you to ensure that a cable is connected correctly. 
The tester passes a signal along the cable to verify that all the wires are connected as 
they should be and that there aren’t any breaks. The most useful cable testers include 
a detachable unit that you can use remotely, plugging it into one end of a cable run 
so that you can use the larger part of the device at the other end to test the cable in 
between. Figure 9-5 shows this kind of cable tester.
Cable Stripper
To remove the plastic sheath from an Ethernet cable easily and without damaging the 
insulation on the wires inside, buy a cable stripper. Figure 9-6 shows an example.
note
Figure 9-4  
A punch-down tool is 
vital for connecting the 
wires in a cable to the 
connectors in a wall 
plate.
Figure 9-5  
A cable tester with a 
detachable unit lets 
you test either a run of 
cable or a patch cable 
easily.

Project 9: Build a Wired Network in Your Home  95
Crimping Tool
If you plan to create your own Ethernet cables, buy a crimping tool (see Figure 9-7), 
a drop-in die for RJ45 plugs, and a supply of RJ45 plugs for shielded twisted pair 
(STP) cable. You can then crimp a plug onto each end of a length of cable quickly 
and easily (after some fiddling to get the cables into order and alignment). 
Cable Tacker
If you need to secure cables quickly to baseboards, floorboards, beams, or other wooden 
objects, consider buying a cable tacker (also called a cable stapler) such as the one shown 
in Figure 9-8. Alternatively, you can use plastic clips and a small hammer.
Figure 9-6  
A cable stripper helps 
you remove the plastic 
sheath from an Ethernet 
cable. Make sure yours 
has an adjustable blade 
so that you can get the 
cut depth right.
Figure 9-7  
A crimping tool lets 
you create your own 
Ethernet cables, saving 
money over premade 
cables.
Figure 9-8  
With a cable tacker, you 
can staple down cables 
quickly and securely.

96 
Part II: Intermediate
Step 2: Make Sure the PCs Have Network Adapters
First, make sure that each of the PCs that will connect to the network has a network 
adapter. In these days of widely available broadband Internet connections, it is now hard 
to buy a PC that doesn’t have a network adapter. But if your network will include PCs that 
are several years old or more, you may find that you need to add a network adapter.
The best way to add a network adapter to a desktop PC is by opening the case and 
installing a PCI network card. If you have a spare Fast Ethernet PCI card lying around 
from an old PC, use that. Otherwise, buy a new Gigabit Ethernet PCI card.
If you’re unwilling or unable to open your PC’s case, or if it doesn’t have a spare 
PCI slot to accommodate a network card, your main alternative is to connect a net-
work adapter via USB. This is not such a good choice because USB is not fast enough 
for the fastest network connections even if the full bandwidth of the USB bus is avail-
able. (Normally the USB bus is carrying other signals as well—for example, from 
your keyboard or mouse to the PC.) However, a USB network connection is quite 
viable unless you simply must have the very fastest network speeds possible over a 
Gigabit Ethernet network.
For a laptop PC, the easiest solution is usually a PC Card or ExpressCard network 
adapter. Again, look for a Gigabit Ethernet card unless you already have a Fast Eth-
ernet card you want to reuse. If neither of these options is available (for example, be-
cause you keep the PC Card slot occupied with another card), you can also use USB.
Step 3: Assess Your Hardware Needs  
for the Network—and Then Buy
Next, work out what you’ll need for the network. Follow these general steps:
Draw a diagram of your home and mark where each of the PCs in the net-
work will be.
Mark where you will place a wall plate with a connection for each PC or 
other network device. For example, if you will use a cable or ADSL router, 
that will need a connection to the network too. So will a network printer on 
which each PC can print.
Decide where you will place the switch (or switches).
Figure out where you will need to run the cables for the network and how 
many cables you will need to run to each point.
Establish which tools you need to buy.
With your needs established, you’re now ready to buy the equipment for the net-
work. A large computer store or a networking specialist will let you see the equipment 
before you buy, which will help you decide between competing products, especially 
if the staff is knowledgeable enough to provide useful advice. Alternatively, you will 
find plenty of online stores that sell networking equipment—often at good prices.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Project 9: Build a Wired Network in Your Home  97
Step 4: Pull Cables Wherever They Need to Go
The next step is to pull cables from the location of your switch to each of the points at 
which you want to place a wall plate. Exactly what this step entails depends on your 
house or dwelling, the materials from which it is constructed, and where you’re put-
ting the cables. But chances are that you will need to route some cables from one room 
to another or between floors.
Exercise extreme caution when drilling holes in the wall, floor, or ceiling. If you don’t have a tool 
for detecting electric cables and pipes in walls or floors, now is a good time to invest in one.
Here are three tips that apply to almost all types of cabling:
Run the cable before cutting it If you can run the cable without having 
to cut it, do so, because being able to adjust the cable length easily to cir-
cumvent unforeseen obstacles can save you a great deal of time, effort, and 
wasted cable.
Pull plenty of cable If you need to cut the cable—for example, so that you 
can pass it through a hole in a wall or a floor—allow plenty of extra cable 
to get around unexpected snags and to give you enough cable to route and 
punch down at the far end. If you end up with a cable that is several feet too 
long, you can cut the surplus length off and turn it into a patch cable. But 
if you end up with a cable that’s several feet too short, you will either need 
to adapt the network design on the fly or redo the whole run with a longer 
cable.
Treat the cable gently Try to avoid folding the cables or putting sharp 
bends in them, as doing so can reduce the speed at which they transmit data. 
When pulling cable through a wall or along a conduit, have someone feed 
the cable in at the other end to reduce the tension on the cable. Rather than 
pulling cable around two corners in a single action, pull it around the first 
corner, and then pull it around the second.
Running a cable down through a floorboard (or out through a baseboard), through the basement, 
and then back up into another room can be an easy way to get from room to room.
Step 5: Punch Down the Cables
Once you’ve pulled the cables to their destinations, punch them down into the wall 
plates. Follow these steps:
If the wall plate is the kind that attaches to a box (sometimes called a wall 
wart), punch a hole in the box, and then poke the cable through it. If the plate 
covers a hole in the wall, you don’t need to take this step.
If the cable is much too long, cut it down to length.
●
●
●
1.
2.
caution
tip

98 
Part II: Intermediate
Using a cable stripper, strip off the plastic cover from the last one-and-a-half 
inches of the cable to give yourself enough wire to work with.
Remove the connector block from the back of the wall plate, and then ar-
range the wires carefully in the slots on the block, as shown in Figure 9-9, 
following the guide in Table 9-1.
Two wiring standards are widely used for Ethernet cables. The standard shown in this section is 
called T568A and is considered technically superior to the other standard, T568B, because it has 
better backward compatibility. The difference between the two standards is that the pin positions 
of the orange pair of wires and the green pair of wires are reversed. Both standards work fine as 
long as you make sure that each cable uses only one standard: each end of the cable must be 
connected in the same way, so the easiest approach is to choose one standard and stay with it.
Starting with the first wire, align the punch-down tool with its trimming 
blades on the outside of the connector, and then press it down firmly. The 
punch-down tool pushes the wire into its slot, so that it makes contact with 
the blades on either side, and trims off any excess length of wire.
3.
4.
5.
caution
Pin #
Wire Color
Pin #
Wire Color
  1
White/green
  5
White/blue
  2
Green
  6
Orange
  3
White/orange
  7
White/brown
  4
Blue
  8
Brown
Table 9-1 Wiring Diagram for RJ45 in the T568A Standard
Figure 9-9  
Arrange the wires in 
the connector block, 
and then punch them 
down.
Pin 4: Blue
Pin 6: Orange
Pin 8: Brown
Pin 7: White/brown
Pin 5: White/blue
Pin 3: White/orange
Pin 1: White/green
Pin 2: Green

Project 9: Build a Wired Network in Your Home  99
Once you’ve finished punching down a cable, install the connector block in 
the wall plate.
When you’ve punched down all the cables for a wall plate, screw the wall 
plate into place.
Step 6: Test the Cables
Once you’ve punched down a run of cable, test it with the cable tester to make sure 
that it is working:
Find (or create) two Ethernet patch cables, and then test them with the cable 
tester.
Connect the remote end of the cable tester to one end of a run of cable. If that 
end terminates in a wall plate, connect the tester’s end using one of the patch 
cables.
Connect the main part of the cable tester to the other end of the run. Again, if 
that end terminates in a wall plate, use a patch cable to connect the tester.
Press the button on the tester, and verify that the tester shows a good con-
nection.
If the cable tester shows a problem with the cable, follow these steps:
Check that the ends of the cable are correctly punched down or crimped.
Punch down or crimp each end again if necessary. Normally, the problem 
will be an incomplete connection. If you’ve crimped an RJ45 connector onto 
the cable, cut it off, strip a new section of cable, and then crimp on another 
RJ45 connector.
Test the cable again. If you still do not have a connection, and you’re sure 
the cable is correctly punched down or crimped, you may need to replace 
the cable.
Step 7: Connect the Switch
When the cables are working, connect the cables to the switch at the center of your 
network. If you have two or more switches in the network, you need to connect them 
to each other. In some switches, you must use an uplink port, a port that’s specially 
designed for connecting to another switch rather than to another network device. The 
uplink port may be a separate port or one of the regular ports with a switch to change 
it between regular mode and uplink mode. Read the switch’s documentation to find 
out whether you need to use an uplink port. Some switches have auto-sensing ports 
that allow you to link to any port.
6.
7.
1.
2.
3.
4.
1.
2.
3.

100
Part II: Intermediate
Step 8: Set Your Router to Assign  
IP Addresses via DHCP
When you connect each of your PCs and other network devices to the network, each 
must have an IP address that’s unique on the network. The IP address allows the 
PCs and devices on the network to identify each other and transmit data to the right 
place.
The easiest way to assign IP addresses is to have your router assign them auto-
matically by using Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP). When a PC or de-
vice starts up, it looks for a DHCP server, a computer or device allocating IP addresses. 
The PC or device requests an IP address from the DHCP server and then uses that IP 
address until you shut it down. (And after you shut it down, the DHCP server marks 
the IP address as being available for use by another computer or device.)
Your router may already be set up to assign IP addresses via DHCP. To find out, 
connect a PC to your router following the instructions that come with the router. (For 
example, you may need to connect directly via a USB cable or via an Ethernet cable 
through a network switch.) Then access the configuration screens for the router and find 
the means for allocating IP addresses. If necessary, change this setting to use DHCP.
DHCP works well for most small networks, but in some circumstances, you may find that you need 
to assign IP addresses manually. For example, if you run your own web server or FTP server on your 
network, you may need to direct incoming requests for web pages or FTP files to a particular PC. 
In this case, assigning a fixed IP address to that PC makes directing the incoming requests much 
easier. Consult your router’s documentation for instructions on which IP addresses you can assign.
Step 9: Connect Your PCs and Other Devices
Now connect your PCs and other devices to the network:
If you have used wall plates, connect one end of an Ethernet cable to a wall 
plate and the other end to the Ethernet connector on the PC or device.
If you have used cables that end in Ethernet plugs, simply insert a plug in the 
Ethernet connector on the PC or device.
Step 10: Tell Windows to Get an IP Address via DHCP
When you connect your PCs to the network and power them on, you may find that 
Windows automatically requests an IP address from your router via DHCP. The easi-
est way to tell is by opening Internet Explorer and seeing if it’s able to load a web 
page. If so, you’re all set. If not, you may need to change the PC’s network configura-
tion to make Windows get an IP address via DHCP, as described next.
●
●
note

Project 9: Build a Wired Network in Your Home  101
Set Windows Vista to Get an IP Address via DHCP
To set Windows Vista to get an IP address via DHCP, follow these steps:
Click the Start button, right-click the Network item, and choose Properties to 
open a Network And Sharing Center window.
Click the Manage Network Connections link in the Tasks list on the left of the 
window to display the Network Connections window.
Right-click the Local Area Connection item and choose Properties to display 
the Local Area Connection Properties dialog box. Unless you have turned off 
User Account Control, you need to go through User Account Control for the 
Network Connections program.
In the This Connection Uses The Following Items list box, double-click the 
Internet Protocol Version 4 (TCP/IPv4) item to display the Internet Protocol 
Version 4 (TCP/IPv4) Properties dialog box.
Select the Obtain An IP Address Automatically option button.
Select the Obtain DNS Server Address Automatically option button.
Click the OK button to close each dialog box, and then click the Close button 
(the × button) to close the Network Connections window.
Step 11: Share Files Using the Public Folder
Windows Vista comes equipped with folders for sharing files with other users of your 
PC or of your network. You may need to change settings on these folders to allow all 
users of the network to access them. When sharing files among the PCs on the net-
work, you will probably want to share a folder on a PC that you keep running most of 
the time. (You can share one or more folders from any PC, but as soon as the PC goes 
to sleep, or you turn it off, those folders become unavailable.)
One way of making sure your shared files are available all the time is to have a server, a PC or device 
that you run all the time. See “Step 4: Set Up a Media Server for Your Household” in Project 13.
To make Windows Vista’s Public folder available to all network users, follow 
these steps:
Click the Start button, right-click the Network item, and choose Properties to 
open a Network And Sharing Center window (see Figure 9-10).
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
1.
note

102
Part II: Intermediate
Click the down-arrow button on the Public Folder Sharing line to display the 
options.
Select the Turn On Sharing So Anyone With Network Access Can Open, 
Change, And Create Files option button if you want other network users to 
be able to work with files in the shared folder. If you want to let them view 
the files but not change them, select the Turn On Sharing So Anyone With 
Network Access Can Open Files option button.
Click the Apply button, and then go through User Account Control for the 
Network And Sharing Center program (if you are using User Account Con-
trol). Windows applies the sharing.
Click the Close button to close the Network And Sharing Center window.
Windows Vista sometimes loses track of shared Public folders. If this happens, try restarting the 
PC that’s sharing the Public folder that has vanished. If that doesn’t help, try restarting the PC 
that’s unable to see the shared folder.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Figure 9-10  
Use the Sharing And 
Discovery controls in 
the Network And  
Sharing Center window 
to share your PC’s 
Public folder with other 
users of your network.
note

Project 9: Build a Wired Network in Your Home  103
Step 12: Connect to a Shared Folder
Once you’ve shared a folder from one PC, you can connect another PC to it easily. 
To connect to a shared folder in Windows Vista, follow these steps:
Choose Start | Network to open a Network window showing all the PCs on 
the network.
Double-click the PC whose shared items you want to view. Windows Ex-
plorer displays those items, as in this example:
Double-click the folder you want to open. In the example shown, you would 
double-click the SharedDocs folder.
1.
2.
3.

104
Part II: Intermediate
Map a Drive to a Network Folder
If you want to use the same network folder frequently, you can map a drive 
letter to it. Windows then establishes the drive mapping each time you log 
on, and you can access the folder via its drive letter directly from a Computer 
window. To map a drive to a network folder, follow these steps:
Using the instructions earlier in this section, open a Windows Explorer 
window, and then navigate so that the window shows the folder you 
want to map.
Right-click the folder in the main part of the window and choose Map 
Network Drive to display the Map Network Drive dialog box (shown 
here). Windows automatically enters the network path to the folder in 
the Folder text box.
In the Drive drop-down list, Windows automatically assigns the last 
unused letter of the alphabet—Z first, X if Z is used, and so on. You 
can choose another letter if you prefer.
Make sure the Reconnect At Logon check box is selected.
Click the Finish button. Windows maps the drive to the network folder.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

105
Project 10
Recover from 
Windows 
Disasters with 
Knoppix
What You’ll Need
Hardware: USB key or USB drive (optional)
Software: Knoppix
Cost: Free to $10 U.S.
S
ometimes Windows disagrees with itself—badly. Or with your PC’s hardware. 
Or with its horoscope. Or maybe it gets a virus, Trojan horse, or other malware. 
Or your antivirus program decides it simply doesn’t like you anymore. When 
one of these problems happens, you may find that you can no longer start Windows 
as usual. That means you can’t access any of your files—your documents…your pic-
tures…your videos…not even your e-mail messages.
To get Windows working again, you may need to repair it or reinstall it in a differ-
ent folder. That can bring problems of its own, because you may not be able to access 
the files within your user account. So before you mess with your PC, you should make 
a copy of all the files you value so that they’re safe even if the problems Windows is 
suffering turn out to be really bad.
This project shows you how to use Knoppix to copy those files to the safety of 
either a USB key or USB drive or a network drive. The project also shows you how to 
connect to the Internet so that you can download Windows updates, drivers, or other 
files you need to fix Windows.
Your copy of Windows may never suffer a disaster such as those described in this project—or it 
may suffer such a disaster tomorrow. To be prepared for such a disaster, read this project today 
and work through Steps 2 and 3, which show you how to get Knoppix, burn it to CD, and then run 
it. You can then store your Knoppix CD away safely with your other troubleshooting tools, ready 
for trouble—whether it strikes on your PC or that of a family member, friend, or colleague.
●
●
●
note

106
Part 1I: Intermediate
Step 1: Understand What Knoppix Can Do
Knoppix is one of the many different distributions of the Linux operating system. 
Like many other Linux distributions, you can either download Knoppix for free or 
order a CD or DVD for little more than the cost of the media and shipping.
Knoppix is what’s called a live distribution of Linux. That means that Knoppix 
boots directly from the CD or DVD in your PC’s optical drive without you having to 
install it to your PC’s hard disk. Booting from the optical drive has several advantages, 
including not changing the contents of the hard disk and being able to work when 
the hard disk (or its boot sector) is out of service. (There are also disadvantages, such 
as needing to access the optical drive whenever the operating system needs more 
instructions—but when you’re recovering from a disaster, this price is easy enough 
to pay.)
Knoppix is modest in its hardware requirements, needing only 128MB of RAM to 
run all its features. But as usual with operating systems, the more RAM, the merrier: 
Knoppix will run better, and you can even load the operating system into RAM to 
make it run faster and to free up your PC’s optical drive.
Knoppix is a full operating system and even includes the OpenOffice.org program 
suite (which includes a word processor, a spreadsheet program, and a presentations 
program), so it can take care of most of your computing needs. However, in this proj-
ect we look only at how to use Knoppix to recover files from a Windows computer 
that’s having problems.
Step 2: Download Knoppix and Burn Your Recovery CD
First, download the latest version of Knoppix and burn it to CD.
If you have a slow Internet connection, you may prefer to order a Knoppix CD or DVD from a 
vendor such as On-Disk.com (http://on-disk.com). You’ll find a full list of these vendors on the 
Knoppix web site. The cost is typically around $10 U.S. including delivery.
Download the Latest Knoppix CD
Steer your web browser to the Knoppix web site (www.knoppix.com), and then click 
the Download link. This link takes you to a page where you can choose to download 
Knoppix via BitTorrent or Emule or via HTTP or FTP from a mirror site. (A mirror site is 
a site that hosts files on behalf of other web sites to make them more widely available.)
There are two main distributions of Knoppix: a CD distribution (which is the one 
you most likely want) and a DVD distribution, which is far larger and contains many 
more programs and tools. Unless you have an extremely fast Internet connection, 
downloading the DVD distribution will take all night, whereas you should be able to 
download the CD distribution via a DSL or cable connection in less than two hours.
The Knoppix distribution file you want probably has a name that looks like this: 
KNOPPIX_V5.1.1CD-2007-01-04-EN.iso. Here, 5.1 is the version number; the file is 
for one CD and is an ISO image for creating a CD; and the language is English (EN). 
tip

Project 10: Recover from Windows Disasters with Knoppix  107
The file size of the ISO file will be 700MB or a bit less, because 700MB is the amount 
of data that fits on a standard recordable CD. (If the web site’s directory is crammed 
with files, the file size can be a useful identifier.)
When you click the link to download the disk image, Internet Explorer may dis-
play a dialog box asking if you want to save the file or find a program online to open 
it. Click the Save button, and then choose where to save the file—preferably in a 
folder on your PC’s hard drive so that you can easily burn it to CD.
When Internet Explorer displays the Download Complete dialog box, click the 
Open Folder button to open the folder containing the Knoppix disk image.
Burn the Knoppix Disk Image to CD
Next, burn the Knoppix disk image to CD. How you do this depends on the burning 
software installed on your computer. For example, if you have the widely distributed 
Roxio DigitalMedia LE, click the Copy button, click the Burn Image item below it, 
choose the disk image on the screen, and then click the Burn Image button.
If your PC doesn’t have a program for burning disk images to CD or DVD, have a look at ISO 
Recorder (http://isorecorder.alexfeinman.com/isorecorder.htm), donationware (if you like it, you 
can make a donation to the author’s development fund) that can burn CDs on Windows XP and 
both CDs and DVDs on Windows Vista.
Step 3: Take Knoppix for a Spin  
to Make Sure It’s Working
This step shows you how to launch Knoppix, view some files, attach a USB drive, 
access the Internet via a broadband connection, and then close down Knoppix.
Launch Knoppix
To launch Knoppix, follow these steps:
With Windows running, insert the Knoppix disc. If Windows opens an Inter-
net Explorer window showing information about the Knoppix distribution, 
browse it if you wish to.
Close your Windows programs, and then restart your PC. The PC boots from 
the Knoppix disc, and the Knoppix screen appears.
If your PC doesn’t boot from the Knoppix disc, you may need to change the PC’s BIOS settings to 
make the PC boot from the optical drive. See Project 6 for instructions on doing this.
Press ENTER to start loading Knoppix. You’ll see several screens full of text in 
various colors as Knoppix loads, displaying messages that track its progress. 
1.
2.
3.
tip
note

108
Part 1I: Intermediate
The Knoppix graphical user interface (GUI) then appears for the rest of the 
loading process.
When Knoppix is fully loaded, it opens a Konqueror window (see Figure 10-1). 
Konqueror is the file browser and web browser that Knoppix uses.
Have a quick look at the files on your PC:
Click the Close button (the × button) to close the Konqueror window.
Click the Hard Disk (hda1) icon to open a Konqueror window showing the 
contents of the first hard disk in your PC (see Figure 10-2). The PC shown 
here has three hard disk partitions, but your PC may well have only one 
partition.
Konqueror opens a file with a single-click rather than a double-click, as Windows Explorer 
requires. Until you become accustomed to Konqueror, you may find it easier to right-click a file 
(and then cancel the context menu if you don’t need to issue one of its commands) than to click 
a file and open it inadvertently.
Click the Maximize button in the upper-right corner of the Konqueror window 
to maximize the window.
4.
1.
2.
3.
tip
Figure 10-1  
Knoppix is now up and 
running, having booted 
from your PC’s optical 
drive rather than the 
hard disk.
K Menu
Knoppix button
Quick-launch bar
Desktops
Optical disk
Floppy disk
Hard disks

Project 10: Recover from Windows Disasters with Knoppix  109
Choose View | View Mode | Detailed List View to display the details of the 
files and folders (see Figure 10-3). Here, you can see all the files and folders, 
including the hibernation file (hiberfil.sys), the page file (pagefile.sys), and 
the boot manager (bootmgr), which are normally hidden.
Click the Users folder to display its contents, which include a folder for each 
user’s user account, an Administrator account, and the All Users account.
Click the account name for a user whose account you normally cannot access. 
(Or, if you prefer, click your own account.) Konqueror displays its contents, 
which you can then access as needed.
Click the Close button or press ALT-F4 to close the Konqueror window.
Explore the K Menu to get an idea of its contents. It contains a wide range of 
programs and utilities—and even some games.
Attach a USB Drive
When you’re using Knoppix to repair Windows or to recover files from your PC, it’s 
often handy to have a drive to which you can copy files or that you can use to supply 
files to the PC. The easiest solution is to use a USB key (sometimes also called a flash 
drive or a thumb drive) or another USB-connected drive that enables you to copy files 
easily to or from the PC.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Figure 10-2  
Here are the contents 
of hda1, the first hard 
disk partition on the 
computer.

110
Part 1I: Intermediate
In Linux terminology, you mount a drive to add it to the PC’s file system. To remove a drive from 
the file system, you unmount it.
To use a USB key or USB drive with Knoppix, follow these steps:
Connect the USB key or drive to your PC. Knoppix recognizes the key or 
drive, mounts it automatically in the file system, and then displays a dialog 
box saying that a new medium has been detected.
Select the Open In New Window item in the list box.
Click the OK button. Knoppix displays a window showing the contents of 
the key or drive, as in the example shown here:
1.
2.
3.
Figure 10-3  
Detailed List View gives 
you a better view of the 
files and folders on the 
drive.
note

Project 10: Recover from Windows Disasters with Knoppix  111
You can then work with the files and folders on the key or drive much as you 
would in a Windows Explorer window on Windows. For example, to copy a file or 
folder, right-click it and choose Copy. You can then right-click the folder in which you 
want to paste the file or folder, and choose Paste to paste it.
When you have finished using the USB drive, unmount it from the file system be-
fore you detach it from the PC. Right-click the drive’s icon on the desktop and choose 
Unmount. You can then safely remove the drive from your PC.
Connect to Your Network and the Internet
If you have a broadband Internet connection, you should be able to get Knoppix to 
connect to the Internet easily by choosing suitable settings for your PC’s network 
adapter. This is handy for when you need to download patches or update files to fix 
Windows or run a virus check on Windows.
If you have a network with a typical setup, when you connect to the Internet, you can also 
connect to any shared drives on your network. For example, you may need to copy files from 
another computer on the network to the PC on which you have booted Knoppix.
 Set Up a Network Connection or Broadband Connection
To connect to your network, and thus to connect to the Internet via a broadband 
connection shared via the network, follow these steps:
Click the Knoppix icon (the penguin) on the quick-launch bar and choose 
Network/Internet | Network Card Configuration. Knoppix launches the 
netcardconfig program in a console window.
If your computer has two or more 
network interfaces (for example, an 
Ethernet connection and a wireless 
connection, or an Ethernet connec-
tion and a FireWire card), Knoppix 
displays an Xdialog box like the 
one shown here, prompting you to 
choose the network device. (If your 
computer has only one network 
interface, skip to step 3.) Select the 
eth0 item, as this is usually the Eth-
ernet connection, and then click the 
OK button.
Knoppix displays a dialog box asking whether you want to obtain an IP ad-
dress automatically via DHCP. If your network uses Dynamic Host Configu-
ration Protocol (DHCP) to allocate available IP addresses automatically, as 
many networks do by default, click the Yes button, and then go to step 5. 
1.
2.
3.
note

112
Part 1I: Intermediate
Otherwise, click the No button, and then specify the following information 
in the dialog boxes that appear in the sidebar “Find Out Your Network’s 
Gateway and DNS Settings” if you don’t have this information:
IP address For example, 192.168.0.14 or 10.0.0.5
Network mask The subnet mask, 
usually 255.255.255.0.
Broadcast address Usually the last 
address in the subnet you’re using—for 
example, 192.168.0.255 or 10.0.0.255.
Default gateway The IP address of the Internet connection device. This 
is usually a low value in the subnet—for example, 192.168.0.1 or 10.0.0.2.
Name server The IP address of the Domain Name Service (DNS) server 
your Internet connection uses. Your ISP normally provides this IP address.
When you click the OK button in the last dialog box, the netcardconfig program 
applies the settings, displays several lines of text as it does so, and then closes.
●
●
●
●
●
4.
Find Out Your Network’s Gateway and DNS Settings
If you don’t have your network’s gateway and DNS settings written down, but 
you have another functional PC running Windows Vista, you can find them 
out easily:
Click the Start button, right-click the Network item, and choose 
Properties to open a Network And Sharing Center window.
Click the View Status link 
for the network connection 
to display the connection’s 
Status dialog box.
Click the Details button to 
display the Network Connec-
tion Details dialog box, which 
contains readouts of the IP 
address, subnet mask, default 
gateway, and DNS servers.
Click the Close button to 
close each dialog box, and 
then click the Close button to 
close the Network And Shar-
ing Center window.
1.
2.
3.
4.

Project 10: Recover from Windows Disasters with Knoppix  113
Verify That Your PC’s Internet Connection Is Working
To verify that your PC’s Internet connection is working, access a web site:
Click the Konqueror button on the quick-launch bar to launch Konqueror.
Click in the address bar to place the focus there.
Type the address of a web site (for example, www.mhprofessional.com) and 
then press ENTER.
Verify That You Can Connect to Your Network
If your PC can connect to the Internet, it’s definitely connected to your network. You 
can then view shared folders on the network as well. Follow these steps:
Click the Knoppix button on the quick-launch bar and choose Utilities| 
Samba Network Neighborhood. Knoppix opens a Konqueror window that 
shows the workgroups of computers sharing files via the Server Message 
Block (SMB) protocol. (Samba is a geek’s way of saying SMB.) The following 
illustration shows an example:
Click the workgroup that contains the computer that shares the drive (you 
may well see only one workgroup). The Konqueror window shows the 
computers that are sharing drives:
1.
2.
3.
1.
2.

114
Part 1I: Intermediate
Click the computer that shares the drive. The Konqueror window shows the 
shared drives:
Any drive whose name is a drive letter followed by $ is one of Windows’ hidden shares that are 
used for administrative purposes. You will not normally be able to connect to these drives from 
Knoppix.
Click the drive you want to connect to. The Konqueror window shows its 
contents:
When you’ve finished browsing the network, click the Close button to close the 
Konqueror window.
Log Out from Knoppix and Return to Windows
To log out from Knoppix and return to Windows, follow these steps:
Click the Knoppix button, and then 
choose Log Out. Knoppix displays 
the End Session dialog box.
Click the Restart Computer button. 
Knoppix closes down with several 
screens full of multicolored text, and 
then prompts you to remove the CD.
Remove the CD, close the optical 
drive if it’s the kind that opens, and 
then press ENTER. Windows starts as 
usual, and you can log on.
3.
4.
1.
2.
3.
note

Project 10: Recover from Windows Disasters with Knoppix  115
If you want to turn the PC off rather than restart it with Windows, click the Turn Off Computer 
button instead of the Restart Computer button in the End Session dialog box. After you remove 
the CD and press ENTER, your PC shuts down.
Step 4: Back Up Your Files Using Knoppix
If Windows starts giving problems and refuses to boot, follow these general steps to 
back up your files, referring back to Step 3 for specific techniques:
Insert the Knoppix CD in your PC’s optical drive, and then boot Knoppix.
Choose the drive or folder to which you will back up the files: either connect 
a USB key or USB drive to your PC or establish a connection to another com-
puter on your network that has a shared folder.
Use Konqueror to copy the appropriate files to the drive or folder.
Step 5: Download Windows Updates  
or Drivers to Fix Problems
If Windows has suffered problems that allow you to log on but not connect to a net-
work, you can use Knoppix to download Windows updates, tools such as the Win-
dows Malicious Software Removal Tool, or hardware drivers to fix the problem. Fol-
low these general steps, referring back to Step 3 for specific techniques:
Insert the Knoppix CD in your PC’s optical drive, and then boot Knoppix.
Establish an Internet connection.
Open Konqueror, and then download the files you need:
Windows updates and tools Go to the Microsoft Download Center 
(www.microsoft.com/downloads/).
Hardware drivers Start at the hardware manufacturer’s web site. If it 
no longer exists, try searching using a search engine, such as Google.
Shut down Knoppix.
Boot Windows, and install the updates or drivers.
1.
2.
3.
1.
2.
3.
●
●
4.
5.
note

116
Part 1I: Intermediate
Making Knoppix Run Much Faster
If you find Knoppix useful and run it frequently, you may grow impatient at 
Knoppix’s need to access the optical drive every other time you issue a com-
mand. If your computer has 1.5GB RAM or more, you can make Knoppix run 
much faster by copying Knoppix to RAM. (RAM responds far faster than the 
optical drive, and in silence.) To do so, when your PC starts booting Knoppix 
and displays the introductory screen, instead of simply pressing ENTER, type 
the following command, and then press ENTER:
knoppix toram
Copying the CD to RAM takes a few minutes, but once that’s done, Knoppix 
runs much faster, and much more quietly.

117
Project 11
Modify Your 
PC’s Case
What You’ll Need
Hardware: Rotary tool, file saw, tapered reamer, metal cutter
Software: None
Cost: $100–200 U.S.
T
his project shows you how to get started on modifying the case of your desktop 
PC—preferably after its warranty has expired. The project shows you the tools 
you typically need, gives you examples of a couple of simple projects, and then 
leaves you to exercise your imagination and do-it-yourself skills.
There are two main reasons to modify your PC’s case:
Practical To make a component fit that wouldn’t otherwise fit. This project  
explains how to create the space for and mount a larger fan to keep a PC cool.
Aesthetic To make your PC’s case look better (or worse, or simply more in-
teresting) than the manufacturer made it. For example, enthusiastic “modders” 
have created cases made of wood, of see-through acrylic (with lights inside), 
and of other materials. Others have created a PC that looks like a weapon of 
mass destruction, a PC that looks like a gingerbread house, and even a PC that 
looks like a toilet. (If you want to see some of these, look at http://gadgets 
.fosfor.se/the-top-10-weirdest-case-mods/.) This project shows you how to cut 
a hole in the side panel of the case, and then put a transparent panel over the 
hole, so that you can see the inside the computer while the side is on.
This project doesn’t cover modifying laptop PCs. You can of course attack them with the tools 
described in this project—but unless the laptop is unusually roomy inside, you will be able to 
achieve little change without inflicting damage. If you feel an insatiable urge to modify a laptop 
PC, try scrounging some broken ones to practice on before you attack your pride and joy.
●
●
●
●
●
note

118
Part 1I: Intermediate
Step 1: Get the Tools for the Job
You can severely modify a PC—or wreck it completely—by using conventional 
household tools. But for good (or even acceptable) results, you’ll probably want to 
use specialized or semi-specialized tools. Exactly which tools you need depends on 
what you’re planning to do to your PC. This section discusses the main tools you’re 
likely to need.
Normally, you’ll want to modify only your PC’s case, not any of the PC’s components. This should 
go without saying, but if you’ve seen the tech-support horror-story forum stories that describe users 
finding that a new video card “had too many pins” to fit in the slot on the motherboard, and “fixing” 
the problem by cutting off the extra pins, you’ll know it doesn’t go without saying. (The video card is 
the wrong kind for the slot on the motherboard, and the extra pins are vital to the card.)
Rotary Tool
For minor drilling, precision cutting, grinding, sanding, or buffing, you’ll probably 
want a rotary tool such as a Dremel. Figure 11-1 shows a cordless Dremel with a 
starter kit of attachments, which include attachments for cutting and sanding.
Always wear goggles or other full-eye protection when using a Dremel or other rotary tool.
File Saw
If you need to put a hole through a plastic part of your PC’s case, one possible tool is a 
file saw (see Figure 11-2). This is an inexpensive tool with a drill-like tip and serrated 
shaft that you can use to cut holes. The results are rough, but you can tidy them up 
afterward with other tools as needed.
Figure 11-1  
A rotary tool can  
perform a wide variety 
of case-modification 
tasks with the right 
attachments.
Figure 11-2  
You can use a file saw 
to cut holes in a plastic 
case.
caution
caution

Project 11: Modify Your PC’s Case  119
Tapered Reamer
If you need to put things through your PC’s case in ways the case’s maker didn’t 
intend, you probably need to create some holes and enlarge others. Where there’s 
an existing hole, you can drill with a larger bit to make it bigger, but what’s usually 
easier and neater is to use a tapered reamer, a spike that tapers from a narrow point 
to a thicker haft, and which has cutting blades along the taper. You push the reamer 
through an existing hole, and then turn it while pushing it in to enlarge the hole to 
exactly the right size. Figure 11-3 shows a tapered reamer.
Most reamers are designed to work in one direction only—for example, clockwise. Even though 
this may appear to be a tool where you don’t need to read the two lines of instructions on the 
packaging, do just that.
Metal Cutters
Metal cutters, also called tin snips, tend to look like a particularly macho pair of kitchen 
shears (see Figure 11-4). They’re useful for cutting through sheets of metal—for 
example, for enlarging an existing hole you’ve made in a side panel—or for trimming 
off extra bits of metal left over from your work with other tools.
Apart from these specialized and semi-specialized tools, you’ll probably also need  
household tools such as a metal file and a pair of pliers. Work gloves are also a good idea.
Figure 11-3  
A tapered reamer is a 
great tool for enlarging 
existing holes to exactly 
the size you need.
Figure 11-4  
Metal cutters let you 
trim metal to fit or cut 
through sheets of metal.
caution
note

120
Part 1I: Intermediate
Step 2: Mount a Larger Fan
This step explains how to mount a larger fan to keep your PC cool.
A larger fan is especially handy if you’re looking to reduce the amount of noise your PC makes. 
See Project 22 for a detailed look at how you can silence your PC.
To mount a larger fan than your PC’s case is designed for, follow these steps:
Shut down Windows, turn off the PC, and disconnect all its cables. Put the 
PC on a work surface.
Open the case. For example, undo the thumbscrews or screws that secure 
the case.
Touch a part of the metal chassis to discharge any static electricity you have 
built up.
Choose the fan you will use, and then measure the amount of space it takes 
up. The fan may come with a template for marking the ventilation hole and 
screw holes it needs. If it doesn’t, you may find it helpful to make your own 
template by using a piece of cardboard or stiff paper.
Find a suitable location for the fan:
To keep the noise down, you should mount the fan on the frame of the 
PC’s case. You can mount a fan on a panel (for example, the top panel) in 
a pinch, but it’s a recipe for producing vibration as well as airflow.
If possible, site the fan so that it will be removing heat from, or providing 
cool air to, the PC’s hotter components, such as the processor, processor 
fan, or graphics card.
Make sure the fan is oriented the right way:
A fan at the front of the case should normally be drawing air into  
the case.
A fan at the back of the case should normally be blowing air out of  
the case.
Measure where the screw holes will need to go.
If possible, use one or more existing holes intended for mounting fans. 
For example, if your case is designed to take an 80mm fan and you’re 
trying to shoehorn in a 120mm fan, you may be able to use one of the 
corner holes.
You may be able to simply stick your template to the case and drill 
through it.
Drill small holes for the screws, and then use a tapered reamer to enlarge 
them carefully to the right size for the screws.
If necessary, enlarge the ventilation hole for the fan.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
●
●
6.
●
●
7.
●
●
8.
9.
note

Project 11: Modify Your PC’s Case  121
Mount the fan and screw it in place, using any vibration-damping mounts 
provided.
Connect the fan to a power connector. If you’re using a variable-speed 
fan controller, mount it too. (For example, some variable-speed fans have 
a controller that mounts in a spare expansion slot, with a control knob 
outside the PC.)
Put your PC back together, connect its cables, and restart it.
Step 3: Create a Viewing Window in the Case
To make a viewing window in your PC’s case (see Figure 11-5), follow these general 
steps:
Shut down Windows, turn off the PC, and disconnect all its cables. Put the 
PC on a work surface.
Open the case. For example, undo the thumbscrews or screws that secure 
the case.
Remove the panel in which you will create the hole.
Measure and mark the hole on the inside of the panel. CD pens and permanent 
markers work well on light-colored case panels. If the panel is dark-colored, 
use a grease pencil or paper tape to mark the hole.
10.
11.
12.
1.
2.
3.
4.
Figure 11-5  
A viewing window in 
your PC’s case lets you 
see what’s going on 
inside while it’s running.

122
Part 1I: Intermediate
Drill through the case at one corner of the shape. Position the drill hole a little 
way within the shape so that the hole will not pass the extreme of the shape 
even when you expand the hole.
Using a tapered reamer or similar tool, ream the hole until it is large enough 
for your cutting tool to pass inside.
If you’re using metal cutters as your cutting tool, you may need to drill several holes and then 
ream them together into a slot. Keep each of the holes inside the shape rather than placing 
them on the line.
Cut the hole. This is easier said than done:
In an ideal world, you’ll be able simply to cut smoothly and evenly all 
the way along the outside of the hole.
In practice, you’ll often need to hack out the center of the hole, and then 
work your way around the edges, cutting off small pieces at a time.
Stay within your shape. You can always extend the hole later, but you’ll 
have a tough time making it smaller once you’ve cut outside it.
Tidy up the hole:
File off any large rough edges.
Use a rotary tool to sand down smaller rough bits.
Use pliers to straighten any parts of the metal that you’ve bent out of 
shape.
Cover the hole with your window material on the inside of the panel, and 
then secure the window in place. For example, you might use adhesive to 
bond a sheet of clear or colored acrylic over the hole.
Clean up the case panel and your workspace, and then put the case back to-
gether. If the result lacks polish, consider painting parts of the case, or deco-
rating it with stickers or decals, to disguise any flaws.
If you put a viewing window in your PC’s case, you may also want to add an internal light to 
make the PC’s innards easier to see—or to make them glow in the dark. An online or offline 
computer store will offer various options.
5.
6.
7.
●
●
●
8.
●
●
●
9.
10.
note
tip

123
Project 12
Use Your PC 
as Your Home 
Theater
What You’ll Need
Hardware: Your existing TV or projector, cables
Software: Windows Vista Home Premium Edition or Windows Vista 
Ultimate Edition
Cost: Free, as long as you have a TV or projector
I
f your PC started life as a Media Center, or if you’ve turned it into one (as de-
scribed in Project 5), you’ve probably gotten used to watching TV on it, and maybe 
recording one show while you’re watching another. Watching is great on your 
large-screen LCD—but doesn’t it spoil your enjoyment when the other members of 
your family park themselves around your desk, peering over your shoulder as you bite 
your nails through the final few minutes of the ballgame? Or maybe they decide that 
the DVD you’re watching beats any available TV channel hands down.
Either way, if you want your family or household members to be able to enjoy the 
TV as much as you do, you probably need to display the picture on a larger screen. This 
project shows you how to use your PC as your home theater by connecting the PC to 
either your TV or to a projector.
Step 1: Choose a Connection Type
The first step—and in some ways the most complex—is choosing the right type of con-
nection to use between your PC and the TV or projector. Depending on your PC and 
the TV or projector, you may have only one choice of connection, but in many cases, 
you’ll need to decide among two, three, or more types of connection. Let’s examine the 
connections first so that you know which connectors to look for on the PC and the TV 
or projector.
●
●
●

124
Part II: Intermediate
Understand Which Connection Types Are Preferable
Here are the types of connections, in descending order of quality:
HDMI (High-Definition Multimedia Interface)
DVI (Digital Visual Interface)
VGA (Video Graphics Array)
Component video
S-Video
Composite video
The following subsections explain the different connections and show pictures of 
what their ports and connectors look like.
Ideally, you should avoid converting the signal from digital to analog if the TV can handle digital 
input. Even if you must convert the signal to analog, try to avoid converting the signal from one 
connection type to another, as doing so will always degrade the signal. That said, the results may 
be quite acceptable, especially as most TVs are far less sharp than PC monitors.
HDMI
An HDMI cable transmits uncompressed digital audio and video signals, conveying 
the audio and video information from your PC to the TV without loss, so it should 
be your first choice if both your PC and output device have it. Figure 12-1 shows an 
HDMI port and an HDMI connector.
Many new and recent LCD TVs include one or more HDMI ports, as do higher-
end projectors. Older TVs are less likely to have HDMI ports.
DVI
DVI is widely used for connecting desktop PCs to LCD monitors and to projectors, 
but few laptops have DVI ports (usually only high-end laptops), and even fewer 
TVs have them. Look for the connection anyway—if your TV has DVI, you’ll get  
a high-quality picture. Figure 12-2 shows a DVI port and a DVI connector.
●
●
●
●
●
●
Figure 12-1  
If your PC and TV both 
have HDMI ports, an 
HDMI cable should be 
your first choice for 
connecting them at full 
quality.
HDMI port
HDMI connector
tip

Project 12: Use Your PC as Your Home Theater  125
VGA
VGA cables carry an analog signal rather than the digital signal that HDMI 
and DVI carry, so the PC has to convert the video signal from digital to analog 
before sending it along the VGA cable. VGA is widely used for connecting both 
desktop PCs and laptop PCs to monitors and to projectors. Few TVs have VGA 
ports. Figure 12-3 shows a VGA port and connector. You will also see VGA ports 
and connectors referred to as D-sub, which is short for D (indicating the shape)  
and subminiature (indicating that the connector was smaller than other connectors 
used at the time—but not anymore).
VGA D-sub connectors and ports are the same size as some other types of D-sub connectors 
and ports that have different numbers of pins and are used for different purposes. For example, a 
nine-pin D-sub connector is used for serial ports. Before inserting a D-sub connector in a D-sub 
port, check visually that the number and arrangement of pins on the connector matches the 
number and arrangement of holes on the port.
Component Video
Component video uses a three-stranded cable to carry an analog signal, with each strand 
terminating in a separate RCA connector. Each strand carries a different component of 
the video signal—hence the name. Figure 12-4 shows a component video cable.
DVI port
DVI connector
Figure 12-2  
DVI gives a high-quality 
signal, but you are more 
likely to find a DVI port 
on a projector than on 
a TV.
VGA connector
VGA port
Figure 12-3  
VGA uses a D-sub  
connection that has  
15 pins.
Figure 12-4  
Component video uses 
three RCA connectors 
at the ends.
caution

126
Part II: Intermediate
S-Video
An S-Video cable uses a two-stranded cable to carry an analog video signal. The cable 
terminates in a single connector, making for an easy connection. Figure 12-5 shows an 
S-Video port and connector.
S-Video port
S-Video connector
Figure 12-5  
An S-Video cable uses  
a single connector, so 
it’s easy to connect.
Figure 12-6  
When you use a 
composite cable (left) 
to carry a video signal, 
you also need to use 
another cable (such as 
the RCA cable shown 
on the right) to carry 
the audio signal.
RCA/Composite Video
A composite cable carries the entire video signal on a single cable. Image quality 
suffers, so make a composite cable your last choice—the one you use only if none of 
the other connection types is available. The composite cable carries only the video, 
so you’ll also need to use an RCA cable to carry the audio from the PC to the TV or 
projector. Figure 12-6 shows a composite cable and an RCA cable.
Check the Ports on Your PC’s Graphics Card and TV or Projector
Now that you know what the ports and connectors for the various connection op-
tions look like, check which ports are on your PC’s graphics card and on your TV or 
projector.
Normally, a desktop PC gives you far more choices than a laptop PC does—and 
if necessary, you can change the graphics card in most desktops without much dif-
ficulty, whereas only a few laptops let you change their graphics cards, and then only 
with considerable expense and minimal choice of replacement cards.

Project 12: Use Your PC as Your Home Theater  127
Most TVs offer one or more of HDMI, component video, S-Video, and composite 
video. Choose the highest-quality connection type available for both your TV and 
the PC. Many projectors offer both DVI and VGA ports. Some also offer HDMI ports. 
Again, choose the highest-quality connection type available.
Step 2: Find or Buy a Cable
Now that you’ve established what kind of cable you need, see whether you already 
own one. For example, your shiny new TV may have included an HDMI cable that 
you’ve left sleeping in its Styrofoam nest, or your camcorder box may have packed 
an S-Video cable along with its tangle of other cables. Or maybe a dusty old box con-
tains an unused component video cable that came with your DVD player…even if the 
cable is several years old, it should work.
If your search comes up dry, you’ll need to beg, borrow, or buy a cable. Any elec-
tronics retailer worth patronizing—online or bricks-and-mortar—should be able to 
help you here.
Another means of connecting your PC to your TV is to use a media extender, a TV set-top box 
to which your PC transmits the video signal wirelessly. At this writing, Microsoft and hardware 
partners including Linksys, D-Link, and Niveus Media have just announced media extenders that 
work with Windows Media Center in Windows Vista, so these devices should be available by the 
time you read this.
Step 3: Connect Your PC to Your TV or Projector
With the cable in hand, you’re ready to connect your PC to the TV or projector. How 
exactly you proceed depends on what kind of PC and what kind of TV or projector 
you have, but in general, you need to follow these steps:
If the PC is running, shut down Windows, and then turn the PC off.
Make sure the TV or projector is powered off as well.
Connect a cable of the appropriate type to the port you’re using on the PC 
and to the input on the TV or projector.
Turn on the TV or projector. If necessary, switch the TV’s or projector’s input 
to receive the signal from the cable you’re using. For example:
On a TV, you may need to choose a different AV input instead of the 
usual one.
On a projector, you may need to press a button to cycle among the pos-
sible input sources until it finds the signal from the PC.
Turn on the PC. Depending on the connection you’re using, you may see the 
PC’s bootup sequence on the PC’s monitor, on the TV screen, or on both.
1.
2.
3.
4.
●
●
5.
note

128
Part II: Intermediate
If Windows Vista detects the TV or projector as a new display and opens 
the New Display Detected dialog box to let you configure the new display, 
choose the appropriate option button, each of which is described next, and 
then click the Apply button:
Duplicate My Desktop On All Displays (Mirrored) Select this option 
button if you want to display the same picture on your PC’s screen and 
on the TV or projector. This setting is useful when you’re setting up the 
TV or projector, but usually either the PC’s screen or the external image 
will be at an unsuitable resolution for long-term viewing.
Show Different Parts Of My Desktop On Each Display (Extended) Se-
lect this option button if you want to make the external image an exten-
sion of your desktop. You can then drag a window from the PC’s screen 
to the external image.
Show My Desktop On The External Display Only Select this option 
button if you want to shut off your PC’s screen and see only the external 
image.
On a laptop PC, you may need to press a function key combination (for example, FN-F7) to send the 
video output to the external graphics port. Consult your laptop’s documentation or look for a key 
bearing a graphic of multiple monitors (usually in the color used for the lettering on the FN key).
If at this point you’re not seeing any image on the TV or projector, use the 
Display Settings dialog box to set up the display:
Right-click the Desktop and choose Personalize to open the Personalize 
window.
6.
●
●
●
7.
●
note

Project 12: Use Your PC as Your Home Theater  129
Click the Display Settings link at the bottom to open the Display Settings 
dialog box:
Click the monitor icon that represents the TV or projector. If you’re not 
sure which it is, click the Identify Monitors button to make Windows 
flash up a large number on each monitor.
Select the Extend The Desktop Onto This Monitor check box.
Click the Apply button.
If necessary, change the resolution on the monitor by dragging the Reso-
lution slider, and then click the Apply button. For a TV, start with the 
lowest resolution available, and then work upward. For a projector, start 
with the lowest recommended resolution in the projector’s specs, and 
then experiment with higher resolutions that the projector supports.
When you’ve got the external display to your satisfaction, click the OK 
button to close the Display Settings dialog box.
Step 4: Run Windows Media Center and Play Content
Now you’re all set to run Windows Media Center and enjoy content on it:
Choose Start | All Programs | Windows Media Center.
If you extended your desktop, drag the Windows Media Center window to 
the TV or projector’s part of the desktop, and then maximize the window.
Start the program or DVD playing. Enjoy!
●
●
●
●
●
●
1.
2.
3.

130
Part II: Intermediate
If you’re using a projector, when you switch the projector off, the fan may continue to run even 
after the lamp has gone off. Allow the fan to finish cooling the projector before you unplug the 
projector’s power supply. Disconnecting the power supply to stop the fan running may damage 
the lamp in the projector.
Is It Worth Buying a Projector for Enjoying TV or Media?
Since you ask: Only if you have money to burn. Projector prices have dropped 
from the levels of causing severe financial pain to being borderline affordable, 
but unless you plan to enjoy movies frequently, the expense probably doesn’t 
justify the enjoyment. Besides, with a projector, you usually need to darken the 
room somewhat before you can see the picture well. The gloom or darkness 
can be atmospheric—romantic or scary, take your pick—especially for movies, 
but it’s less than ideal for regular viewing.
What you may be able to do, though, is rent or borrow a projector. Your 
local video store may rent them out. Many organizations and social clubs have 
projectors that are seldom used but available to the members. Or you could tell 
your boss that it’s essential you practice your presentation at home…
If you do buy or borrow a projector, you’ll also need a surface onto which 
you can project the image. Ideally, you’ll have a screen (maybe borrowed from 
the same source), but a white wall, a white board (such as a sheet of 8×4-foot 
chipboard sanded down a bit and painted with matt paint), or even a sheet 
stretched taut can all serve the purpose.
caution

131
Project 13
Share Your 
Household’s 
Music and 
Movies Easily 
and Effectively
What You’ll Need
Hardware: Extra PC (optional), network-attached storage device 
(optional), or external USB hard disk (optional)
Software: Windows Media Player or iTunes
Cost: Free or up to $500 U.S., depending on the method you choose
I
f your household has more than one computer, you’ll probably want to share your 
music and movies between the computers so that each computer can play all the 
songs and video files. This project shows you how to share your household’s mu-
sic and movies easily and effectively. You have a choice of several ways to share your 
music and movie files with other people whose computers connect to the same net-
work as yours. Before you start sharing, it’s a good idea to understand your options, 
because this will let you choose and implement the way of sharing that’s best for you. 
We’ll look at this first.
Step 1: Assess Your Options and Decide  
Your Plan of Attack
Your first step is to assess your options for sharing music and movies, figure out exactly 
what you need, and then decide how to proceed. The easiest way to start is by using a 
network-aware media player, such as Windows Media Player or iTunes. You build your 
media library in the player, and then choose to share either the whole library or just 
parts of it.
●
●
●

132
Part II: Intermediate
Sharing is simple and effective. Here’s how it works:
The shared library remains on the computer that’s sharing it, and when a 
participating computer goes to play a song or other item, the sharing com-
puter streams that item across the network to the playing computer. This 
means that the item isn’t copied from the sharing computer to the playing 
computer in a way that leaves a usable file on the playing computer.
Streaming is a way of sending a file across a network connection in order so that the computer 
receiving the file can start playing it before receiving the whole file. If you view a video on YouTube, 
that’s streaming.
Participating computers can play the shared items but can’t do anything else 
with them; for example, they can’t burn shared songs to CD or DVD, down-
load them to a player such as an iPod or Zune, or copy them to their own 
libraries.
When a computer goes offline or is shut down, library items it has been shar-
ing stop being available to other users.
As you no doubt spotted, that last bullet point holds a major drawback. Unless 
you keep all the sharing computers running all the time (and prevent any laptops 
from leaving the building or your wireless network), you will lose access to some 
of the shared items. Not being able to burn shared items or download them can 
also be a problem, depending on how much freedom you expect to have with your 
shared files.
The sharing described here is limited to computers on the same TCP/IP subnet as your computer 
is on. (A subnet is a logical division of a network.) Any home network uses a single subnet, so 
this won’t be a problem. But if your computer connects to a medium-sized network (such as 
one in a dorm), and you’re unable to find a computer that you know is connected to the same 
network somewhere, it may be on a different subnet.
If you want to make sure that all your media files are available all the time, and 
that you can do with them whatever you want (subject to the law), you may need to 
step up to the next level—for example, by repurposing an old PC as a server, by using 
Windows Home Server, or by using a purpose-built network storage device. Step 2 
shows you how to share music and video using Windows Media Player. Step 3 shows 
you how to share music and video using iTunes. Step 4 discusses your options for 
running a server or a network storage device.
Windows Media Player makes sharing media files with other PCs easier than iTunes does—and 
it gives you finer control over which media files you share with whom. (For example, you can 
share all your files with one computer but share only a select few files with another computer.) 
However, iTunes also lets you share media files with Macs running iTunes and play the media 
files those Macs are sharing.
●
●
●
note
note
note

Project 13: Share Your Household’s Music and Movies Easily and Effectively  133
Step 2: Share Music and Video Files  
via Windows Media Player
Unless you’ve installed an operating system other than Windows on your PC (see 
Project 23 for suggestions), the chances are high that you’ve got Windows Media 
Player installed on your computer. Windows Media Player is a friendly program that 
wants to help you share your computer’s music and video files with other computers 
on the same network—and enjoy the files that they’re sharing. Let’s look at how you 
set up Windows Media Player for sharing.
Understand How Windows Media Player Shares Files
Before you set up sharing on Windows Media Player, you need to know a little about 
how it shares files.
First, you probably have your own user account, as every user should. The user 
account lets you maintain your settings—everything from your Desktop background 
to where you position the Taskbar, from your screensaver to the items on the Start 
menu—independently from those of each of the other users.
Your user account contains a whole suite of folders in which Windows intends 
you to store your files: Documents, Music, Pictures, Videos, and so on. Any files you 
keep in the folders in your user account are private from other users—unless they’re 
media files and you tell Windows Media Player to share them.
Set Up Sharing on Windows Media Player
To set up sharing on Windows Media Player, follow these steps:
Start Windows Media Player if it’s not already running. For example, choose 
Start | All Programs | Windows Media Player.
Move the mouse pointer over the Library button on the toolbar, click the 
down-arrow button that appears on the bottom part of the button, and then 
choose Media Sharing from the menu. Windows Media Player displays the 
Media Sharing dialog box.
If you want Windows Media Player to automatically locate media libraries 
that other computers running Windows Media Player are sharing, select the 
Find Media That Others Are Sharing check box. Normally, you’ll want to do 
this.
If you want Windows Media Player to share your own media, select the 
Share My Media check box.
Click the OK button, and then go through User Account Control for the 
Windows Media Player Configuration feature. Windows Media Player dis-
plays an expanded version of the Media Sharing dialog box, as shown next. 
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

134
Part II: Intermediate
Any computer or item marked with a yellow triangle and an exclamation 
mark doesn’t yet have a sharing setting applied to it.
To allow other users of your computer to access your media library, click the 
Other Users Of This PC icon in the Share My Media To list box, and then click 
the Allow button. Windows Media Player changes the exclamation-mark 
icon for a checkmark icon and makes the Customize button available.
To allow users of a particular other computer to access your media library, 
click the computer’s icon in the Share My Media To list box, and then click 
the Allow button. Windows Media Player replaces the exclamation-mark 
icon with a checkmark icon and makes the Customize button available.
To block users of a particular other computer from accessing your media 
library, follow these steps:
Click the computer’s icon in the Share My Media To list box, and then 
click the Deny button. Windows Media Player displays the Deny dialog 
box for the computer.
If you want to prevent any other user of your computer from sharing 
media with the computer you’re blocking, click the Yes button, and then 
go through User Account Control for the Windows Media Player Con-
figuration feature. If you want to leave other users of your computer free 
to share their media with the computer you’re blocking, click the No but-
ton. Either way, you can select the Don’t Show This Message Again check 
box before clicking a button if you don’t want Windows Media Player to 
ask you this question again.
If you don’t want to share your entire media library with the other users of 
your PC or the specified computer, follow these steps:
Click the computer’s icon or the Other Users Of This PC icon (as appro-
priate) in the Share My Media To list box.
6.
7.
8.
●
●
9.
●

Project 13: Share Your Household’s Music and Movies Easily and Effectively  135
Click the Customize button. Windows Media Player display the Media 
Sharing – Customize dialog box:
Clear the Use Default Settings check box. (Using the default settings 
means sharing all media types—music files, picture files, and video 
files—with minimal-quality screening and without parental ratings.) 
Windows Media Player makes all the Media Types, Star Ratings, and 
Parental Ratings controls available.
In the Media Types column, select only the check boxes for the media 
types you want to share. For example, if you want to share only music, 
select the Music check box, and clear both the Pictures check box and the 
Video check box.
In the Star Ratings column, choose what you want to share. Select the 
All Ratings option button only if you’re determined to share your dross 
as well as your diamonds. Normally, you’re better advised to select the 
Only option button, and then choose either Rated 5 Stars or Rated 4 Stars 
Or Higher in the drop-down list. Clear the Include Unrated Files check 
box unless you really want to share everything.
To get the most out of your media library, rate all the files it contains—eventually, not all at 
once. You can then be confident of sharing only quality media. Better yet, you can keep the 
library’s size down by removing the low-rated files.
In the Parental Ratings column, select the All Ratings option button if 
you want to share all items no matter how low they’re rated. Otherwise, 
select the Only option button, and then select the check boxes for the 
unrated items you want to share: Music, Pictures, or Video.
The check boxes that appear in the Parental Ratings list box correspond to the check boxes 
you’ve selected in the Media Types column. For example, if you clear the Video check box in the 
Media Types column, the Parental Ratings list box doesn’t have a Video: Unrated check box.
●
●
●
●
●
tip
note

136
Part II: Intermediate
Click the OK button. Windows Media Player closes the Media Sharing – 
Customize dialog box, returning you to the Media Sharing dialog box.
Click the OK button. Windows Media Player closes the Media Sharing dialog 
box and applies the settings you chose.
Play Media Files in a Shared Library
To play media files in a shared library, follow these steps:
In Windows Media Player, click the Library button on the toolbar to display 
the Library (unless the Library is already displayed). The shared libraries 
appear toward the bottom of the left column.
Double-click the library name to expand its listing, displaying its contents. 
(You can also click the black triangle, but double-clicking the name is usually 
easier.)
Click the view you want to use to display the library’s contents, as in the 
example in Figure 13-1, which shows Artist view. You can then play items as 
usual—for example, double-click a song to start it playing.
●
10.
1.
2.
3.
Figure 13-1  
Once you’ve set Win-
dows Media Player to 
look for shared media 
libraries, you can easily 
play shared music and 
video files.

Project 13: Share Your Household’s Music and Movies Easily and Effectively  137
Step 3: Share Music and Video Files via iTunes
If you have an iPod or an iPhone rather than a player that’s compatible with Win-
dows Media Player, you’ll probably want to manage the iPod or iPhone using iTunes, 
the program that Apple provides—for free—for managing iPods and iPhones. (There 
are several alternative programs that you can use to manage iPods from Windows, 
but most of them involve paying money.)
Like Windows Media Player (discussed in Step 2), iTunes makes it easy to share 
your music and video files with other iTunes users on your network and to play the 
files they’re sharing. You may also want to share files with other users of your com-
puter—which, interestingly, requires a little more effort.
Get and Install iTunes
If you’re already using an iPod or an iPhone, chances are that you’ve already down-
loaded and installed iTunes. If not, open your web browser, go to the Apple web site 
(www.apple.com/itunes/download/), and download the latest version of iTunes for 
Windows.
iTunes has a straightforward installation procedure except for one minor issue on 
Windows Vista: the User Account Control dialog boxes that make sure you’re intend-
ing to install the software (rather than having accidentally triggered some malware 
Start Sharing Your Media Library the Easy Way
This section shows you how to set up sharing of your media library manually, 
but there’s an even easier way to get started. When Windows Media Player 
notices a shared media library that you haven’t used before, it displays a 
pop-up message above the notification area:
Click the pop-up message to open the Windows Media Player Library 
Sharing dialog box. If you want to share your media library with this computer, 
click the Allow button. If you’re feeling surly, click the Deny button. And if 
you’re feeling really surly, select the Disable Future Notifications check box, 
and then click the Deny button.
That’s enough possibilities to satisfy most people, but if you want to 
customize your sharing settings, click the Sharing Settings button. Windows 
Media Player displays the Media Sharing dialog box, in which you can set up 
custom sharing as discussed in step 9 of the preceding list.

138
Part II: Intermediate
that’s trying to run it) tend to get stuck behind the main installation window. If instal-
lation seems to have gotten stuck, look at the Taskbar to see if there’s a flashing button 
for User Account Control. If so, click it, and then go through User Account Control 
as usual. Because the installer installs not only iTunes but also QuickTime and other 
components, you may have to go through User Account Control twice or more.
Once you’ve installed iTunes, start it, and then follow through its prompts for 
adding media files to your media library (iTunes offers to search your folders for 
files). You can add other files to the media library easily:
Drag the files from a Windows Explorer window to the Library area of the 
Source pane (the pane on the left of the iTunes window).
Choose File | Add Folder To Library to add a whole folder of files.
Choose File | Add File To Library to add an individual file.
Share Your Library with Other Local iTunes Users
You can share either your entire library or selected playlists with other users on your 
network. You can share most items, including MP3 files, AAC files, Apple Lossless 
Encoding files, AIFF files, WAV files, and links to radio stations. You can’t share Au-
dible files or QuickTime sound files.
At this writing, you can share your library with up to five other computers per day, and your 
computer can be one of up to five computers accessing the shared library on another computer 
on any given day. However, Apple can change the details of library sharing, so you may see different 
restrictions from these.
To share some or all of your library, follow these steps:
In iTunes, choose Edit | Preferences or press CTRL-COMMA or CTRL-Y to display 
the iTunes dialog box.
Click the Sharing tab, shown in Figure 13-2 with settings chosen.
Select the Share My Library On My Local Network check box (which is 
cleared by default). By default, iTunes then selects the Share Entire Library 
option button. If you want to share only some playlists, select the Share 
Selected Playlists option button, and then select the check boxes for the 
playlists you want to share.
By default, the items in your shared library are available to any other user 
on the network. To restrict access to only those people with whom you share 
a password, select the Require Password check box, and then enter a strong 
(unguessable) password in the text box.
If there are many computers on your network, use a sharing password to help avoid running up 
against the five-users-per-day limit. If your network has only a few computers, you may not need 
a password to avoid reaching this limit.
●
●
●
1.
2.
3.
4.
note
tip

Project 13: Share Your Household’s Music and Movies Easily and Effectively  139
Click the General tab to display its contents. In the Shared Name text box , set 
the name that other users trying to access your library will see. The default 
name is username’s Library—for example, Mimi’s Library. You might choose 
to enter a more descriptive name, especially if your computer is part of a 
well-populated network (for example, in a dorm).
Click the OK button to apply your choices and close the dialog box.
When you set iTunes to share your library, iTunes displays a message reminding you that  
“Sharing music is for personal use only”—in other words, remember not to violate copyright law. 
Select the Do Not Show This Message Again check box if you want to prevent this message from 
appearing again.
Once you’ve shared your library, other iTunes users on the same network can ac-
cess it as described in the upcoming section “Access and Play Another Local iTunes 
User’s Shared Library.”
Disconnect Other Users from Your Shared Library
To disconnect other users from your shared library, follow these steps:
In iTunes, choose Edit | Preferences or press CTRL-COMMA or CTRL-Y to display 
the iTunes dialog box.
Click the Sharing tab to display it.
5.
6.
1.
2.
Figure 13-2  
On the Sharing tab, 
choose whether to look 
for shared libraries and 
whether to share part 
or all of your library.
note

140
Part II: Intermediate
To see how many users are connected to your shared library, look at the Sta-
tus readout toward the bottom of the Sharing tab.
Clear the Share My Library On My Local Network check box.
Click the OK button. If any other user is connected to your shared library, 
iTunes displays a message box that indicates so and asks whether you are 
sure you want to turn off sharing.
Click the Yes button or the No button, as appropriate. If you click the Yes but-
ton, anyone playing an item from the library will be cut off abruptly without 
notice.
Access and Play Another Local iTunes User’s Shared Library
To access another person’s shared library, you must first set your computer to look for 
shared libraries. You may already have done so when you turned on sharing on your 
own computer. If not, do so first.
Set Your Computer to Look for Shared Libraries
First, set your computer to look for shared libraries:
In iTunes, choose Edit | Preferences or press CTRL-COMMA or CTRL-Y to display 
the iTunes dialog box.
Click the Sharing tab to display its contents.
Select the Look For Shared Libraries check box.
Click the OK button to close the iTunes dialog box.
Access Shared Libraries on Your Local Network
Once you’ve selected the Look For Shared Libraries check box on the Sharing tab, 
iTunes automatically detects shared libraries when you launch the program while 
your computer is connected to a network. If a shared library comes online after that, 
iTunes detects it almost immediately.
If iTunes finds shared libraries or playlists, it displays them in the Source pane 
on the left. Figure 13-3 shows an example of browsing the music shared by another 
computer.
If a shared library has a password, iTunes displays the Shared Library Password 
dialog box. Type the password, and then click the OK button to access the library. 
Select the Remember Password check box before clicking the OK button if you want 
iTunes to save the password to speed up future access to the library.
Double-click the entry for a shared library in the Source pane to open a separate window that 
shows the library’s contents.
3.
4.
5.
6.
1.
2.
3.
4.
tip

Project 13: Share Your Household’s Music and Movies Easily and Effectively  141
Disconnect a Shared Library
To disconnect a shared library you’ve connected to, take one of these actions:
Click the Eject icon next to the library in the Source pane.
Click the library in the Source pane and then either press CTRL-E, click the 
Eject icon in the lower-right corner of the iTunes window, or choose Controls | 
Disconnect Library (where Library is the name of the shared library).
Right-click the library in the Source pane and choose Disconnect.
Share Your Music More Effectively with Other Local Users
As you saw earlier in this step, iTunes makes it easy for you to share either your li-
brary or specific playlists with other iTunes users on your local area network (LAN). 
You can share with up to five different computers per day, and your computer must 
be attached to the network and powered on for other computers to be able to access 
your shared files. 
You may also want to share your music and videos with other users of your 
computer. As you saw in Step 2, Windows Media Player knows the ins and outs of 
Windows Firewall and can share your media files even if you’ve put them in the 
folders within your user account that are normally barred to anyone but you. iTunes 
doesn’t have this inside knowledge, and as a result, you have to work around the se-
curity features built into Windows before you can share your music and video files.  
●
●
●
Figure 13-3  
Computers sharing 
libraries appear in the 
Source pane in iTunes, 
allowing you to quickly 
browse the songs and 
other items that are 
being shared.

142
Part II: Intermediate
Your iTunes library, which is stored by default in your Music\iTunes\iTunes Music 
folder, is securely protected from other users of your computer. That’s great if you 
want to keep your music to yourself, but not so great if you want to share it with 
your friends, family, or coworkers.
The easiest way to give other users access to your library is to move it to the Pub-
lic folder. Windows creates this folder automatically when you install it, and shares it 
automatically with other users of your computer but not with other computers on the 
network. The Public folder appears at the top level of the file system from the user’s 
point of view. Choose Start | Computer to open a Computer window, click the drop-
down arrow at the left end of the Address bar, and choose Public. In the Public folder, 
you’ll find a full set of folders for sharing, including Public Music, Public Pictures, 
and Public Videos.
Moving your library to the Public Music folder involves two steps: Moving the 
files, and then telling iTunes where you’ve moved them to.
Move Your Library Files to the Shared Folder
To move your library files to the Public Music folder or the Shared Music folder, fol-
low these steps:
Close iTunes if it’s running. (For example, press ALT-F4 or choose File | Exit.)
Open your library folder.  Choose Start | Music to open a Windows Explorer 
window showing your Music folder.
Double-click the iTunes folder to open it. You’ll see an iTunes Music Library.
xml file, an iTunes Music Library.itl file, and an iTunes Music folder. The first 
two files must stay in your library folder. If you remove them, iTunes won’t 
be able to find your library, and it will create these files again from scratch.
Right-click the iTunes Music folder and choose Cut to cut it to the Clip-
board.
In the Music folder, double-click the shortcut to the Sample Music folder. 
(The Sample Music folder is in the Public Music folder, so double-clicking 
the Sample Music folder’s shortcut is a handy way to jump to inside the Pub-
lic Music folder.) In the Address bar, click the Public Music item to display 
the folder’s contents.
Right-click an open space in the Public Music folder, and then choose Paste 
to paste the iTunes Music folder into the folder.
Close the Windows Explorer window. (For example, press ALT-F4 or choose 
File | Close.)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Project 13: Share Your Household’s Music and Movies Easily and Effectively  143
Tell iTunes Where the Media Files Are Located
Next, you need to tell iTunes where the song files and other media files are:
Start iTunes. (For example, double-click the iTunes icon on your Desktop.)
Press CTRL-COMMA or choose Edit | Preferences to display the iTunes  
dialog box.
Click the Advanced tab to display its contents.
Click the Change button to display the Browse For Folder dialog box.
Navigate to the Public Music folder, and then click the OK button to close the 
Browse For Folder dialog box.
Click the OK button to close the iTunes dialog box.
After you’ve done this, iTunes knows where the files are, and you can play them 
back as usual. When you rip further song files from CD or import files, iTunes stores 
them in the Public Music folder.
You’re all set. The other users of your PC can do either of two things:
Move their library to the Public Music folder, using the techniques described 
here, so that all files are stored centrally. Instead of moving the library folder 
itself, they should move the folders it contains. Users can then add songs 
they import to the shared library, and all users can access them.
Keep their library separate, but add the contents of the shared library folder 
to it:
 Choose File | Add Folder To Library to display the Browse For Folder 
dialog box.
Navigate to the Public Music folder.
Select the iTunes Music folder.
Click the Open button. iTunes adds all the latest songs to the library.
Whichever approach the other users of your PC choose, the songs that they add 
to the shared library don’t appear automatically in your library. To add all the latest 
songs, use the Add To Library dialog box, as described in the previous list—but be 
careful not to add the same songs twice.
If you do add the same songs to your library twice (or more), click the Music item in the Library 
area of the Source pane, and then choose View | Show Duplicates to reveal duplicate songs. 
You can then delete any unwanted duplicates once you’ve made sure they’re actually duplicates 
rather than other versions of the same songs.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
●
●
1.
2.
3.
4.
note

144
Part II: Intermediate
Step 4: Set Up a Media Server for Your Household
If you find that trying to play songs stored in libraries that keep disappearing off the 
network is too tedious, another option is to set up a media server for your household. 
In the old days, a server would be a dedicated computer that you kept running the 
whole time, but there’s also a modern alternative that you may find preferable—a 
network-aware drive or an external hard drive connected to a network router.
If you have an old computer that you can turn into a server, and you’re prepared 
to leave it running the whole time, cranking up your electricity bill, the server is a 
good option. But if getting a server would mean buying a new computer, a network 
drive may be a better choice. Let’s look at the network drive option first.
This section assumes that you’re using the server primarily to share media files—but you can 
also use it to share other files (such as documents or spreadsheets) or to back up files.
Choose a Network Drive
A network drive tends to be a neater solution than running a full-bore server—and it 
is usually much lighter on the electricity than is a server. And if you’re really lucky, 
you may already have a network router that can share a drive. So start by making 
sure you know the capabilities of your network router. An increasing number of these 
include one or more USB ports to which you can attach an external drive, and then 
share it on the network. The configuration process varies depending on the router 
manufacturer, but it is usually easy. If your router has this capability, all you need do 
is buy an external drive, connect it via USB, and configure it for sharing.
If your network router doesn’t have the capability to share an attached USB drive, 
look at independent network-attached storage (NAS) devices designed for consumers 
rather than corporations. You can find these at any computer store worth patronizing, 
but you may find a wider variety at online stores such as Amazon (www.amazon 
.com) and CDW (www.cdw.com).
Examples of NAS devices include those in the following list. On most of these 
sites, you’ll want to follow a Network Storage link to find the devices if they don’t 
have links on the home page.
LinkStation series Buffalo Technology Inc. (www.buffalotech.com)
StorCenter series Iomega Corporation (www.iomega.com)
Ethernet Big Disk NAS Server series LaCie (www.lacie.com)
Shared Storage NAS Server Seagate Technology LLC (www.seagate.com)
Once you’ve bought the NAS device, connect it to your network via an Ethernet 
cable, and then configure it following the instructions that come with it.
●
●
●
●
note

Project 13: Share Your Household’s Music and Movies Easily and Effectively  145
Set Up a “Real” Server
You can either build a server from scratch on a new computer or change the role of 
one of your existing computers—even a pensioned-off computer that’s too old to run 
Windows Vista or XP at a decent speed. Whether you buy (or build) a new computer 
or repurpose an existing computer will color your choices for your server. Here are 
notes on the key components for the server:
Operating system The server can run Windows Vista or Windows XP if 
you have a copy that you can spare; if not, you might consider using a less 
expensive (or even free) operating system, such as one of the many distribu-
tions of Linux.
Another possibility is to use Windows Home Server. After installing Windows Home Server, you 
can manage the server remotely through a management console, so the computer running  
Windows Home Server doesn’t even need a monitor or a keyboard.
Processor The server can run on a modest processor—even an antiquated 
one by today’s standards, such as a 500-MHz or faster processor for a Win-
dows or Linux server.
RAM The server needs only enough RAM to run the operating system un-
less you’ll need to run applications on it. For example, 256MB of RAM is 
adequate for a server running Windows XP. Windows Vista requires 512MB 
or (preferably) 1GB.
Disk space The server must have enough disk space to store all the songs 
and other files you want to have available. A desktop computer is likely to be 
a better bet than a notebook computer, because you can add internal drives to 
it. Alternatively, you might use one or more external USB or FireWire drives 
to provide plenty of space.
Network connection The server must be connected to your network, either 
via network cable or via wireless. A wireless connection is adequate for serv-
ing a few computers, but in most cases, a wired connection (Fast Ethernet or 
Gigabit Ethernet) is a much better choice.
Monitor If the server will simply be running somewhere convenient (rath-
er than being used for other computing tasks, such as running applications), 
all you need is an old monitor capable of displaying the bootup and login 
screens for the operating system. After that, you can turn the monitor off 
until you need to restart or configure the server.
Keyboard and mouse Like the monitor, the keyboard and mouse can be 
basic devices, because you’ll need to use them only for booting and configur-
ing the server.
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
note

146
Part II: Intermediate
CD-ROM drive Your server needs a CD-ROM drive only if you’ll use 
the server for ripping. If you’ll rip on the clients, the server can get by 
without one.
Sound card Your server needs a sound card only if you’ll use it for playing 
music or other media files.
Reliability Your server may be modest, but it must be reliable—otherwise 
the files won’t be available when you want to play them. Make sure also that 
the server has plenty of cooling, and configure its power settings so that it 
doesn’t go to sleep.
Location If you choose to leave your server running all the time, locate it 
somewhere safe. To keep down the noise, you may be tempted to hide the 
server away in a closet. If you do, make sure there’s enough ventilation so 
that the server doesn’t overheat.
Place the Files and Media Libraries on the Server
Once you’ve gotten your NAS device or server up and running, perform these 
general steps:
Create a folder that will contain the songs.
Share that folder on the network so that all the users you want to be able 
to play music are allowed to access it.
On each of the client computers, move the library into the shared folder.
●
●
●
●
1.
2.
3.

147
Project 14
Turn Your PC 
into a Recording 
Studio
What You’ll Need
Hardware: Audio interface, microphones, your existing instruments, 
a room
Software: Audacity
Cost: $100 U.S. and up to wherever you choose to stop
B
ack in the old days before PCs became ubiquitous and multipotent, recording 
high-quality audio was a complex process involving expensive equipment, reel-
to-reel recorders, and usually a studio. Recording a track worth other people’s 
listening time usually meant a serious investment of time, money, and effort.
Now that PCs powerful enough to handle audio and video are easily affordable, 
recording is far easier, though it can still be as complex as you choose to make it. 
For example, if you want to record an entire rock band (or other musical group) all 
together, you’ll need a load of microphones, pickups, and mixing gear. But if you’re 
happy to proceed by recording one or two instruments at a time, and then mixing the 
tracks together on your PC, you can get impressive results using only a minimum 
of equipment.
This project shows you how to turn your PC into a recording studio by getting the 
hardware and installing the software you need for recording. The next project demon-
strates how to use the software to record and mix tracks together.
Step 1: Prepare a Room for Recording
If you will use a studio for recording, you can skip this section. But if you’re not in a po-
sition to afford burning handfuls of dollars every hour, you’ll do better to work at home. 
The basic rule of home recording is to make the most of what you’ve got. Chances are 
that you won’t have a spare room that you can devote to recording, so you will probably 
need to repurpose an existing room—for example, your bedroom or the living room.
●
●
●

148
Part II: Intermediate
A bedroom can actually be a great choice for home recording, because it contains curtains and 
soft objects that help absorb sound. 
Whatever type of room you have available, you’ll need to prepare the room acous-
tically as far as possible and set up the PC in a suitable and (preferably) quiet way. 
The next sections offer suggestions for how to go about these tasks.
Work on the Room’s Acoustics
Have you ever walked into a big, empty room with bare walls—a community hall, 
perhaps, or a school gym—and heard your footsteps echoing back at you? Or your 
voice booming when you spoke? In such rooms, standing waves tend to occur when 
something makes a noise. Your heel cracks down on the floor, and the noise bounces 
off one wall, reflecting across the room to the other wall, where it bounces off again. 
The waves meet up again in the middle of the room, producing the standing waves.
Unless you’re deliberately aiming for a recording that sounds as though it was 
made in a garbage can, you’ll want to minimize standing waves by taming the sound 
reflections. To tame the reflections, you need to break up any bare walls or similar 
surfaces (such as fitted closet doors) in the room. For example:
Draw the curtains. The curtains will damp down the window.
Hang a blanket over and around the door. This will damp down the door and 
also reduce the amount of sound leaking out of the room.
Remove any sliding closet doors. These loose, flat objects can vibrate beautifully. 
After removing such doors, hang a blanket over the open space to deaden it.
Put a rug on a bare floor. Polished hardwood floors are beautiful, but the sound 
bounces off them big-time. Use a rug or some off-cuts of carpet to absorb the 
sound.
Add furniture. Your first reaction is probably to shift all the furniture out of 
the room so that you have space for your instruments (and for you and your 
bandmates to express yourselves). But a bed, sofa, armchairs, and so on are 
great for reducing standing waves.
Put a cushion or bean-bag in each open corner. If the room has open corners, you 
need to damp them down. One easy way is to put a pillow, cushion, bean-
bag, or folded blanket in each open corner. Alternatively, move furniture into 
the corners. For example, put an armchair in a corner.
If you have pets, remove them from not only your studio but the surrounding area when you’re 
playing. This is not just to avoid the potential cruelty of forcing them to listen to your music but 
also to prevent them from adding vocal contributions—for example, your dog might decide to 
howl when a stringed instrument hits the animal’s resonant frequency.
●
●
●
●
●
●
note
tip

Project 14: Turn Your PC into a Recording Studio  149
You also need to, within reason, remove any objects that may resonate or vibrate. 
When you and your bandmates start playing your instruments, any loose objects in 
the room will start getting a sonic workout. When an object, or part of it, hits its reso-
nant frequency, it starts to vibrate or rattle. This is awkward enough when a single 
object starts vibrating noisily when you’re playing, but if your band goes in for a 
wall-of-sound sonic assault, you’ll probably get multiple objects vibrating or rattling 
at the same time. Musical instruments tend to be prime culprits here, though they’re 
not the only ones (your mom’s collection of china plates, tastefully arranged on dis-
play racks, might collect an interesting range of vibrations). For example, if you have 
a piano in your recording room, other instruments from drums to guitars will make 
its strings vibrate, so you’ll probably want to remove it from the room if you’re not 
using it. Bass guitar often sets the snare wires on a snare drum vibrating. And other 
instruments can trigger vibrations in guitars.
Set Up Your PC in the Recording Room
Next, set up your PC in the recording room so that you can connect your sound sourc-
es to it. Normally, you’ll have two main considerations when setting up the PC:
Position the PC where it is as easy to use as possible.
Avoid recording any noise that the PC itself makes.
Make the PC Easy to Use When Recording
Set up your PC in the room so that you’ll be able to access it easily while you’re record-
ing. For example, if you’re wearing a guitar or bass, you will probably find it easier to 
use the PC while standing than while sitting, so putting the monitor, keyboard, and 
mouse on a higher surface than usual may be helpful. On the other hand, if you’ll be 
hammering away at musical keyboards most of the time, having the computer key-
board somewhere you can reach from a seated position will usually be preferable.
Avoid Recording Noise from Your PC
To make sure that their recordings contain no noise from the computers used for re-
cordings, professional sound studios use computers that are almost totally silenced. 
You too can have a totally silent PC, but they tend to be expensive.
See Project 22 for instructions on reducing the amount of noise your PC makes—and to learn 
sources for buying totally silent PCs.
More likely, though, you’ll want to get started with your existing PC. If the PC is 
noisy enough to create problems with the recording, try these workarounds:
Place the PC’s CPU in a corner of the room as far as possible from your mi-
crophones and pickups. Screen the CPU off with furniture, cushions, or other 
sonic baffles. If you’re tempted to cover it with blankets, make sure it doesn’t 
overheat.
●
●
●
note

150
Part II: Intermediate
If your PC is a noisy laptop, treat the whole of the laptop as the CPU, positioning it away from 
your microphones and pickups. Attach an external monitor, keyboard, and mouse to the laptop.
Position the monitor, keyboard, and mouse where you need to control the 
recording, and connect them to the CPU via extension cables.
If you can run cables under a door, through a vent, or through a serving 
hatch, you may even be able to position the CPU in a different room from the 
monitor, keyboard, and mouse.
If you’re using an external audio interface, as recommended in this project, 
position it with the monitor, keyboard, and mouse. Again, you’ll probably 
need an extension cable.
Step 2: Get the Audio Hardware You Need
Since around the turn of the millennium, it has been hard to buy a PC that doesn’t 
have multimedia capabilities, so there’s every chance that your PC includes at least 
basic sound hardware. But if you’re planning on serious amounts of recording, you 
may want to beef up your PC’s audio capabilities.
Choose an Audio Interface
For most people starting out with recording audio, the easiest choice usually is an 
external audio interface, which is basically a sound box into which you can connect 
your instruments. The sound box sits outside your PC and transfers the sound to the 
PC via USB or FireWire. Figure 14-1 shows the MobilePre USB audio interface from 
M-Audio (www.m-audio.com), which this project uses as its example.
Having a single cable going to your PC tends to be much easier than simply plug-
ging instruments or microphones into the sound card—especially on a laptop PC, 
which normally has only a single audio input. However, if you do want to be able to 
●
●
●
note
Figure 14-1  
An external audio 
interface such as the 
MobilePre USB makes  
it easy to get a high-
quality audio signal into 
your PC.

Project 14: Turn Your PC into a Recording Studio  151
plug multiple instruments and microphones directly into a desktop PC, and you’re 
prepared to install a PCI sound card, you can use an audio interface such as the Delta 
1010LT (see Figure 14-2), also available from M-Audio.
Connect Your Audio Interface to Your PC
If you’re using an external audio interface, you need to connect it to your PC and 
install any drivers that Windows needs in order to recognize and use the interface. 
This section shows you the general steps you need to follow. The example uses an 
M-Audio MobilePre USB interface; the precise steps needed to connect any other audio 
interface will almost certainly be somewhat different.
To connect your audio interface, follow these general steps:
Install the driver software for the interface:
Even if the interface included a disc containing drivers, it’s a good idea to 
visit the manufacturer’s web site to see if an updated version is available.
Even though an interface may appear to be a single object to the human 
eye (for example, a box with knobs, switches, and connectors), to Win-
dows it may appear as several different components. For example, the  
M-Audio MobilePre USB appears as both a USB controller (as shown on the 
left here) and a sound, video, or game controller (as shown on the right).
1.
●
●
Figure 14-2  
An internal audio inter-
face such as the Delta 
1010LT lets you plug a 
wide array of instru-
ments directly into a 
desktop PC.

152
Part II: Intermediate
When the software installation is complete, or when the installation routine 
prompts you to do so, plug in the audio interface.
When Windows tells you that your device or devices are ready to use, click 
the Close button. If Windows prompts you to restart your PC, do so.
Step 3: Connect or Mike Your Instruments
The next step is to connect your instruments to the audio interface. How you will do 
this depends on what types of instruments you have and what types of audio inter-
face, but here are brief examples.
Vocals
Use a good-quality dynamic microphone designed to pick up a full range of vocals, 
not that extra webcam mike that has been sitting unused for three years because you 
bought a Bluetooth headset. Normally, you’ll plug the microphone directly into the 
audio interface unless you need to run it through any effects boxes first—for example, 
to multitrack your voice.
Use a pop shield to protect the microphone from any excesses in your voice stream. If you don’t 
have a pop shield, you can create a workable substitute quickly by stretching an old pair of 
nylons over a coat hanger.
If you’ll be playing an instrument while singing, you’ll need a microphone stand. 
If you can devote your full energy to singing, holding the microphone will give you 
more freedom.
Acoustic Guitar
To record an acoustic guitar, use a dynamic microphone positioned about a hand’s 
breadth away from the sound hole in the guitar. Normally, you’ll want to use a micro-
phone stand to hold the microphone in place, but if you’re short of a stand, you may 
be able to tape the microphone to the back of a chair. (If so, tape it securely, and make 
sure the chair is stable enough to avoid vibration.)
Electric Guitar or Bass
When recording electric guitar, you have two main options:
Run the guitar through your effects pedals or processors (reverb, wah-wah, 
or whatever), and then run a cord from the last pedal or processor to your 
audio interface so that you can record the processed sound. This approach 
lets you create your preferred sound in your regular way, and then simply 
record it.
2.
3.
●
tip

Project 14: Turn Your PC into a Recording Studio  153
Connect the guitar directly to the audio interface and record it “clean,” and 
then apply audio effects in Audacity as needed (Audacity is introduced in 
Step 4). This approach gives you more flexibility in Audacity, but you will 
need to learn a different way of creating your preferred sound.
If you’re in a hurry to get results, go with the first option. Given more time, you 
will probably want to experiment with both approaches and find out which suits you 
the best.
When recording electric bass, proceed as for electric guitar.
Drums
Most drummers swear by acoustic drums and swear at electronic drums, but elec-
tronic drums are far easier to record than acoustic drums, as you can run the signal 
directly into your audio interface. This section assumes you’ve got acoustic drums.
In the olden days, big-band recording engineers would devote a single micro-
phone to the drums, positioning it with great care but often not a great deal of success. 
As you’ll know, if you’ve listened to such recordings, unless the engineer was very 
good (or got lucky), some of the drums would be dominant and others barely audible. 
These days, many professional recording studios mike each drum or percussion item 
(for example, a hi-hat or a cymbal) separately. Some of the key drums or percussion 
items may even enjoy two or more microphones to give the engineer more flexibility 
in processing the sound.
In a pinch, you can create acceptable drum tracks by positioning one microphone 
on either side of the drum kit. You’ll need to experiment to find the best placement, 
and you may need to vary your normal drumming style—for example, by striking 
some drums less hard than usual so that they don’t swamp the other drums. If you’re 
looking for optimum results, grit your teeth, buy the microphones and microphone 
stands, and then position them as follows:
Bass drum Take off the front skin (the one away from the drum pedal and 
beater), and place a folded blanket against the back skin (the one the drum 
beater strikes) to dampen the sound. Position a dynamic microphone inside 
the bass drum. If you need to deepen the bass drum’s sound, place a thick 
blanket over the drum (but not over the back skin).
Snare drum Position a dynamic microphone a few inches away from the 
drum head on the side opposite the drummer. If the snare rings too loud, use 
damping gels (widely available in music stores) or cloth and tape to damp 
the sound.
When positioning microphones on drums, your challenge is to get them close enough to the 
drum head to pick up the sound clearly without the sound of other percussion but far enough 
away from the drummer’s flailing sticks. A well-struck microphone makes a fine, dramatic sound 
on a recording—but usually only once.
●
●
●
note
note

154
Part II: Intermediate
Toms For each tom, position a dynamic microphone a few inches away 
from the drum head on the side opposite the drummer.
Hi-hat Position a condenser microphone a few inches away from the top 
plate of the hi-hat at the upper extent of its travel.
Cymbals Position a condenser microphone six inches to a foot from each of 
the most important cymbals (for example, your primary ride cymbal). Cym-
bals that you use less—for example, ancillary crash or splash cymbals—may 
be able to share a microphone effectively.
If you’re short of microphones, cut down your drum kit to a minimum. For example, by ditching 
the second tom, the floor tom, and a couple of crash or splash cymbals, you can save yourself a 
handful of microphones.
Step 4: Download and Install Audacity
Many different recording programs are available, but if you’re feeling the knock-on 
effects of the subprime pinch, the best place to start is with a free program. Luckily, 
there’s a great one, Audacity, which runs not only on Windows but also on Linux and 
the Mac. Go to the Audacity page on the SourceForge.net web site (http://sourceforge 
.net/projects/audacity/) and download Audacity by following the link that leads to 
the latest stable version for Windows. (There’s also an unstable version that’s suitable 
only for the adventurous.) You want the version described as “.exe (32-bit Windows),” 
not the zip file.
Internet Explorer may try to block you from downloading Audacity. If nothing happens when 
you click the download link, click the Information Bar (the yellow bar that appears between the 
lowest toolbar and the top of the window) to display a menu that allows you to circumvent the 
blocking.
To install Audacity, follow these steps:
Run the file you’ve downloaded. For example, if you’re using Internet Ex-
plorer, click the Run button in the Download Complete dialog box.
If Internet Explorer displays a Security Warning dialog box to let you know 
that “The publisher could not be verified,” click the Run button. As long as 
you’ve downloaded Audacity via SourceForge, the file should be fine, even 
though it has not been signed with a digital certificate. You also need to go 
through User Account Control for the audacity-win program (unless you 
have turned off User Account Control).
Accept the license agreement.
●
●
●
1.
2.
3.
tip
note

Project 14: Turn Your PC into a Recording Studio  155
Specify where to install Audacity. The default location, in an Audacity folder 
inside your Program Files folder, is fine unless you particularly want to put 
it somewhere else.
On the Select Additional Tasks screen, choose whether to create a Desktop 
icon (you may find it useful) and create Windows file associations with the 
Audacity project file extension (.aup; usually a good idea).
On the Completing The Audacity Setup Wizard screen, leave the Launch 
Audacity check box selected so that the wizard launches Audacity for you.
The first time you run Audacity, choose the language you want to use. You then 
see an Audacity window. Project 15 shows you how to use the Audacity interface, so 
for now, your next step is to configure Audacity for sound recording.
Step 5: Configure Audacity for Sound Recording
Part of Audacity’s power comes from the wide variety of configurable settings it of-
fers. By choosing suitable settings, you can greatly increase your chances of making a 
high-quality recording that others will listen to with pleasure rather than with horror 
or embarrassment. To access the settings, choose Edit | Preferences. Audacity opens 
the Audacity Preferences dialog box.
Configure Input/Output Settings
With the Audacity Preferences dialog box open, start by configuring the audio input/
output settings:
Click the Audio I/O tab to display its contents (see Figure 14-3).
In the Playback drop-down list, select the audio device you want to use for 
playing back audio. For example, you may want to output audio through 
your audio interface so that you can play it through an amplifier rather than 
merely listen to it on speakers.
4.
5.
6.
1.
2.
Figure 14-3  
Choose your playback 
and recording devices, 
and the number of 
channels, on the Audio 
I/O tab.

156
Part II: Intermediate
In the Device drop-down list in the Recording group box, select the item for 
your audio interface.
In the Channels drop-down list, select 1 (Mono) if you’re getting mono input 
or 2 (Stereo) for stereo input. Audacity supports up to 16 channels if your 
input device can supply them.
If you want to play back the existing tracks in the audio project while record-
ing a new track, select the Play Other Tracks While Recording New One check 
box. This setting lets you play along with what you’ve recorded so far.
If you want Audacity to play back each new track as you record it, select the 
Software Playthrough check box.
Leave the Audacity Preferences dialog box open for the moment so that you can 
choose recording quality settings.
Choose Recording Quality Settings
To choose recording quality settings, follow these steps:
Click the Quality tab to display its contents (see Figure 14-4).
In the Default Sample Rate drop-down list, select 44100 Hz unless you 
know you want to use a different sample rate. 44100 Hz (often described as 
44.1 kilohertz, or kHz) is the sample rate used for CDs, and provides very 
high audio quality. Audacity does offer much higher sample rates—up to 
96000 Hz—if you need them.
In the Default Sample Format drop-down list, choose 32-bit Float if your 
sound card supports 32-bit sound. This gives you the best audio quality—but 
if your sound card maxes out at 16-bit sound, there’s no point in using 32-bit 
sound, so choose 16-bit instead, and you will reduce the file sizes by half. If 
your sound card supports 24-bit sound, choose 24-bit, which is the stage in 
3.
4.
5.
6.
1.
2.
3.
Figure 14-4  
Choose the default 
sample rate and default 
sample format on the 
Quality tab.

Project 14: Turn Your PC into a Recording Studio  157
between 16-bit and 32-bit sound. (Check your sound card’s documentation if 
you’re not sure of its capabilities.)
In the Real-Time Sample Rate Converter drop-down list, choose Fast Sinc 
Interpolation. 
In the High-Quality Sample Rate Converter drop-down list, choose High-
Quality Sinc Interpolation. 
In the Real-Time Dither drop-down list, choose None. 
In the High-Quality Dither drop-down list, choose Triangle. 
Again, leave the Audacity Preferences dialog box open so that you can continue 
choosing settings.
Choose File Formats Settings
To choose file formats settings, follow these steps:
Click the File Formats tab to display its contents (see Figure 14-5).
In the When Importing Uncompressed Audio Files Into Audacity group box, 
select the Make A Copy Of The File Before Editing option button if you want 
to avoid even the possibility of damage to your existing uncompressed audio 
files (for example, WAV files) when importing them into Audacity for your 
projects. Select the Read Directly From The Original File option button if 
you’re prepared to tolerate the faint possibility of damage occurring while 
Audacity reads the files.
4.
5.
6.
7.
1.
2.
Figure 14-5  
The most important 
setting on the File For-
mats tab is the Uncom-
pressed Export Format 
drop-down list. You can 
also use the controls on 
this tab to add an MP3 
encoder to Audacity.

158
Part II: Intermediate
In the Uncompressed Export Format drop-down list, choose the format in 
which you want to export uncompressed audio:
This is the format in which you will export your project files unless you 
compress them using the OGG encoder or an MP3 encoder that you add 
(as described in the sidebar, “Add an MP3 Encoder to Audacity so that 
You Can Create MP3 Files”).
Normally, the best choice here is WAV (Microsoft 16 Bit PCM) if you’re 
working with a 16-bit sample size, or WAV (Microsoft 32 Bit Float) if 
you’re working with a 32-bit sample size.
If you will export audio files to the Ogg Vorbis file format, choose a quality 
on the OGG Quality slider.
Ogg Vorbis is a free, open-source encoder for compressed audio. Ogg Vorbis competes with the 
MP3 encoder (which is proprietary), but at this writing, MP3 is much more widely used.
If you will export audio files to the MP3 file format, add an MP3 encoder to 
Audacity, and then choose settings. See the following sidebar, “Add an MP3 
Encoder to Audacity so that You Can Create MP3 Files,” for details.
3.
●
●
4.
5.
Add an MP3 Encoder to Audacity so that  
You Can Create MP3 Files
If you want to be able to create MP3 files directly from Audacity, you must add 
an MP3 encoder to Audacity. Alternatively, you can export WAV files from 
Audacity, import them into a media player such as Windows Media Player or 
iTunes, and then create MP3 files using that program’s MP3 encoder. To add an 
MP3 encoder to Audacity, follow these steps:
Download the latest stable version of the LAME encoder from the 
LAME Project home page (http://lame.sourceforge.net/index.php) 
or another site. The Audacity home page maintains a link to a site that 
provides LAME downloads.
Internet Explorer may try to block this download. Click the Information Bar to display a 
menu that allows you to download the file.
Extract the lame_enc.dll file from the download package and put it in 
the System32 folder in your Windows folder:
The easiest way to open a Windows Explorer window to this 
folder is to choose Start | Run, type %windir%\system32, and 
then press ENTER.
Windows may try to hide the contents of the System32 folder from 
you. If so, click the Show The Contents Of This Folder link.
1.
2.
●
●
note
note

Project 14: Turn Your PC into a Recording Studio  159
The Spectrograms tab of the Audacity Preferences dialog box lets you change the way in which 
Audacity displays spectrograms of audio tracks. (To display a spectrogram, click the track’s drop-
down menu and choose Spectrum.) You probably won’t need to change the default Fast Fourier 
Transform (FFT) setting from 256 until you’re experienced with Audacity, but you may want to 
select the Grayscale check box to view the spectrograms in grayscale rather than in color. You 
can also change the maximum frequency on this tab, but try using the default setting at first.
Choose Interface Settings
Audacity is highly customizable, and the Interface tab and Keyboard tab of the Au-
dacity Preferences dialog box let you configure how Audacity’s interface appears and 
how you can use the keyboard to control the program. The Mouse tab is informa-
tional only. When you’re getting started with Audacity, the settings you’re most likely 
to want to change are those on the Interface tab (see Figure 14-6).
Here are the key settings, with suggested choices:
Autoscroll While Playing Controls whether Audacity automatically scrolls 
the display of the tracks while recording or playing back. Turn this setting on 
unless you find that you get breaks in the audio because your PC is strug-
gling to keep up. (This should be a problem only on an underpowered PC.)
●
Display the Audacity Preferences dialog box by pressing CTRL-P or 
choosing Edit | Preferences.
Click the File Formats tab to display its contents.
Check the MP3 Export Setup area. If the MP3 Library Version readout 
says “MP3 exporting plugin not found,” you need to add an MP3 
encoder.
Click the Find Library button. Audacity displays the Export MP3 dialog 
box, which explains that you need to supply the LAME MP3 encoder 
and asks if you want to provide it.
Click the Yes button and use the resulting dialog box to find lame_enc.dll 
in the folder to which you extracted it in step 2.
Click the Open button. Audacity adds the LAME version to the MP3 
Library Version readout.
In the Bit Rate drop-down list, select the bitrate at which you want 
to export MP3 files. For example, choose 128 Kbps if you want ac-
ceptable-quality audio at small file sizes (for instance, so that you can 
cram more songs onto a low-capacity iPod) or choose 320 Kbps for 
maximum quality at the expense of file size.
Click the OK button to close the Audacity Preferences dialog box.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
note

160
Part II: Intermediate
Always Allow Pausing Controls whether Audacity enables the Pause but-
ton even when you’re not playing or recording. Selecting this check box lets 
you click the Pause button to put Audacity on Pause, and then click the Re-
cord button to get Audacity ready to record; you can then click the Pause 
button to set the recording going. This action may seem familiar if you’ve 
recorded on cassette recorders. On cassette recorders, starting recording this 
way made sense because applying the recording heads made a noise. In Au-
dacity, most people find it easier simply to click the Record button when 
they’re ready to start recording.
Always Allow Playing Controls whether Audacity enables the Play button 
even when you don’t need it for controlling playback. Normally, it is best to 
leave this check box cleared.
Update Spectrogram While Playing Controls whether Audacity updates 
the display of the spectrogram while playing audio. As long as your PC can 
manage the updating without the audio breaking up, you’ll probably find 
this setting helpful.
Enable Edit Toolbar Controls whether Audacity lets you use the Edit tool-
bar. Normally, you’ll want to keep this check box selected.
Enable Mixer Toolbar Controls whether Audacity lets you use the Mixer 
toolbar. This toolbar also is usually helpful to have, so keep this check box 
selected.
●
●
●
●
●
Figure 14-6  
The Interface tab lets 
you control which 
toolbars are available 
and the minimum deci-
bel display range that 
Audacity uses.

Project 14: Turn Your PC into a Recording Studio  161
Enable Meter Toolbar Controls whether Audacity lets you use the Meter 
toolbar. Most people find this toolbar vital to making good recordings, so 
keep this check box selected too.
Enable Dragging Of Left And Right Selection Edges Controls whether 
Audacity lets you drag the left and right edges of a selection to change the 
length of the selection. If you clear this check box, clicking the left or right 
edge of a selection will create a new selection.
Minimum Of dB Mode Display Range Controls the scale that Audac-
ity uses for displaying logarithmic waveforms. Briefly, you have a range of 
choices. At a low setting (such as –36 decibels), quiet sounds appear to be 
silent, but you get a clear view of the sounds at the louder end of the scale. 
At a high setting (such as –145 decibels), you get a clear view of the quieter 
sounds, but the sounds at the louder end of the scale have less differentia-
tion. Try starting with –48 decibels, but change the setting depending on 
whether you’re working with primarily loud sounds (choose a low setting) 
or primarily quieter sounds (choose a high setting).
Choose a Temporary Folder
Audacity automatically sets itself up to use a temporary folder for recording data 
that you haven’t yet explicitly assigned to a specific file. This folder has a name such 
as audacity_1_2_temp and is located within the Temp folder in your user profile. For 
example, if your username is Dave, you’ll find the Audacity temp folder somewhere 
like this on Windows Vista: C:\Users\Dave\AppData\Local\Temp\audacity_ 
1_2_temp. You can change where the temporary folder is located by clicking the Di-
rectories tab in the Audacity Preferences dialog box and using the controls in the 
Temp. Directory group box:
You can place the temporary folder anywhere in your PC’s file system, but for 
best performance, follow these simple guidelines:
Use a local hard drive To ensure that the temporary folder is always pres-
ent, use a local hard drive rather than an external hard drive or a removable 
drive. A local hard drive will normally also give better performance.
The Keyboard tab of the Audacity Preferences dialog box lets you set up custom keyboard shortcuts 
for Audacity so that you can work faster. 
●
●
●
●
tip

162
Part II: Intermediate
If you have two hard drives, avoid the system drive  In a desktop system 
(or one of the rare laptops) that has two or more physical hard drives, put 
your temporary folder and your project folders on a drive other than the 
system drive. The system drive is the drive on which Windows is installed. 
Windows puts the paging file (which Windows uses for extra memory space) 
on the system drive, keeping the system drive busy. If your PC has only one 
hard drive, don’t worry about this.
Make sure there’s plenty of space The Free Space readout at the bottom 
of the Temp. Directory shows you how much space is available on the disk 
on which the temporary folder is currently located. To ensure worry-free 
recording, allow yourself at least 5–10GB of free space on the disk.
Recording 32-bit audio at 44.1 kHz and in stereo takes up about 20MB of space per minute. 
Each gigabyte buys you around 50 minutes of jamming. If you find yourself running short of 
disk space, you may want to archive your old recordings to recordable CDs or DVDs—or simply 
delete them.
When you’ve finished choosing settings, click the OK button to close the Audac-
ity Preferences dialog box.
At this point, your home recording studio is set up, and all systems are ready to 
go. It’s time to start recording.
●
●
note

163
Project 15
Record Music 
on Your PC
What You’ll Need
Hardware: Recording gear (as discussed in Project 14)
Software: Audacity
Cost: Free
I
n the previous project, you learned to set your PC up for recording audio, such 
as that from your band or your solo performances, by setting up a room to act 
as a studio, adding an audio interface to your PC, and installing and configuring 
the freeware program Audacity. This project shows you how to perform the recording 
itself. You’ll start by meeting the Audacity user interface, which the previous project 
skipped over.
Step 1: Meet the Audacity User Interface
If you’ve continued straight from Project 14, you probably have an Audacity window 
open on your screen. If not, choose Start | All Programs | Audacity to open an Audac-
ity window so that you can meet the main components. When you launch Audacity, 
the program displays an empty project window, as shown in Figure 15-1.
Audacity’s four toolbars provide controls for the actions you’ll take most frequently:
Control toolbar Contains selection tools and playback and recording 
controls.
Selection Tool
Envelope Tool
Draw Tool
Skip to Start
Play
Record
Zoom Tool
Time-Shift Tool
Multi-Tool Mode
Pause
Stop
Skip to End
●
●
●
●

164
Part II: Intermediate
Edit toolbar Contains tools for performing common editing actions (such as 
cut, copy, and paste), trimming and silencing, undo and redo, and zooming.
Undo
Redo
Zoom In
Zoom Out
Fit Selection 
in Window
Cut
Copy
Paste
Trim Outside 
Selection
Silence 
Selection
Fit Project 
in Window
Mixer toolbar Contains an input volume slider, an output volume slider, 
and a source-selection drop-down list.
Output Volume
Input Volume
Source Selection
●
●
Figure 15-1  
Audacity opens a blank 
project and displays its 
toolbars docked at the 
top of the window.
Tracks area
Status bar
Control toolbar
Edit toolbar
Mixer toolbar
Meter toolbar
Timeline

Project15: Record Music on Your PC  165
Meter toolbar Contains an input level meter and an output level meter. 
Also provides access to related commands.
Input Level Meter
Output Level Meter
Apart from the four toolbars, you see four other main elements in the Audacity 
window shown in Figure 15-1:
Menu bar Like most programs, Audacity provides a set of menus that di-
vide commands into manageable categories. For example, the File menu in-
cludes commands that let you create, save, open, and close project files.
Timeline Below the toolbars, at the top of the main area of the window, is 
the timeline, which shows a readout in seconds.
Tracks area In the middle of the window, this large open area is where you 
create and manipulate tracks, as you’ll learn to do shortly.
Status bar At the bottom of the window, the status bar shows information 
such as the sample rate of the active project and details about the current 
selection (when there is one).
Having the four toolbars together at the top of the Audacity window can be handy for keeping 
your most-used controls in one place, but it squashes the toolbars together, particularly in 
a small window (for example, on a small screen). However, you can float any of the toolbars, 
either by dragging the dotted handle at its left end or by opening the View menu and choosing 
its corresponding Float command. Once you’ve floated a toolbar, the View menu displays a Dock 
command that you can use to dock the toolbar again—for example, Dock Control Toolbar. You’ll 
see an example of floating a toolbar shortly.
Step 2: Create a Recording Project
Normally, your first step in making a recording should be to create a new recording 
project for it.
To create a recording project, follow these steps:
Start Audacity if it’s not currently running. For example, choose Start | All 
Programs | Audacity. Audacity automatically creates a new, blank project 
file when you open it.
●
●
●
●
●
1.
tip

166
Part II: Intermediate
If you’ve got another project file open, choose File | New or press CTRL-N to open a new project file.
Choose File | Save Project As. Until you tell Audacity not to warn you any-
more, Audacity displays a Warning dialog box. Read the warning (which 
briefly explains Audacity’s file formats), select the Don’t Show This Warning 
Again check box, and then click the OK button to close the dialog box.
Audacity displays the Save Project As dialog box, which is a standard Save 
dialog box. Choose the folder in which to save the project. As mentioned in 
Project 14, you should allow plenty of disk space for your Audacity record-
ings. Type the name for the project file, and then click the Save button.
2.
3.
Understand How Audacity’s Project Files Work
A recording project is the set of files in which Audacity saves the audio files 
and configuration files that make up an audio project. For example, to create a 
project, you typically either import existing audio files, record new audio files 
from scratch, or both. You then decide which files are worth using, and tell 
Audacity how to mix them.
An Audacity project file uses the .aup file extension, which is associated 
with Audacity. Most other audio programs can’t open Audacity project files, so 
when you want to use another program to listen to or work with audio you’ve 
recorded or created with Audacity, you export the appropriate mix of a project 
to a common file format (such as WAV or MP3).
Start Recording Without Saving a Project…When You Must
If you don’t explicitly save a project, you can simply click the Record but-
ton to start recording audio to Audacity’s temporary folder. (See the section 
“Choose a Temporary Folder” in Project 14 for an explanation of what the tem-
porary folder is and where it’s located.) Such ad hoc recording usually works 
fine, which is handy for those times when a jam that’s going nowhere shows 
signs of turning into a scorcher, or when you’re noodling out the chords to a 
song and suddenly find yourself inspired to sing something you might want 
to keep. Other times, start by creating and saving a project first to keep your 
files in order.
note

Project15: Record Music on Your PC  167
Step 3: Set the Recording Level
Before you record any music, make sure you’ve got the recording level set at the right 
level to capture even the loudest sounds you will generate, as loud as possible, with-
out distorting those sounds. To set the recording level, follow these steps:
In Audacity, choose View | Float Meter Toolbar to display the Meter toolbar 
as a separate floating window rather than docked at the top of the Audacity 
window.
If the Audacity Meter Toolbar window isn’t a suitable size or shape, resize 
or reshape it by dragging its lower-right corner down and to the right. Once 
you drag to a certain size, Audacity automatically changes the configuration 
of the meters:
Start an input source and crank it up to full volume. For example, tell your 
guitarist to start playing—and to turn his amp up to 11.
Click the drop-down button next to the microphone icon and choose Moni-
tor Input.
The Audacity Meter Toolbar window displays the strength of the input sig-
nal, as shown here. Adjust the signal’s strength so that the loudest sound you 
will record registers close to, but below, 0 at the right end of the scale. For 
example, turn down the volume on the audio interface.
For precise work, you may find it easier to have the Audacity Meter Toolbar 
window displayed vertically. To switch dimension, click the drop-down but-
ton next to the microphone icon and choose Vertical Stereo. Again, drag the 
window to the shape and size you want.
If you have plenty of screen space, you may prefer to keep the Audacity Meter 
Toolbar window floating. If you’re pushed for screen space, you can dock the toolbar 
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

168
Part II: Intermediate
again once you’ve set the recording level. To dock the toolbar, choose View | Dock 
Meter Toolbar.
If you have time, test the recording level further by making a test recording that you can play 
back to make sure there’s no distortion. Most people find it hard to predict in advance exactly 
how loud they will play—especially when there is competition from other band members.
Step 4: Record the First Track
Be sure not to record anybody else’s copyrighted work without permission.
At this point, you should be all set to add the first track to your recording project. 
Follow these general steps:
Get the input ready. For example, wake your drummer, feed him a cup of 
coffee, and point him toward the drum kit.
In Audacity, click the Record button. Audacity adds a new track to the proj-
ect and starts recording input.
Start the input. For example, gesture vigorously and explicitly at your drum-
mer until he starts playing.
When you’re ready to stop recording, click the Stop button.
Play back the track by clicking the Play button. Decide whether it’s worth 
keeping. If not, click the Close button (the × button) at the upper-left corner 
of the track to delete the track, and then go back to step 1 of this list.
Rename the track with a descriptive name. Click the drop-down menu but-
ton and choose Name to display the Track Name dialog box. Type the new 
name in the Change Track Name To text box, and then click the OK button.
Press CTRL-S or choose File | Save Project to save the project file (and its com-
ponents).
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Solo or Mute One or More Tracks
When you listen to the first track you’ve recorded, you’ll hear only that track 
when you hit the Play button, because there isn’t any other. But once you’ve 
recorded two or more tracks, Audacity plays them all together unless you tell 
it to do otherwise.
To listen to a track on its own, without hearing any other tracks you’ve re-
corded, click the Solo button for the track, and then click the Play button. You 
can solo multiple tracks at once, so you can use this feature to listen to different 
mixes of tracks. Click the Solo button again to remove soloing from a track.
Alternatively, you can mute any track by clicking its Mute button. Click the 
Mute button again to remove muting.
tip
caution

Project15: Record Music on Your PC  169
Step 5: Apply Effects to a Track
As mentioned in the previous project, you can either record effects into an audio 
stream that you then record in Audacity, or record a clean audio stream and then 
apply effects in Audacity. You can also combine both approaches and apply effects 
in Audacity to a stream that already includes effects.
The advantage of applying effects in Audacity is that you can remove them. By 
contrast, any effects that you’ve recorded into an audio stream normally remain there. 
You may be able to use Audacity’s effects to reduce or remove effects you’ve deliber-
ately recorded in an audio stream, but you’d be unwise to rely on doing so.
Audacity offers a good range of effects, from echo and compression to pitch-
changing and wah-wah. You’ll find all the effects on the Effects menu. To apply an 
effect, follow these general steps:
Click the track you want to affect.
Open the Effects menu and choose the effect you want to apply. For example, 
choose Effect | Compressor if you want to apply dynamic compression to a 
track.
Dynamic compression is useful for punching up a track by reducing its overall dynamic range: 
Quiet sounds become somewhat louder, and the range of difference between the quieter sounds 
and the louder sounds is reduced.
If Audacity displays a dialog box, such as the Dynamic Range Compres-
sor dialog box shown here, choose settings to achieve the sound you want. 
Most of these dialog boxes include a Preview button that lets you audition 
an effect before you actually apply it. When you’ve produced the sound you 
want, click the OK button to apply the effect to the track.
1.
2.
3.
note

170
Part II: Intermediate
Step 6: Add Further Tracks to Your Recording
To add the next track to your recording, you can follow much the same steps as for 
recording the first track: Cue the sound source, click the Record button to add a new 
track and start recording in it, and then set the sound source going. Stop the record-
ing, listen to the resulting track, and apply any effects that are needed.
If you want to hear the existing tracks while you are playing the next track, choose 
Edit | Preferences, make sure the Play Other Tracks While Recording New One check 
box on the Audio I/O tab of the Audacity Preferences dialog box is selected, and then 
click the OK button.
Step 7: Set the Gain and Panning for Each Track
When you’ve recorded all the tracks for your project, you’ll be ready to set the relative 
volume of each track (by adjusting the gain) and its left-right positioning (by adjust-
ing the panning).
You may choose to set gain and panning earlier in the process of adding tracks. For example, 
after recording the first track for a project, you may decide that it belongs on the left of the mix 
and deserves a moderate volume; and you may then pan the next track to the right. However, 
you will probably need to tweak the gain and panning of the tracks further as you add subsequent 
tracks to your project, because adding tracks normally makes the dynamics of the overall sound 
change.
Different people find that different balancing techniques work best for them, but 
in general, it’s usually best to start with the underpinning tracks—those that form the 
basis of the music you are producing. For example, if you’re recording rock music, 
you will probably use the drum tracks and the bass tracks as the underpinning for the 
other tracks. Once you’ve set up these tracks, you can decide where the other tracks 
belong in the mix. By contrast, if you start by setting up an intricate arrangement of 
guitar tracks, you may have trouble working in the drum and bass tracks because of 
their relative lack of subtlety.
Change the Gain for a Track
To change the gain for a track, (controlling the volume at which the track is played 
back), drag the Gain slider along its minus-to-plus axis. Each movement is three deci-
bels, but you can hold down SHIFT as you drag to make one-decibel adjustments.
Change the Panning for a Track
To change the panning for a track, drag the Panning slider along the Left–Right axis. 
Each movement is ten percent, but you can make smaller adjustments by holding 
down SHIFT as you drag.
note

Project15: Record Music on Your PC  171
Step 8: Align Tracks with the Time-Shift Tool
When your PC is both recording audio and playing back audio at the same time, as 
when you use the Play Other Tracks While Recording New One feature to play back 
your existing tracks, the audio can easily get out of sync. This usually happens be-
cause your PC introduces latency—a delay, in lay terms—into the recording process. 
You’ll notice this problem immediately when you play it back; depending on the 
track type, you may also be able to see the problem on the track display, as in the 
example shown in Figure 15-2. Here, you can see that the main beats in the Drums 1 
track and the Tambourine track are severely out of time.
To fix the synchronization problem, use the Time-Shift Tool. Follow these steps:
Choose View | Zoom In one or more times to zoom the view in so that you 
can see the tracks more spaced out:
Click the Time-Shift Tool button on the Control toolbar.
1.
2.
Figure 15-2  
When your tracks are 
out of sync, like the 
tracks shown here, you 
can use the Time-Shift 
Tool to align them.

172
Part II: Intermediate
Click the track you want to shift, and then drag it left or right to align its 
waveforms with those in the other track.
Play back the tracks, and verify that the alignment is accurate.
Choose View | Zoom Normal to restore normality to the view.
Step 9: Turn Two Tracks into a Stereo Track
When you’re recording on a shoestring, you will often need to record a single track 
at a time, and in mono. You can then use Audacity to turn two mono tracks into one 
stereo track, giving your project a more interesting sound:
Make sure the tracks are aligned. If not, align them as described in Step 8.
Position the two tracks together in the Audacity window, so that one of the 
tracks is directly above the other track, as shown in the following example. If 
the tracks are currently separated, click one of them, open the track’s drop-
down menu, and then use the Move Track Up command or the Move Track 
Down command to move the track so that it is next to the other track.
Open the drop-down menu for the upper of the two tracks and choose Make 
Stereo Track. Audacity turns the two tracks into a single track, as shown 
here:
Play back the stereo track, and verify that it sounds correct. If you need to 
adjust it (for example, to align the tracks better), choose Edit | Undo Make 
Stereo to separate the two tracks again.
3.
4.
5.
1.
2.
3.
4.

Project15: Record Music on Your PC  173
Step 10: Export Your Project to an Audio File
When you’ve finished mixing your project in Audacity, listen to it several times to 
make sure you’re satisfied with the sound. Adjust the mix or effects as necessary.
If you have bandmates, make them listen to it too, and get their approval. Otherwise, marshal 
some friends or family, but be prepared to take their views with several pinches of salt, because 
they probably don’t have a firm grasp on your artistic vision.
To export your project, take the following steps. These assume that you are ex-
porting your project to a WAV file, but the process for creating an MP3 file is similar.
If your project contains unsaved changes, press CTRL-S or choose File | Save 
Project.
Choose File | Export As WAV. Audacity displays the Save WAV (Microsoft) 
File As dialog box.
Click the Browse Folders button to display the remainder of the dialog box if 
you need to be able to access other folders.
Select the folder in which you want to save the file.
In the File Name text box, type the name you want to assign to the exported 
file.
If necessary, in the Save As Type drop-down list, choose the format in which 
you want to save the exported file. This should seldom be necessary, because 
the Save As Type drop-down list displays the format corresponding to your 
choice in step 2. For example, if you choose Save As WAV, the Save As Type 
drop-down list automatically displays WAV (Microsoft) Files.
Click the Save button or press ENTER. Audacity saves the audio file in the 
format you chose.
If you’ve exported the audio file in an uncompressed format (such as WAV), 
you will probably want to create a compressed version that you can distribute com-
fortably across the Internet. For example, import the audio file into Windows Media 
Player or iTunes, and then use that program’s features to create an MP3 file or an 
AAC file containing a compressed version of the file.
Step 11: Tag Your Song File
After creating a compressed audio file, be sure to tag the file with suitable information 
so that those who receive the file are in a position to appreciate it fully. The basic com-
ponents of a tag are the artist’s name, the CD or album name, the song name, and the 
song number, but it’s good to add any further data you have available. For example, 
if you have artwork for the song, include it in the audio file. Likewise, also include 
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
note

174
Part II: Intermediate
any lyrics the song has, no matter how clearly you suppose them to be audible—some 
listeners will find them helpful.
To tag a file, you can use a media-player program such as Windows Media Player 
or iTunes; many other audio-editing programs also provide tagging capabilities. 
Figure 15-3 shows the Song Information dialog box from iTunes, whose title bar 
displays the song’s title (rather than the words “Song Information”).
Step 12: Distribute Your Song
When you’ve finished tagging your song, it’s time to unleash it on the waiting world. 
Once upon a time, you needed to enlist the services of a record company to get your 
song distributed, but now the Internet offers you a wide variety of ways to distribute 
the song yourself. Here are four ways to consider:
Post your song on music sites Sites such as Amie Street (www.amiestreet 
.com) let artists post their own songs—and earn money when other people 
buy them. On this particular site, song prices rise as the songs become more 
popular (or at least as they are downloaded more), so thrifty listeners can get 
a song for free or for only a few cents. While the price of your song is low, 
enlist a few friends to help you drive the price up to a level at which it starts 
receiving attention.
Create a video for YouTube Creating a full-scale video may be beyond your 
budget, but there’s nothing to stop you from getting creative with whatever 
●
●
Figure 15-3  
Use a tagging tool such 
as the Song Information 
dialog box in iTunes to 
make sure that your 
song is tagged with 
a full complement of 
information.

Project15: Record Music on Your PC  175
you have. For example, you can use photos and animations in a PowerPoint 
presentation to create a visually attractive or arresting accompaniment to 
your song. Windows Movie Maker (or iMovie, if you have access to a Mac) 
also lets you create effective movies out of still photos or video clips.
Send your song to local radio stations or podcast stations Both local radio 
stations and podcast stations have an insatiable hunger for content, espe-
cially if you can supply it to them with an angle, such as your being a local 
citizen or a long-standing listener.
Post your song to your web site As soon as you have a band, you should 
set up a web site for it—either on your own site, or on a social networking 
site. Make the file available at a moderate quality (for example, 128 Kbps 
MP3) so that people can download it easily but enjoy the audio.
If the file size of your song is less than a few megabytes, you can even send it to people via  
e-mail—but usually, sending a message that tells people how to download a full-quality version 
of the song from your web site (or from another site) is a better idea.
Once you’ve gotten the hang of recording, you’ll probably want to work at it and 
become more expert with the many features that Audacity offers. This project has 
barely scraped the surface, but if it has whetted your appetite, then it has done its job. 
The next project explains how to avoid losing your precious compositions.
●
●
note

176
Project 16
Back Up and 
Restore Your 
Computer
What You’ll Need
Hardware: External USB hard drive (optional)
Software: Your existing copy of Windows Vista Business Edition or 
Windows Vista Ultimate Edition, or another version of Windows 
Vista plus a third-party program
Cost: Free to $250 U.S.
B
ackups are the dental floss of computing. Everyone knows they should floss 
their teeth…all of them…regularly. Some do. Similarly, everyone knows that 
they should back up their data…all of it…regularly. Few do.
Windows Vista Business Edition and Windows Vista Ultimate Edition include a 
feature called Complete PC Backup and Restore. Provided you have enough space on 
a hard disk or other storage medium (such as recordable DVDs), you can back up all of 
the data on your PC. You can also choose to back up some drives but not others, which 
is useful when you want to use one hard drive as the backup location for another hard 
drive. With other versions of Windows Vista, you need to use a third-party program if 
you want to back up your entire PC.
Step 1: Back Up Your Entire PC on Windows Vista  
Business Edition or Ultimate Edition
Backing up every file on your PC requires far more space than just backing up essen-
tial files, but it has the great advantage of preventing you from missing any files that 
you’ve stored in folders other than your regular ones.
If you’re looking for a backup solution for one or more PCs that don’t have Complete PC Backup 
and Restore, consider Windows Home Server, which can run automatic backups on all computers 
connected to the server.
●
●
●
note

Project 16: Back Up and Restore Your Computer  177
To back up your entire PC, follow these steps:
If you plan to use an external hard disk for the backup, make sure that it’s 
connected to your PC and that it’s working.
Choose Start | All Programs | Maintenance | Backup And Restore Center to 
open a Backup And Restore Center window (see Figure 16-1).
1.
2.
Programs to Back Up and Restore Other Versions of Windows
Neither Windows Vista Home Basic Edition nor Windows Vista Home Pre-
mium Edition includes a program that lets you back up your whole PC or 
your entire system drive, so if you want to perform this task, you need to use 
third-party software.
At this writing, perhaps the best program for doing this is Norton Ghost 
from Symantec (www.symantec.com). Ghost lets you back up your full system 
to a wide variety of media, including external drives (connected via either USB 
or FireWire) and recordable DVDs. You can also control backups from other 
computers, which is useful if you have more than one PC.
Symantec also offers a more limited program called Norton Save & Restore 
that offers much of Ghost’s backup functionality but does not provide remote 
management.
Another program you may want to evaluate is True Image Home from 
Acronis (www.acronis.com), which offers similar features to Save & Restore.
Figure 16-1  
The Backup And  
Restore Center window 
provides quick access 
to the commands for 
backing up and restoring 
your entire PC.

178
Part II: Intermediate
Click the Back Up Computer button, and then go through User Account 
Control for the Microsoft Windows Backup feature (unless you’ve turned 
off User Account Control). Windows launches the Windows Complete PC 
Backup Wizard, which displays the Where Do You Want To Save The Backup? 
screen.
Choose where to save the backup:
Hard disk If you want to save the backup on a hard disk, select the On 
A Hard Disk option button, and then choose the correct hard disk in the 
drop-down list. 
DVDs If you want to save the backup on as many DVDs as it takes, 
select the On One Or More DVDs option button, and then make sure that 
the correct drive is selected in the drop-down list.
Click the Next button to display the Which Disks Do You Want To Include In 
The Backup? screen (see Figure 16-2).
3.
4.
●
●
5.
Figure 16-2  
Choose which disks you 
want to include in the 
backup.

Project 16: Back Up and Restore Your Computer  179
Select the check box for each disk you want to include. The wizard automati-
cally selects your system disks for you and doesn’t let you deselect them. The 
readouts show how much space is needed to back up the selected disks and 
how much space is available.
Click the Next button to display the Confirm Your Backup Settings screen 
(see Figure 16-3).
6.
7.
Figure 16-3  
Verify your backup 
settings before you start 
the backup running.
Make sure you’ve chosen the right disks to back up and the right backup 
location.
Click the Start Backup button to start the backup running. The wizard keeps 
you informed of its progress.
When the Windows Complete PC Backup window shows the message 
“The backup completed successfully,” click the Close button to close the 
wizard, and then click the Close button (the × button) to close the Backup 
And Restore Center window.
If you’re using a removable medium for the backup, label it and store it safely.
8.
9.
10.
11.

180
Part II: Intermediate
Step 2: Restore Your Entire PC
If things go wrong with your PC, you can restore it from the latest backup you made 
using Complete PC Backup and Restore. To restore your entire PC, follow these 
steps:
To start the restore process, your PC must be switched on and your Windows 
Vista installation DVD must be in the optical drive:
If Windows is running, insert the Windows Vista installation DVD, close 
the AutoPlay dialog box if it opens, and then restart Windows.
If Windows is not running (for example, because it won’t run), start your 
PC, and then insert the Windows Vista installation DVD. If Windows has 
already reached the point at which it hangs by the time you insert the 
DVD, restart the PC by pressing the Reset button or the Power button.
When your PC prompts you to “press any key to boot from CD or DVD,” 
press a key to launch the boot process. Windows displays the Install Windows 
screen.
If your PC doesn’t offer to boot from the Windows DVD, you may need to change BIOS settings. 
See Project 6 for instructions.
1.
●
●
2.
note

Project 16: Back Up and Restore Your Computer  181
Choose the language in the Language To Install drop-down list and the 
keyboard layout in the Keyboard Or Input Method drop-down list.
Click the Next button to display the Install Now screen.
Click the Repair Your Computer link in the lower-left corner of the Install 
Now screen to display the first System Recovery Options dialog box.
Click the operating system you want to restore, and then click the Next 
button to display the second System Recovery Options dialog box.
3.
4.
5.
6.

182
Part II: Intermediate
Click the Windows Complete PC Restore link to display the Restore Your 
Entire Computer From A Backup screen:
In the Restore The Following Backup area, make sure that Windows has chosen 
the backup you want to use, and then click the Next button. If Windows 
has not chosen the backup you want to use, select the Restore A Different 
Backup option, and then click the Next button. On the Select The Location 
Of The Backup screen, select the backup you want to use, and then click the 
Next button.
Windows displays a confirmation screen to confirm the restoration:
7.
8.
9.

Project 16: Back Up and Restore Your Computer  183
Make sure the settings are correct. Select the Format And Repartition Disks 
check box only if you want to reformat your PC’s hard disk and return its 
partitions to the way they were when you made the backup. (This is not 
usually necessary.)
Click the Finish button to display Windows’ double-check confirmation 
dialog box:
Take a deep breath, and then select the I Confirm That I Want To Erase All 
Existing Data And Restore The Backup check box.
Click the OK button. Windows restores the PC, keeping you informed of its 
progress.
At the end of the restoration, Windows restarts your PC.
When the logon screen appears, you can log on, and then start using the PC.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
You May Need to Reactivate Windows Vista  
After Restoring Your PC
If you’ve just restored your PC successfully, you’ll probably be relieved 
enough to put up with a little inconvenience…and some may be coming your 
way. After restoring your PC, you may need to reactivate Windows Vista. This 
normally happens only if Windows Vista has cause to believe it’s running on 
different hardware than it was before. For example, if you’ve replaced your 
PC’s hard drive because it failed, Windows Vista may detect the new hard 
drive as a different PC. But this problem also seems to occur even without 
hardware replacements.
If Windows Vista prompts you to activate it, follow through the online 
activation process. If the process fails (as it may, because the activation mecha-
nism might think you are trying to install the same copy of Windows on a second 
PC), call the telephone number the activation mechanism provides, have yourself 
transferred from the automated system to a human, and persuade them to give 
you a new activation code to enter.
Now that you’ve backed up your PC, should you think about flossing your teeth?

184
Project 17
Create a 
Wireless 
Network
What You’ll Need
Hardware: Wireless access point, wireless network adapter, USB 
flash drive
Software: Your existing copy of Windows Vista 
Cost: $150 U.S.
I
n Project 9, you learned how to run a wired network through your home to con-
nect all your PCs, share your Internet connection, and share files. Setting up a fully 
wired network gives great results, but it takes a serious commitment of time and 
effort (not to mention money).
If you don’t want to take the time and effort to set up a wired network, or if you 
live in a dwelling whose landlord won’t let you run cables and make holes in the walls 
and floors, a wireless network may be a better choice. This project shows you how to 
set up a wireless network, making sure you know about the limitations and dangers of 
wireless networks as well as their advantages.
Step 1: Decide Whether a Wireless Network  
Is Right for You
Wireless networks have several highly appealing benefits over wired networks. For 
example, you don’t need to drill holes or run cables, and if your PCs already have wire-
less network adapters, you may not need to buy any hardware except a wireless access 
point. So if you need to set up a new network, the choice between wired and wireless 
may seem a no-brainer: Creating a wireless network is easier and much faster, and it 
may even be cheaper than creating a wired network.
Plus, your computers won’t be tethered to Ethernet wall plates in the various rooms 
that the network serves. You’ll be able to move your computers freely throughout the 
●
●
●

Project 17: Create a Wireless Network  185
entire area covered by the network. That may include the whole house, your yard, 
or even several neighboring buildings. You may even be able to connect to your net-
work from the coffee shop down the street. This means that anyone else within range 
of your network can also connect as well, so you need to secure the network using 
encryption to prevent unauthorized people connecting to it.
Despite rapid advances in wireless technology, wireless networks are still far 
slower than up-to-date wired networks—even though they have now become faster 
than wired networks were a few years ago. See the sidebar “Have Realistic Expecta-
tions of Wireless Network Speeds” for details on this. However, unless you need to 
transfer large files among the PCs on your network frequently, current wireless net-
work speeds may be more than adequate. For example, streaming video via a Sling-
box (see Project 21) typically works fine over an 802.11g wireless network. And even 
an 11 Mbps–max 802.11b wireless network is usually adequate for sharing a DSL or 
cable Internet connection.
Have Realistic Expectations of Wireless Network Speeds
Wireless network equipment is based on various standards set by the Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE). At this writing (February 2008), the 
latest standard to have been approved (in 2003) is 802.11g, also called Wireless-G,  
which provides for transmission speeds of up to 54 Mbps. Wireless-G 
equipment generally works well and is the best choice for creating a wireless 
network.
The 802.11b standard, approved by IEEE in 1999, provides for transmission 
speeds of only up to 11 Mbps but is very widely used. The 802.11a standard, 
also approved in 1999, provides for speeds of up to 54 Mbps but is not used 
nearly as widely. 802.11b equipment and 802.11a equipment are not compat-
ible, but most 802.11g equipment is backward compatible with both 802.11b 
and 802.11a equipment. 802.11a equipment was not successful in the consumer 
market, largely because it was not only incompatible with 802.11b equipment 
but also more expensive.
However, 54 Mbps is not very fast, so manufacturers have been releasing 
equipment based on the draft of the forthcoming 802.11n standard, which pro-
vides for transmission speeds of 270 Mbps or faster. Some manufacturers claim 
speeds of 300 Mbps or more for their Draft-N equipment. 802.11n equipment is 
typically backward compatible with 802.11g, 802.11b, and 802.11a equipment.
There are three problems with the manufacturers’ claimed speeds:
The fastest speeds are only available under greenfield conditions—that 
is, when only 802.11n equipment is involved. Having a mix of 802.11n 
equipment and equipment based on earlier standards (such as 802.11g 
or 802.11b) typically requires even the 802.11n equipment to use lower 
speeds. In the real world, greenfield conditions seldom occur.
(Continued)
●

186
Part II: Intermediate
Step 2: Understand the Types of Wireless  
Network and Assess Your Needs
There are three main types of wireless network:
Infrastructure wireless network A network that is built around one or 
more wireless access points. This is the type of network covered in this proj-
ect. For a home network, you’ll normally need only one access point, unless 
you need the network to cover a large area (for example, all the way down 
the back yard). Figure 17-1 shows an infrastructure wireless network.
●
Because the equipment is based on the Draft-N standard rather than 
on a final standard, equipment from different manufacturers may not 
interoperate at the higher speeds.
In the real world, data transmission is almost always much slower 
than the maximum theoretical speeds, especially when multiple de-
vices are accessing the same network. If other wireless networks over-
lap with yours, your equipment may need to lower its speeds in order 
to communicate. Other nonnetworking equipment (such as cordless 
phones and microwave ovens) can also contribute to lowering trans-
mission speeds.
For these reasons, don’t expect the wireless network equipment you buy to 
achieve anything like its claimed speeds. Because of the Draft-N issue, if you 
buy 802.11n equipment, buy it all from the same manufacturer to ensure the 
devices work together successfully at acceptable speeds.
●
●
Internet
ADSL or
Cable Router
Wireless
Access Point
Printer
Desktop PC
Laptop PC
Laptop PC
Figure 17-1  
In an infrastructure 
wireless network, a 
wireless access point 
provides wireless  
connectivity to the PCs 
and other devices.

Project 17: Create a Wireless Network  187
Ad hoc wireless network A network created among computers without 
the use of an access point. For example, if your main PC has an Internet 
connection, you can create an ad hoc wireless network to share that Internet 
connection by using your PC to share the Internet connection, as shown in 
Figure 17-2.
●
Figure 17-2  
An ad hoc wireless  
network lets you 
quickly share your  
files and Internet  
connection with another 
wireless-enabled PC.
Internet
Cable or
DSL Router
Printer
Laptop
Guest Laptop
Wireless
Connection
Hotspot wireless network This is actually an infrastructure wireless net-
work, but behaves in a different way from an infrastructure wireless network 
that you may create in your home. When you connect to a hotspot wireless 
network, such as the network in a coffee shop or an airport, your browser is 
typically redirected to a captive portal, a web page at which you log in (and 
usually agree to terms of service) and that lets the wireless network authen-
ticate your computer and prevent it from taking nonapproved actions (such 
as sending spam or accessing web sites that are on a blocked list).
A fourth type of wireless network is a citywide or metropolitan wireless network, which provides 
either free or paid wireless Internet access throughout a city or the major part of it. If your city 
provides a wireless network, its authorities will make sure that the taxpayers know how to 
access the network.
Step 3: Buy the Wireless Network Equipment
For your wireless network, you’ll almost certainly need a wireless access point. Many 
different models are available, depending on the features you need. These are the 
features that you will typically need:
IEEE standard 802.11g is the safest choice. If you choose to buy draft-
standard 802.11n equipment, buy both the access point and any network 
adapters from the same manufacturer.
Wired Ethernet ports Look for a wireless access point with enough switches 
to connect any wired Ethernet devices you want to use. For example, you may 
need to connect your printer or your cable or DSL router—or both—to the 
wireless access point to share them through the network.
●
●
●
note

188
Part II: Intermediate
If you don’t already have a cable or DSL router, look for an access point that incorporates the 
type of router you need. That way, you have one less device to configure.
USB ports Having one or more USB ports on the access point is useful for 
two reasons. First, some wireless access points let you configure them by us-
ing a USB flash drive. Second, some access points let you share a hard drive 
on the network by attaching it to the access point. Given that the access point 
keeps running all the time to maintain the network, this is an easy way to 
share files on the network.
If your PCs already have wireless network adapters (as many recent PCs do, espe-
cially laptops), you will not need to buy adapters. Otherwise, these are your choices 
for adding wireless network adapters:
Desktop PC Either connect a USB wireless adapter or open the case and 
install a PCI network adapter. USB is the easier choice, especially if you buy 
a cabled adapter that you can reposition to get good reception.
Laptop PC Either insert a PC Card or ExpressCard wireless adapter, or con-
nect a USB wireless adapter. A PC Card or ExpressCard is usually a neater 
solution than a USB adapter, as the USB adapter projects farther from the 
laptop and is easy to damage. As with a desktop PC, however, a cabled USB 
adapter that you can reposition to improve reception is a good alternative if 
the wireless signal is weak.
Step 4: Position the Wireless Access Point  
and Power It On
Once you’ve got the wireless gear you need, position the wireless access point where 
you can connect it to your Internet router and to any devices that it will share—for 
example, a printer or a USB hard drive. You also need a power socket for the wireless 
access point’s power supply. When you’ve connected the power supply, power on the 
access point.
Step 5: Create the Settings for the Wireless Network
The next step is to create the settings for the wireless network and save them to a USB 
flash disk so that you can then apply them to the access point and to each PC that will 
be part of the network. 
To create the settings file for the wireless network on Windows Vista, follow these 
steps:
Click the Start button, right-click the Network item (in the list of folders on 
the right), and then click Properties to open a Network And Sharing Center 
window.
●
●
●
1.
tip

Project 17: Create a Wireless Network  189
In the left panel, click the Set Up A Connection Or Network link to launch the 
Set Up A Connection Or Network Wizard. The wizard displays the Choose 
A Connection Option screen.
In the Choose A Connection Option list box, select the Set Up A Wireless 
Router Or Access Point item, and then click the Next button. The wizard 
displays the Set Up A Home Or Small Business Network screen.
Click the Next button. The wizard tries to detect your wireless access point. 
If it fails to do so, it displays the Windows Did Not Detect Any Wireless Net-
work Hardware screen. If the wizard detects your access point but cannot 
configure it directly, it displays the Windows Detected Network Hardware 
But Cannot Configure It Automatically screen.
If your wireless access point supports USB configuration, click the Create 
Wireless Network Settings And Save To USB Flash Drive option. The wizard 
displays the Give Your Network A Name screen.
If your wireless access point does not support USB configuration, and the wizard has displayed 
the Windows Detected Network Hardware But Cannot Configure It Automatically screen, 
you can click the Configure This Device Manually option. The wizard opens your browser (for 
example, Internet Explorer) to the login screen for the wireless access point. Type the username 
and password (these will be in the manual unless you have changed them), and you will then 
reach a screen for entering the network name (or SSID), the security type (for example, WPA), 
and the passphrase to use for security.
In the Network Name (SSID) text box type the name you want to give the 
network, using up to 32 letters and numbers.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
note

190
Part II: Intermediate
Click the Next button to reach the Help Make Your Network More Secure 
With A Passphrase screen.
The Passphrase text box contains an automatically generated passphrase 
that is very hard to break. For the best security, accept this passphrase. If you 
prefer, you can type another passphrase manually (for example, one that’s 
easier to remember) or click the Create A Different Passphrase For Me link to 
create another passphrase automatically.
If you want to change the wireless security method used, click the Show Advanced Network 
Security Options link, and then choose the security method you want in the Security Method 
drop-down list on the Choose Advanced Network Security Options screen. Windows Vista’s 
default security method is good enough for securing most wireless networks.
When you’ve finished choosing the passphrase, click the Next button to dis-
play the Choose File And Printer Sharing Options screen.
Choose the appropriate option button:
Keep The Custom Settings I Currently Have This option button ap-
pears only if you have chosen custom sharing settings. In this case, you 
will normally want to leave this option button selected (as it is by de-
fault) to preserve those custom settings.
Do Not Allow File And Printer Sharing Select this option button if 
you want to turn off sharing. The PCs can still connect to the Internet.
Allow Sharing With Anyone With A User Account And Password For 
This Computer Select this option button if you want users with accounts 
on this PC to be able to reach this PC’s Public folder and shared printer 
from any other PC on the network.
7.
8.
9.
10.
●
●
●
note

Project 17: Create a Wireless Network  191
Allow Sharing With Anyone On The Same Network As This  
Computer Select this option button if you want anybody using another 
PC on this network to be able to reach this PC’s Public folder and shared 
printer (even if they don’t have a user account on this PC).
Click the Next button, and then go through User Account Control (unless 
you’ve turned User Account Control off) for any option except keeping your 
current network settings. The wizard displays the Insert The USB Flash Drive 
Into This Computer screen.
Insert the flash drive (if it’s not already connected), and then choose the drive 
letter in the Save Settings To drop-down list.
Click the Next button to make the wizard copy the wireless network settings 
to the flash drive. The wizard then displays the To Add A Device Or Com-
puter, Follow These Instructions screen.
Unplug the flash drive from your PC, and then click the Close button to close 
the wizard.
Step 6: Apply the Wireless Network  
Settings to the Wireless Access Point
To apply the settings to the wireless access point, follow these steps:
Plug the flash drive into the wireless access point’s USB port.
Wait for 30 seconds while the wireless access point reads the settings and 
applies them.
Unplug the flash drive.
Step 7: Apply the Wireless Network  
Settings to Each PC
To apply the network settings to a PC, follow these steps on Windows Vista:
Plug the USB flash drive containing 
the network settings into a USB port. 
Windows Vista automatically opens 
the AutoPlay dialog box, as shown 
here. 
Click the Wireless Network Setup 
Wizard button to launch the wizard, 
which prompts you to add the PC to 
the network.
●
11.
12.
13.
14.
1.
2.
3.
1.
2.

192
Part II: Intermediate
Click the OK button to add the PC to the network. When the wizard has done 
so, it displays a message box confirming the action.
Click the OK button. You can then unplug the USB flash drive and use it to 
connect other PCs to the network.
Step 8: Connect a PC to the Wireless Network
Once you’ve applied the wireless network settings, 
Windows automatically connects to the wireless 
network if it is within range. Windows displays a 
connection icon in the notification area. You can 
hover the mouse pointer over the icon to display its 
current status, as shown here.
You can then start using the network. For example, choose Start | Internet to 
open an Internet Explorer window and connect to the Internet through the wireless 
network.
Step 9: Disconnect from and Reconnect  
to the Wireless Network
Normally, you’ll want to keep using your wireless network until you put your PC to 
sleep or shut it down. But sometimes you may need to disconnect from your wireless 
network—and then reconnect to it.
To disconnect from the wireless network on Windows Vista, right-click the wireless 
network icon in the notification area, click or highlight the Disconnect From item, 
and then click the network name:
To reconnect to the wireless network on Windows Vista, follow these steps:
Right-click the wireless network icon in the notification area, and then choose 
Connect To A Network to launch the Connect To A Network Wizard, which 
displays the Select A Network To Connect To screen:
3.
4.
1.

Project 17: Create a Wireless Network  193
In the Select A Network To Connect To list box, click the wireless network, 
and then click the Connect button.
When the wizard displays the Successfully Connected To screen, click the 
Close button.
Step 10: Manage Multiple Wireless Networks
If you connect your PC to two or more wireless networks, you need to tell Windows 
the order in which you want it to use the networks, so that Windows doesn’t auto-
matically connect to the wrong network.
 To manage wireless networks on Windows Vista, follow these steps:
Click the wireless network icon in the notification area, and then click the 
Network And Sharing Center link to open a Network And Sharing Center 
window.
In the left pane, click the Manage Network Connections link to display the 
Manage Wireless Networks window (see Figure 17-3).
In the Networks You Can View And Modify list box, drag the networks into 
the order in which you want Windows to attempt to connect automatically.
When you’ve finished rearranging the networks, click the Close button 
(the × button).
2.
3.
1.
2.
3.
4.

194
Part II: Intermediate
From the Manage Wireless Networks window, you can also remove networks to which you no 
longer want to connect.
Now you can surf the Internet—and maybe even do some work—from the comfort 
of the living-room couch.
Figure 17-3  
Use the Manage  
Wireless Networks 
window on Windows 
Vista to arrange the 
wireless networks into 
your preferred  
connection order.
note

195
Project 18
Create an Ad 
Hoc Wireless 
Network
What You’ll Need
Hardware: A wireless network adapter in each PC
Software: Your existing copy of Windows Vista 
Cost: Free to $150 U.S.
I
n Project 17, you learned how to set up an infrastructure wireless network, one 
based around a wireless access point that keeps running all the time, manages the 
wireless connections, and shares resources, such as an Internet connection.
If you’ll be using a wireless network consistently, an infrastructure wireless net-
work is almost always the best choice. However, you may sometimes want to set up a 
wireless network for just a short time so that two or more computers can communicate 
temporarily or so that you can share your computer’s Internet connection easily with 
another computer—for example, when a friend visits with their laptop in tow. In this 
case, you can create an ad hoc wireless network, as described in this project, instead of 
setting up an infrastructure wireless network.
Step 1: Add Wireless Network Adapters if Necessary
The first step in setting up your ad hoc wireless network is to add a wireless network 
adapter to any PC that you want to use in the network and that doesn’t already have 
an adapter. Most recent and current laptops include a wireless network adapter, so you 
may not need to add one.
Look back to Step 3 in Project 17 for a discussion of your options. For example, you 
can add a PCI adapter to a desktop PC, a PC Card or ExpressCard adapter to a laptop 
PC, or a USB adapter to either.
●
●
●

196
Part II: Intermediate
Step 2: Plan Your Wireless Network
Once each PC that will join the network has a wireless network adapter, you can plan 
the network. Planning will take hardly any time, especially if the network will consist 
of only a few PCs, as in the example network shown in Figure 18-1.
Keep these considerations in mind:
Location Most wireless network adapters can’t manage the same distances 
that wireless access points cover, so you’ll get the most consistent results—
and higher data transfer speeds—if the PCs are within spitting distance of 
each other and without obstacles in the way. That said, wireless signals travel 
well through floors and ceilings—often better than through walls, especially 
if the walls are solid rather than cavity.
Encryption method All the PCs must use the same type of encryption—for 
example, WPA or WEP. 
Windows XP is limited to using WEP for ad hoc networks, so if your network will include one 
or more PCs running Windows XP, you will not be able to implement tight security—but WEP 
should be adequate for temporary use. If all your PCs run Windows Vista, you should be able to 
use WPA—but some people find that WPA causes problems with ad hoc networks and have to 
drop back to WEP.
Sharing resources Any PC that is sharing resources with the other PCs on 
the network needs to be running all the time that the other PCs need access 
to those resources.
Step 3: Add PCs to the Network
Setting up a wireless network is largely a matter of telling all the PCs involved in the 
network to use the same network name (the SSID) and the same encryption method. 
This section shows you how to set up the network in Windows Vista.
●
●
●
Internet
Cable or
DSL Router
Printer
Laptop
Guest Laptop
Wireless
Connection
Figure 18-1  
An ad hoc wireless 
network lets you  
temporarily share  
essentials such as your 
Internet connection 
with another PC.
note

Project 18: Create an Ad Hoc Wireless Network  197
Set Up the First PC on the Wireless Network
When you set up the first PC that connects to the network, you are creating the net-
work. Follow these steps:
Choose Start | Connect To. Windows launches the Connect To A Network 
Wizard, which displays the Select A Network To Connect To screen. This 
screen lists the available networks, if any.
Click the Set Up A Connection Or Network link in the lower-left corner to 
display the Choose A Connection Option screen.
Select the Set Up A Wireless Ad Hoc (Computer-To-Computer) Network 
item.
Click the Next button to display the Set Up A Wireless Ad Hoc Network 
screen, which presents information about ad hoc networks.
The Set Up A Wireless Ad Hoc Network screen claims that computers and devices in ad hoc 
networks “must be within 30 feet of each other.” This isn’t strictly true. Unless there are thick 
walls or floors in the way, you should be able to achieve greater distances if necessary.
Click the Next button to display the Give Your Network A Name And Choose 
Security Options screen, shown here with settings chosen:
In the Network Name text box, type the name you want to use for the 
network.
In the Security Type drop-down list, choose the type of security you want:
No Authentication (Open) This setting lets any computer in range 
connect to the network without authenticating itself. This setting is never 
a good idea.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
●
note

198
Part II: Intermediate
WEP This setting uses Wired Equivalent Privacy, which provides mod-
erate protection. Use WEP if you need to be able to connect Windows XP 
PCs to the network.
WPA2-Personal This setting uses Wi-Fi Protected Access, which pro-
vides good privacy. Use WPA2-Personal if all the PCs that will connect 
to the network are running Windows Vista.
In the Security Key/Passphrase text box, type the password for the network, 
making sure that you follow the rules listed next for the type of security you 
chose in Step 7. Select the Display Characters check box if you want to be sure 
of what you’re typing, and you’re confident that nobody is observing you.
WEP The key must be either 5 ASCII (regular) characters or 13 ASCII 
characters—for example, wire0 or w1relessnet99. A 5-character key 
provides 40-bit encryption, and a 13-character key provides 104-bit  
encryption.
Alternatively, you can enter the WEP key as 10 hexadecimal characters (to produce 40-bit  
encryption) or 26 hexadecimal characters (to produce 104-bit encryption). Using ASCII characters 
is easier.
WPA2-Personal You can use a password of 8–63 ASCII characters or 
64 hexadecimal characters.
Select the Save This Network check box if you want Windows to save this 
network for future use. If you’re planning to use the network only once, 
leave this check box cleared.
Click the Next button. Windows sets up the network, and then displays a 
screen (shown next) telling you that the network is ready for use.
●
●
8.
●
●
9.
10.
note

Project 18: Create an Ad Hoc Wireless Network  199
If you want to share this PC’s Internet connection through the wireless net-
work, click the Turn On Internet Connection Sharing button, go through User 
Account Control for the Adhoc Wireless Network program (unless you’ve 
turned off User Account Control), and then follow through the remaining 
steps of this list. If you don’t want to share the Internet connection, click the 
Close button, and then skip the remaining steps.
The wizard displays the Select The Internet Connection You Want To Share 
screen.
In the Available drop-down list, select the Internet connection, and then click 
the Next button. The wizard sets up sharing, and then displays the Internet 
Connection Sharing Is Enabled screen.
Click the Close button to close the wizard.
Your ad hoc wireless network is now set up, and other PCs can connect to it.
Add a PC to an Existing Wireless Network
Once you’ve set up one PC offering the wireless network, you can connect further 
PCs to the network by using a different technique. Follow these steps:
Choose Start | Connect To. Windows launches the Connect To A Network 
Wizard, which displays the Select A Network To Connect To screen. This 
screen lists the available networks, as shown here:
11.
12.
13.
14.
1.

200
Part II: Intermediate
The icon at the left end of each network’s row shows the network type. The icon for an ad hoc 
network shows three computers linked together. If the network list is full of many types of networks, 
choose Wireless in the Show drop-down list to make the list show only wireless networks.
Click the network you want to connect to, and then click the Connect but-
ton. The wizard displays the Type The Network Security Key Or Passphrase 
screen, shown here.
Type the network key in the Security Key Or Passphrase text box. If nobody 
is looking over your shoulder, you can safely select the Display Characters 
check box to suppress the dots that the wizard displays by default (for 
your security).
Click the Connect button. The wizard connects your PC to the network, and 
then displays the Successfully Connected screen.
If you want to be able to use this network easily in the future, select the Save 
This Network check box. For temporary ad hoc networks, however, you will 
probably want to leave this check box cleared.
Click the Close button to close the wizard. Your PC is now connected to the 
network.
Step 4: Disconnect a PC from the Wireless Network
When you want to stop a PC from being part of the wireless network, you disconnect 
the PC from the network. 
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
tip

Project 18: Create an Ad Hoc Wireless Network  201
To disconnect, right-click the Network Connection icon in the notification area, 
click or highlight the Disconnect From item on the context menu, and then click the 
network’s name on the submenu. Windows disconnects from the network.
Step 5: Shut Down the Ad Hoc Network
When you’ve finished using the wireless network, you can shut it down by discon-
necting all the PCs on it, as discussed in the previous section.
As you saw earlier in this project, Windows Vista lets you decide whether to save 
the network for future use. Provided that you did not select the Save This Network 
check box while setting up the network, Windows Vista automatically discards the 
details of the network when you disconnect the PC from the network.
Next up: How to streamline your life by digitizing your paper documents. Turn 
the page.

202
Project 19
Digitize 
Your Paper 
Documents
What You’ll Need
Hardware: Scanner (required), shredder (optional)
Software: Microsoft Office 2003 or 2007 (optional), other optical 
character recognition software (optional), Perforce Server and Perforce 
Client (optional)
Cost: $100–200 U.S.
T
hese days, you can manage almost all your information on your PC—manage 
your correspondence via e-mail or PC-based faxing, handle all your banking 
online, and even make most of your major purchases (and some minor ones) 
over the Internet. This doesn’t cover the paper documents that show up every day—
through the mail, on your desk at work, on your car when you overstay your welcome 
in a parking bay, or simply the receipts that are the result of any successful shopping 
expedition.
Bills, invoices, receipts, checks… chances are, you need to deal with them all.  
Maybe you have a hefty filing cabinet full of such pieces of paper, or maybe you simply 
throw each year’s papers in shoeboxes when they drift into your life, and then truck 
the boxes to your accountant in the run-up to April 15.
If you want to reduce the amount of paper in your life, you can digitize your paper 
documents by scanning them into your PC. This project shows you how to scan your 
documents and how to set up a means of tracking which scanned document is which, 
so that you can hunt down exactly the document you need in seconds rather than 
minutes.
Consult your lawyer and accountant if you’re not sure which documents you must keep the original 
hard copies of. For example, I’m not suggesting you scan your passport and then present your 
laptop at passport control.
●
●
●
caution

Project 19: Digitize Your Paper Documents  203
Step 1: Get a Scanner and Install It
If you don’t already have a scanner, you’ll need to buy or borrow one. The good news 
is that pretty much any scanner will do for digitizing paper documents, as long as 
your PC’s operating system has a driver for the scanner.
Choose a Scanner
For this project, you don’t need a scanner with incredibly high resolution or extra 
features such as scanning 35mm negatives (although you may want the high resolu-
tion and extra features for your other projects, such as creating a family photo album). 
Standard resolution (such as 300 dots per inch, or dpi) is plenty.
Desktop sheet-fed scanners (like a rolling pin on a mount) were popular in the 
late 1990s until their habit of tearing documents fed into them ruined their reputation. 
These days, a flatbed scanner is probably your best bet. If you find yourself scan-
ning scores of documents, you can upgrade in due course to a scanner with a feeder 
mechanism.
Instead of buying a scanner, you may want to buy a multifunction device—a device that  
incorporates a printer, scanner, fax, and perhaps other features. Having such a device might be 
easier than having several different devices connected to your PC; and if you’re looking to add 
several types of functionality at once, buying such a device may also be less expensive than buying 
several different devices. Again, make sure that the device’s manufacturer provides a driver for the 
version of Windows that you’re using.
Understand Hardware Resolution and Software Resolution
If you have a digital camera, you’re probably familiar with the difference be-
tween optical zoom and digital zoom: Optical zoom is the zooming that the 
camera effects by using its zoom lens, and digital zoom is the zoom the camera 
achieves by using computation to process the data it’s seeing and (if necessary) 
to add extra data synthetically to make the image appear larger. Optical zoom 
looks much better than digital zoom, because it shows you what’s actually 
there, and in full quality.
Similarly, each scanner has a maximum hardware resolution, which is the 
highest level of detail that the scanner’s “eye” can “see” what it’s looking at. 
Typically, you want to use either this resolution or a lower resolution. Many 
scanners also offer software-enhanced resolutions that use computation to 
achieve a resolution higher than the scanner’s hardware resolution can provide. 
Normally, you will not want to use these resolutions, because they include data 
that is not actually present in the image that you’re scanning.
note

204
Part II: Intermediate
Install Your Scanner
Install your scanner following the instructions that come with it. Typically, for a USB-
connected scanner, you install the software from CD, and then connect the scanner. 
If you don’t have instructions or software, connect the scanner anyway. When Win-
dows prompts you about the driver software, choose the recommended option for lo-
cating and installing the driver software, and then go through User Account Control 
for the Device Driver Software Installation program (unless you have turned off User 
Account Control). 
Even if you download the driver software from the scanner manufacturer’s web 
site, you may find that Windows Security objects to it, as in the example shown in 
Figure 19-1. Provided that the driver software comes directly from a major manufac-
turer, you should be safe; but if you’ve downloaded it from elsewhere, you should 
probably cancel the installation.
 Once you’ve finished the installation, your scanner should be ready to use. 
Step 2: Scan Your Documents
If your scanner includes custom scanning software, read the documentation and 
experiment with the software to see if you get along with it. If the scanner doesn’t 
include scanning software, you can simply use the scanning capabilities built into 
Windows, as described here.
To scan a document on Windows Vista, follow these steps:
Turn the scanner on if it’s currently turned off.
Insert the document and align it along the scanner’s guides.
 Choose Start | All Programs | Windows Photo Gallery to open a Windows 
Photo Gallery window.
1.
2.
3.
Figure 19-1  
If your scanner’s 
manufacturer has left 
the driver software 
unsigned, you will need 
to decide whether to 
install it anyway.

Project 19: Digitize Your Paper Documents  205
Choose File | Import From Camera Or Scanner. Windows Photo Gallery dis-
plays the Import Pictures And Videos dialog box.
If you have a networked scanner (for example, a multifunction printer that includes scanning 
capabilities), Windows Photo Gallery may not be able to detect the scanner. In this case, look 
at solutions such as SANE (www.sane-project.org) or RemoteScan (www.remote-scan.com) to 
make the scanner visible to Windows Photo Gallery across the network.
In the Scanners And Cameras list, click your scanner, and then click the  
Import button. Windows Photo Gallery displays the New Scan dialog box 
(see Figure 19-2).
4.
5.
tip
Figure 19-2  
Use the options in the 
New Scan dialog box 
to tell Windows which 
kind of document 
you’re scanning and to 
make sure the preview 
looks correct.

206
Part II: Intermediate
The Scanner readout at the top of the dialog box shows the scanner you’ve 
chosen. You shouldn’t need to change this.
In the Profile drop-down list, select Documents if the item you’re scanning is 
a document rather than a photo. Otherwise, choose Photos, the default item.
If your scanner has multiple scanning surfaces, make sure the Source drop-
down list shows the right one—for example, Flatbed. If the scanner has only 
one scanning surface, you shouldn’t need to change this setting.
If the Paper Size drop-down list offers you a choice of settings, choose the 
correct one for the document.
In the Color Format drop-down list, choose Color, Grayscale, or Black And 
White, as appropriate. For a “black and white” document that includes photos, 
you will normally get a better result by choosing Grayscale than by choosing 
Black And White, which changes each shade of gray to either black or white.
In the File Type drop-down list, choose the type of file you want to create. 
See the sidebar “Choose the Best Graphics File Format for Saving Your Docu-
ments” for advice.
In the Resolution text box, choose the resolution you want to use. Windows 
suggests 300 dpi for many scanners, which is plenty for documents. (Photos 
may need higher resolution.)
Click the Preview button to make the New Scan dialog box display a pre-
view of the document on the right side.
If necessary, adjust the Brightness slider or Contrast slider, and then click the 
Preview button again to update the preview and see if the changes result in 
an improvement.
If you need to crop the image, drag the handles on the preview box to reduce 
the selection to only the part of the image that you want to keep.
Click the Scan button. Windows scans the document, and then displays the 
Importing Pictures And Videos dialog box.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

Project 19: Digitize Your Paper Documents  207
To apply a tag to the picture, type the tag in the Tag These Pictures text box, 
or choose a tag you’ve used previously from the drop-down list.
Click the Import button. Windows imports the picture, adds it to the Recently 
Imported category in Windows Photo Gallery, and selects the picture.
You can now add another tag to the picture by clicking the Add Tags picture 
in the right pane of Windows Photo Gallery, typing a tag you want to assign, 
and then pressing ENTER. Repeat this process to add further tags.
17.
18.
19.
Choose the Best Graphics File Format for Saving Your Documents
Windows offers you a choice of four file formats for saving your documents. 
Here’s what you need to know about them:
BMP (Bitmap Image) The BMP image format uses no compression, 
so it produces full-quality images with large file sizes.
JPG (JPEG Image) The JPEG file format uses lossy compression to 
produce reasonable-quality images with moderate file sizes. JPEG 
files are fine for photos that you plan to use on web sites or for other  
low-resolution purposes, but your documents deserve a more faithful 
file format than this.
PNG (PNG Image) The PNG file format uses lossless compression 
to produce high-quality images with moderate file sizes. PNG is  
usually the best choice for storing your documents.
TIFF (TIFF Image) The TIFF file format can use either lossless  
compression, producing full-quality images with moderate file sizes, 
or no compression, giving full-quality images with large file sizes. TIFF 
is widely used for professional image editing.
●
●
●
●
Perform Optical Character Recognition Using Microsoft Office
If you have Microsoft Office 2007 or 2003, you can use its built-in optical char-
acter recognition (OCR) features to get the text from a document in a format 
that you can search (or otherwise manipulate). Entering text via OCR should 
be faster than entering it manually—but you must proofread the text carefully 
after scanning it to root out any errors that creep in. This section shows you 
how to perform OCR using Office 2007, but the process is almost exactly the 
same for Office 2003.
(Continued)

208
Part II: Intermediate
To scan a document and use OCR to turn it into text, connect your scanner 
if it’s not already connected, and then follow these steps:
Choose Start | All Programs | Microsoft Office | Microsoft Office 
Tools | Microsoft Office Document Scanning. Windows displays the 
Scan New Document dialog box (shown here). Choose Black And 
White if you’re scanning a monochrome document. If you’re scanning 
a color text document, choose Black And White From Color Page.
Choose settings for scanning, and then click the Scan button.
Select the Original Is Double Sided check box if the document is 
printed on both sides.
Select the Prompt For Additional Pages check box if the document 
has multiple pages.
Select the View File After Scanning check box to make Microsoft 
Office Document Scanning open automatically.
Click the Scanner button. Microsoft Office Document Scanning scans 
the document, and then opens a Microsoft Office Document Imaging 
window displaying the scanned document.
Select the part of the document you want to recognize, and then 
choose Tools | Recognize Text Using OCR. Microsoft Office Docu-
ment Imaging recognizes the text and then highlights it.
Choose Tools | Send Text To Word. Windows displays the Send Text 
To Word dialog box.
1.
2.
●
●
●
3.
4.
5.

Project 19: Digitize Your Paper Documents  209
Step 3: Organize Your Scanned Documents
As you’ve seen, scanning is easy. The tricky part is keeping your scanned documents 
in order so that you know where to find them when you need them. The following 
sections discuss several methods for doing so. Briefly, the methods are as follows:
Tag the individual picture files in Windows, and then use Windows’ search 
features to search for the ones you need. This solution is adequate if you scan 
few documents or if you’re blessed with plenty of patience.
You can also organize your documents into an elaborate system of folders, but this doesn’t work 
so well when you have documents that fit into multiple categories. To make it easier to find the 
files you need, you can create shortcuts to a file that belongs to multiple categories, and then 
place those shortcuts in other folders.
●
In the upper part of the dialog box, specify which text to send  
to Word:
Current Selection If you’ve selected part of the document,  
Microsoft Office Document Imaging normally selects this option 
button automatically. If there’s no selection, this option button is 
unavailable.
Selected Pages If you’ve selected one or more complete pages 
in the left pane, Microsoft Office Document Imaging normally 
selects this option button automatically. If you haven’t selected 
pages, this option button is unavailable.
All Pages Microsoft Office Document Imaging selects this op-
tion button automatically if you haven’t selected a selection or 
pages. You can also select this option button even if one of the 
other option buttons is selected.
If you want to include any pictures from the document, select 
the Maintain Pictures In Output check box. If you want only the  
document’s text, clear this check box.
Click the OK button. Microsoft Office Document Imaging opens  
a new Word document, places the text in it, and displays the document 
so that you can start working in it.
In Word, run a spelling check on the new document and take care of any 
recognition errors. After that, proofread the text quickly against the original in 
case any whole words have been substituted during the recognition process. 
Any wrong words will be correctly spelled, so the spell checker will have no 
quarrel with them, but they will change the meaning of the text.
6.
●
●
●
7.
8.
note

210
Part II: Intermediate
Create a tracking file, such as a Microsoft Excel workbook, in which you 
enter details of each document. This solution works well if you scan only 
moderate numbers of documents (you get to set your own level of “moder-
ate” here) and if you typically use only a single PC.
Use a professional document-tracking system. This is the best solution if you 
scan many documents or if you want to use two or more PCs for scanning or 
managing your documents.
If you have Microsoft Office OneNote, you can organize your scanned documents into different 
notebooks, sections, and pages. OneNote offers you the choice of either placing the scans in your 
notebooks or linking to other documents in the manner described shortly for Microsoft Excel.
Track Your Scanned Documents Using Tags
As you saw earlier in this project, after you scan a document from Windows Vista, 
Windows Photo Gallery lets you tag the picture with various items of information. 
This information lets you locate a particular picture or set of pictures in Windows 
Photo Gallery.
Track Your Scanned Documents Using Excel
If you have Microsoft Office Excel (pretty much any recent version) or another  
spreadsheet program with similar capabilities, you can create a spreadsheet that helps 
you track your scanned documents. The following illustration shows an example:
Create a spreadsheet that contains a column for each item of information you 
want to store about each picture. Here is an example, but you will almost certainly 
want to keep a different set of data in your spreadsheet:
Year The year in which you scanned and filed the document.
Month The month in which you scanned and filed the document.
Day The day of the month on which you scanned and filed the document.
Category For example, Household, Personal, or Business.
●
●
●
●
●
●
note

Project 19: Digitize Your Paper Documents  211
Subcategory For each category, create subcategories, such as Bank, Utilities, 
Essential Documents, or Tax.
Description Add a short description of the document—for example,  
“Electric bill.”
Keywords To make the document easier to find, add keywords—for ex-
ample, “1040” or “W-2.”
Document Date If the document bears a date, enter it here.
Document Reference Number If the document has a reference number as-
sociated with it, enter it here. You may also want to have a separate column 
for account numbers.
Document Name Enter the document’s name as a hyperlink to the docu-
ment’s location (use the Insert | Hyperlink command).
Another approach is to divide your content logically into separate categories and devote a 
separate spreadsheet page to each of them. For example, you might choose to keep business 
documents, household documents, and personal documents separate from each other.
Once you’ve created the list in your spreadsheet, you can manipulate its contents 
using standard Excel commands. For example:
Use the Data Form command to display a data-form dialog box for the list, 
as shown here. This dialog box lets you enter information quickly in the  
columns of the list, but you will need to enter the hyperlink to the document 
itself manually.
Use the Sort command to sort the rows of data so that you can see related 
items. For example, you might sort by category, by subcategory, and by year 
to pull related items together.
Use the Find command to locate a particular item by using a string of text or 
data (for example, an account number or reference number).
Once you’ve located the document, click the hyperlink to open it in your picture 
editor.
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
note

212
Part II: Intermediate
Track Your Scanned Documents Using a Professional Solution
If you need a heavier-duty solution for tracking your scanned documents, you can 
develop a database of your own (for example, if you have Microsoft Access) or use an 
existing software package for document control.
If you’re interested in creating a serious—but personal-scale—tracking solution for 
scanned documents, take a look at the Perforce Software Configuration Management 
System. Perforce (www.perforce.com/) provides its client software for free, and the 
Perforce Server software is free for unlicensed use by up to two users and five client 
workspaces. Better yet, you don’t need to run the Perforce Client on a different com-
puter from the Perforce Server computer—you can install them both on the same PC.
Once you’ve gotten your scanning-and-storage system up and running, use it for 
a couple of months—and test it as extensively as possible—before reaching for the 
shredder and the recycling bin. Remember to back up your scanned documents to 
keep them safe.

213
Project 20
Seal Your 
Private Data in 
an Uncrackable 
Virtual Locker
What You’ll Need
Hardware: PC with Trusted Platform Module (TPM) version 1.2 or 
later, or USB flash drive
Software: Windows Vista Ultimate Edition 
Cost: Free to $20 U.S.
T
heft, accidents, rainfall, floods, fire, or simply an act of God…if you have a 
laptop PC, you should be prepared to lose it and all its contents at any point. 
Even a desktop PC suffers plenty of threats, ranging from the mundane curse 
of gravity to the rigors of daily life (children in the home, cleaners in the office), from 
the ever-present threats of Internet viruses to the danger of an electrical storm reaching 
far enough along the cables to damage the PC.
But if the contents of your PC are sensitive or valuable—commercially, politically, 
or personally—perhaps the worst threat is of someone else accessing your private 
data. You can protect your PC against intrusion to some extent by applying a strong 
password to your user account, locking your office, and using a firewall to prevent 
remote access, but there remains the possibility that a malefactor will find another 
way in. For example, as you saw in Project 10, someone can use a live Linux distribution 
such as Knoppix to bypass conventional protection systems such as login names 
and passwords.
The solution to this problem is to seal your private data in an uncrackable virtual 
locker by encrypting it using the powerful encryption built into the Ultimate Edition of 
Windows Vista. This encryption is called BitLocker, and it prevents other people from 
reading your files even if they manage to access them.
If you’re not sure which version of Windows your PC is running, press WINDOWS KEY–BREAK. In the 
System window on Windows Vista, look at the Windows Edition readout. 
●
●
●
tip

214
Part III: Advanced
If you don’t have Windows Vista Ultimate Edition, see the sidebar “An Alterna-
tive to BitLocker for Other Versions of Windows” at the end of this project for an 
alternative means of encryption.
Windows Vista Enterprise Edition also includes BitLocker. However, this version of Windows Vista 
is only available to large corporations for bulk purchases. If you’re using Windows Vista Enterprise 
Edition and need to use BitLocker, a system administrator will probably set up BitLocker for you.
Step 1: Understand What Encryption Does—and Why 
You Must Be Careful
If you’ve ever played with a code—even a simple one, such as one that involves shifting 
each letter just a couple of places down the alphabet (A changes to C, B changes to D, 
and so on)—you know what encryption is: Using a key to transform information from 
being readable plaintext to unreadable ciphertext. Decryption is the reverse: Using a 
key to transform the ciphertext back into plaintext.
In the example, the key is knowing that you shift each letter two places forward to 
encrypt the data and two places backward to decrypt the ciphertext back to plaintext, 
something anyone can do with some paper or some practice. Encryption in your PC 
works in the same way but with a much more complex key—one complex enough 
that the files in practice cannot be decrypted without it.
Because BitLocker uses strong encryption, losing your cryptographic key locks 
you out of your data just as effectively as it locks out other people. So you must take 
active steps to ensure that you don’t lose your cryptographic key.
BitLocker Is Strong Enough for Serious Use
No encryption is truly unbreakable, but BitLocker provides strong enough 
encryption for most civilian uses—and perhaps some government and military 
uses. The strength of encryption depends on the length of the encryption 
key used. BitLocker uses a 128-bit key and the AES (Advanced Encryption 
Standard) encryption algorithm. So you can be sure that nobody can crack it 
easily unless they can determine (by guessing or by brute force) your login 
password.
Equally, you can be pretty sure that any security professionals will be able 
to break the encryption eventually. For example, don’t expect BitLocker to hold 
out against the decryption resources of a government agency. (But if these are 
the people against whom you’re trying to protect your secrets, you’ve got 
bigger problems than this book can cover.)
That said, modern encryption is hard enough to crack that some govern-
ments have resorted to other means of deciphering it. For example, UK law 
officers can compel UK citizens to disclose cryptographic keys under the threat 
of five years’ jail if they fail to do so.
note

Project 20: Seal Your Private Data in an Uncrackable Virtual Locker  215
BitLocker stores the encryption key either in a special chip on your PC’s mother-
board or on a USB flash drive that you connect to your PC. The special chip is called 
a Trusted Platform Module (TPM); BitLocker requires TPM version 1.2 or later. You 
can dig through your PC’s specs to find out whether it has a suitable TPM or not, but 
what’s easier is to try to set up BitLocker and see if Windows Vista warns you that 
your PC doesn’t have a suitable TPM.
There’s also one technical thing you need to know about BitLocker: It requires 
two partitions rather than the one partition that Windows normally uses. Both parti-
tions, explained next, use the NTFS format that Windows Vista uses automatically for 
formatting internal hard drives:
System partition The system partition contains Windows Vista and all 
your files. This partition is encrypted, but otherwise it acts much like a nor-
mal system partition.
Active partition The active partition is an unencrypted partition of at least 
1.5GB that allows BitLocker to start Windows and to encrypt data to, and 
decrypt data from, the encrypted system partition.
You can choose to set up an active partition manually, but there’s an easier way. You 
can download the BitLocker Drive Preparation Tool, which can create the active parti-
tion automatically for you by carving out a chunk of your existing system partition.
Encrypting your data requires your PC to work harder to get the same amount of work done, so 
it will degrade performance. If your PC is powerful enough to handle its regular tasks without 
breaking a sweat, having to deal with encryption as well may not slow it down enough for you to 
notice. But if your PC is struggling to run Windows, encryption may be the last straw that brings 
it to its knees.
To encrypt your PC’s hard drive with BitLocker, you must perform these three 
actions:
Download and install the BitLocker Drive Preparation Tool.
Run the BitLocker Drive Preparation Tool and create an active partition for 
BitLocker.
Start BitLocker.
If you want to use a USB key instead of a TPM, you also need to set BitLocker up 
to use the USB key.
Step 2: Download and Install the BitLocker  
Drive Preparation Tool
The BitLocker Drive Preparation Tool is one of the Windows Vista Ultimate Extras; 
extra programs that Microsoft makes available for free only to users of Windows Vista 
●
●
1.
2.
3.
caution

216
Part III: Advanced
Ultimate Edition. To download and install the BitLocker Drive Preparation Tool, fol-
low these steps:
Choose Start | All Programs | Windows Update to open a Windows Update 
window.
Click the View Available Extras link to open a View Available Extras window.
Select the BitLocker And EFS Enhancements check box in the Windows Ulti-
mate Extras section of the list. If you want, you can also select the check box 
for any other Ultimate Extra you want to install.
Click the Install button, and then go through User Account Control for the 
Windows Update program (unless you’ve turned off User Account Control). 
Windows Update downloads the BitLocker and EFS Enhancements package, 
along with any other Extras (or other updates) you chose to install, and then 
installs them.
When the Windows Update window shows the message “The updates 
were successfully installed,” click the Close button (the × button) to close 
the window.
Step 3: Create the Active Partition for BitLocker
To create the active partition for BitLocker, follow these steps:
Choose Start | All Programs | Accessories | System Tools | BitLocker | Bit-
Locker Drive Preparation Tool, and then go through User Account Control 
for the BitLocker Drive Preparation Tool program (unless you’ve turned off 
User Account Control). Windows opens the first BitLocker Drive Encryption 
dialog box, which contains a license agreement.
Read the license agreement. If you can accept its terms, click the I Accept button 
to reach the second BitLocker Drive Encryption dialog box (see Figure 20-1). 
(If you click the I Decline button, you won’t be able to use BitLocker.)
Read the details of what the BitLocker Drive Preparation Tool is planning 
to do to your hard drive—for example, create a new active drive from free 
space on one of your PC’s existing drives.
If you want to proceed, click the Continue button. The BitLocker Drive Prep-
aration Tool shrinks the PC’s existing drive, creates a new active drive, and 
then prepares the new drive for BitLocker. The BitLocker Drive Encryption 
dialog box shows you the progress.
When the BitLocker Drive Preparation Tool has finished creating and pre-
paring the new drive, click the Finish button to close the BitLocker Drive 
Encryption dialog box. Another BitLocker Drive Encryption dialog box then 
tells you that you must restart your computer to apply the changes.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Project 20: Seal Your Private Data in an Uncrackable Virtual Locker  217
Save any unsaved documents you want to keep, close your programs, and 
then click the Restart Now button to restart Windows.
Log on to Windows as normal. Windows then displays the BitLocker Drive 
Encryption window (see Figure 20-2).
6.
7.
Figure 20-1  
The BitLocker Drive 
Encryption dialog box 
starts you off with 
three warnings. Don’t 
worry—things get bet-
ter soon.
Figure 20-2  
If the BitLocker Drive 
Encryption window 
tells you that a TPM 
was not found, you 
must use a USB key 
drive for storing the 
encryption key.

218
Part III: Advanced
If the BitLocker Drive Encryption window contains a yellow bar telling you that 
a TPM was not found, follow the instructions in Step 4 for using a USB key drive to 
store the encryption key. If this yellow bar does not appear, all is well. Go to Step 5 
to turn on BitLocker.
Step 4: Use a USB Key Drive Instead of a TPM
If you’ve just found that your PC doesn’t have the TPM required for BitLocker, follow 
these steps to use a USB drive instead:
Minimize or close the BitLocker Drive Encryption window to get it out of 
the way.
Press WINDOWS KEY–R to display the Run dialog box.
Type gpedit.msc in the Open text box, press ENTER or click the OK button, 
and then go through User Account Control for the Microsoft Management 
Console program (unless you’ve turned off User Account Control). Once 
you’ve done that, Windows displays a Group Policy Object Editor window 
(shown in Figure 20-3 with the tree expanded to show the BitLocker Drive 
Encryption settings).
Expand the Computer Configuration object, the Administrative Templates 
folder, and the Windows Components folder. (You can simply double-click 
each of these in turn.)
In the Windows Components folder, click the BitLocker Drive Encryption 
item to show its contents in the right pane.
In the right pane, double-click the Control Panel Setup: Enable Advanced 
Startup Options setting to display the Control Panel Setup: Enable Advanced 
Startup Options Properties dialog box (shown in Figure 20-4 with settings 
chosen).
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Figure 20-3  
Use the Group Policy 
Object Editor window 
to tell Windows Vista 
to store the BitLocker 
encryption key on a 
USB key drive.

Project 20: Seal Your Private Data in an Uncrackable Virtual Locker  219
Select the Enabled option button.
Make sure that Windows has selected the Allow BitLocker Without A Com-
patible TPM check box.
Click the OK button to close the Properties dialog box, and then click the 
Close button (the × button) in the Group Policy Object Editor window.
Press WINDOWS KEY–R to display the Run dialog box again.
In the Open text box, type gpupdate /force, and then press ENTER (or click 
the OK button) to force Windows Vista to update the group policy with 
the change you’ve just made. Windows runs the command in a Command 
Prompt window, which it then closes automatically.
Choose Start | Control Panel to display a Control Panel window.
If the Control Panel window is in Control Panel Home view (showing a list 
of major and minor headings), click the Classic View link in the upper-left 
corner to switch to Classic view.
Double-click the BitLocker Drive Encryption icon to open a BitLocker Drive 
Encryption window.
Connect your USB key drive to your PC. If Windows opens an AutoPlay 
dialog box, click the Close button to close it.
Now that BitLocker is ready to store the BitLocker encryption key on a USB key 
drive, you can turn BitLocker on.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
Figure 20-4  
The Control Panel 
Setup: Enable Advanced 
Startup Options  
Properties dialog box 
lets you choose where 
to store the BitLocker 
encryption key.

220
Part III: Advanced
Step 5: Turn On BitLocker
To turn on BitLocker, follow these steps from the BitLocker Drive Encryption  
window:
Click the Turn On BitLocker link to start the BitLocker Drive Encryption Wiz-
ard. The wizard displays the Set BitLocker Startup Preferences screen (see 
Figure 20-5).
Choose which BitLocker implementation you want to use by clicking a button:
Use BitLocker Without Additional Keys This option uses the BitLocker  
encryption key stored on your PC’s TPM for encryption. This is the 
standard option, but it’s not available if you’re using a USB key.
Require PIN At Every Startup This option adds security by making 
the user enter a personal identification number (PIN) each time the PC 
is started. Once the user enters the correct PIN, BitLocker uses the key 
stored on the TPM. If you’re using a USB key, this option is not available.
Require Startup USB Key At Every Startup This option lets you store 
the BitLocker encryption key on a USB drive. Use this option if your PC 
doesn’t have a TPM or if you want to be able to carry the BitLocker key 
with you.
1.
2.
●
●
●
Figure 20-5  
If your PC doesn’t have 
a TPM, only the Require 
Startup USB Key At 
Every Startup button 
is available on the Set 
BitLocker Startup  
Preferences screen.

Project 20: Seal Your Private Data in an Uncrackable Virtual Locker  221
If you’re using a USB drive (as in this example), the wizard displays the Save 
Your Startup Key screen when you click the Require Startup USB Key At 
Every Startup button. Make sure the wizard has selected the correct drive, and 
then click the Save button. (If you’re not using a USB drive, skip this step.)
On the Save The Recovery Password screen (see Figure 20-6), click the Save 
The Password On A USB Drive button, the Save The Password In A Folder 
button, or the Print The Password button to save or print the password.
Saving the BitLocker recovery password on your encrypted hard drive will not help you recover 
from forgetting the password.
Click the Next button. The wizard displays the Encrypt The Volume screen 
(see Figure 20-7).
Check that the wizard is planning to encrypt the right drive and that it has 
selected the Run BitLocker System Check check box.
Click the Continue button. The wizard displays the Computer Must Be 
Restarted dialog box.
If you’re using a USB key to store the BitLocker encryption key, leave it 
connected to the PC. Whether you’re using a USB key or not, remove any 
disc from your PC’s optical drive.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Figure 20-6  
Losing your BitLocker 
recovery password will 
cost you all your data, 
so you will probably 
want to save your  
password in two or 
more places.
caution

222
Part III: Advanced
Click the Restart Now button. Windows restarts your PC.
After you log on, BitLocker runs automatically and encrypts your hard disk 
volume, displaying a notification-area icon that you can hover the mouse 
pointer over to get a progress readout, as shown here. (You can also click the 
icon to display a progress dialog box.) To get the encryption finished as fast 
as possible, avoid using your PC until the encryption is complete.
When BitLocker tells you that it has finished encryption, click the Close 
button. You can then use Windows as normal.
Step 6: Start Your PC When BitLocker Is On
After you’ve set up BitLocker to protect your PC, BitLocker verifies the encryption 
key each time you start the PC:
If you’re using a TPM, BitLocker verifies that the TPM contains the encryp-
tion key. As long as it does, you don’t have to take any action yourself.
9.
10.
11.
●
Figure 20-7  
On the Encrypt The 
Volume screen, make 
sure that the wizard has 
chosen the drive you 
want to encrypt.

Project 20: Seal Your Private Data in an Uncrackable Virtual Locker  223
If you’re using a TPM plus a PIN, BitLocker prompts you for the PIN during 
startup.
If you’re using a USB key, BitLocker prompts you for the USB key during 
startup. Figure 20-8 shows an example of the prompt.
If you’ve lost or damaged your USB key, but you have the BitLocker password (for 
example, on a sheet of paper), press ENTER. Windows displays the Windows BitLocker 
Drive Encryption Password Entry screen (see Figure 20-9). Type the password, noting 
the instructions to use the F1–F9 function keys for the numbers 1 through 9, and the F10 
key for 0, and then press ENTER.
●
●
Figure 20-8  
If you’re using a USB 
key with BitLocker, you 
must have the USB key 
connected in order to 
boot the PC.
Figure 20-9  
You can use the  
BitLocker password  
if you’ve lost your  
USB key.

224
Part III: Advanced
Step 7: Decrypt a Disk That’s Encrypted with BitLocker
If you decide that BitLocker is overkill for your protection needs, you can decrypt 
your hard disk again. To decrypt a disk, follow these steps:
Choose Start | Control Panel to display a Control Panel window.
If the Control Panel window is in Control Panel Home view (showing a list 
of major and minor headings), click the Classic View link in the upper-left 
corner to switch to Classic view.
Double-click the BitLocker Drive Encryption icon, and then go through 
User Account Control for the BitLocker Drive Encryption program (unless 
you’ve turned off User Account Control) to open a BitLocker Drive Encryption 
window.
Click the Turn Off BitLocker link to launch the BitLocker Drive Encryp-
tion Wizard, which displays the What Level Of Decryption Do You Want? 
screen shown next.
1.
2.
3.
4.
Create a New USB Key to Replace a Lost Key
If your USB key is permanently lost (rather than having been, say, left at home 
or at work), you can create another key. Follow these steps:
Choose Start | Control Panel to display a Control Panel window.
If the Control Panel window is in Control Panel Home view (showing 
a list of major and minor headings), click the Classic View link in the 
upper-left corner to switch to Classic view.
Double-click the BitLocker Drive Encryption icon, and then go through 
User Account Control for the BitLocker Drive Encryption program 
(unless you’ve turned off User Account Control) to open a BitLocker 
Drive Encryption window.
Click the Manage BitLocker Keys link to display the Select Keys To 
Manage window.
Click the Duplicate The Startup Key link to display the Copy Startup 
Key screen.
Insert the USB key you want to use, select it in the list box, and then 
click the Save button.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Project 20: Seal Your Private Data in an Uncrackable Virtual Locker  225
Click the Decrypt The Volume button to start the decryption. As with the 
encryption, decryption can take a while (for example, up to several hours). 
BitLocker displays a progress icon in the notification area to keep you 
informed.
The other option, Disable BitLocker Drive Encryption, turns BitLocker off temporarily but does 
not decrypt the drive. The normal reason for using this option is to update your PC’s BIOS. After 
updating, you would turn BitLocker on again.
When decryption is complete, BitLocker displays a message box telling you 
so. Click the Close button, and Windows is back to its normal, unencrypted 
self.
5.
6.
An Alternative to BitLocker and EFS  
for Other Versions of Windows
If you don’t have Windows Vista Ultimate Edition (or Enterprise Edition), you 
can’t use BitLocker. One alternative worth considering is TrueCrypt (www 
.truecrypt.org), which is free, open source software for encrypting disks. 
TrueCrypt works on Windows Vista, Windows XP, and Windows 2000.
note

226
Project 21
Stream TV to 
Your PC or 
Handheld Device 
Anywhere
What You’ll Need
Hardware: Slingbox, broadband Internet connection or network 
with router
Software: SlingPlayer (included with Slingbox)
Cost: $200 U.S.
I
f you pay for cable TV or satellite TV, you’ll probably want to make the most of it, 
especially if you have a digital video recorder (DVR) that makes it easy to record 
shows when the timing doesn’t suit you. But making the most of TV usually means 
you have to be home at the time—unless you have a device that can grab the TV output 
and send it out across the Internet to wherever you happen to be.
This project shows you how to stream your TV to your PC or handheld computer 
using a Slingbox. You can still watch TV as usual after you connect the Slingbox, but 
you also have the option of watching it remotely. To see the full details of what the 
Slingbox can do, visit the Sling Media web site (www.slingmedia.com).
In addition to a Slingbox, you need a broadband Internet connection if you want to 
watch across the Internet (if you don’t already have a broadband Internet connection, 
see Project 2 for a discussion of your options). If you’re stuck with a slow connection, 
you can watch across your own network instead—for example, you can use your PC to 
watch a TV show being received by the TV or digital box downstairs.
Step 1: Get and Connect the Slingbox
First, you need to buy, beg, or borrow a Slingbox. You’ve got a great chance of finding 
a Slingbox at your local electronics paradise, but you may prefer to take the easy way 
out and buy a Slingbox online. Once you have your Slingbox, connect it to your TV 
●
●
●

Project 21: Stream TV to Your PC or Handheld Device Anywhere  227
source following the instructions in the documentation that comes with the Sling-
box. This documentation shows you all the possible configurations, but these are 
the main two:
Cable TV or satellite TV Connect the Slingbox to the cable outlet to the 
set-top box, and then connect the TV to the Slingbox. Position the infrared 
emitter above or below the infrared sensor on your set-top box, and then 
connect the cable to the Slingbox. If your Slingbox has two infrared emitters 
rather than one, position one above the infrared sensor and one below it.
Unless you’re sure where the infrared sensor is on your set-top box, don’t use the sticky strips on 
the infrared emitter or emitters to stick it (or them) down yet, because it will be hard to shift if 
you’ve chosen the wrong place. Instead, stick the infrared emitter down lightly with tape or with 
sticky tack, or just wedge it in place for the time being.
Aerial If you receive your TV signal via an aerial, connect the aerial to the 
Slingbox, and then connect the TV to the Slingbox.
Either way, the incoming signal goes through the Slingbox, so that it can process 
the signal and “sling” it out across your network or Internet connection. The Slingbox 
also passes the signal through to the TV, so that you can watch TV as usual.
You then connect the Slingbox to your home network. Ideally, you connect the 
Slingbox to your network’s router or switch directly using an Ethernet cable. But if 
the router is in a separate room from the TV and Slingbox, you can use another tech-
nology, such as a wireless bridge or power-line networking. If you opt for power-line 
networking, consider buying a SlingLink or SlingLink Turbo kit, which are designed 
to work with the Slingbox.
Last, you plug the Slingbox’s power adapter into the Slingbox and into an electri-
cal socket.
Step 2: Install the SlingPlayer Software
When you’ve connected all the hardware, it’s time to install the SlingPlayer software:
Insert the Slingbox CD in your PC’s optical drive. Windows displays an 
AutoPlay dialog box.
If Windows doesn’t display an AutoPlay dialog box, choose Start | Computer. Double-click the 
icon for the PC’s optical drive to display the CD’s contents, and then double-click the Launch 
item on the CD.
Click the Run Launch.exe button. The Setup Wizard’s opening screen appears.
Click the Install SlingPlayer button, and then to go through User Account 
Control for the SlingPlayerSetup program (unless you’ve turned off User 
Account Control). The wizard displays the Choose Setup Language dialog box.
●
●
1.
2.
3.
tip
note

228
Part III: Advanced
Choose your language—for example, English (United States)—in the drop-
down list, and then follow through the installation process. There’s a license 
agreement that you must accept in order to proceed, and the wizard lets you 
choose where to install the software. Normally, the default destination folder 
(a Sling Media\SlingPlayer folder inside your PC’s Program Files folder) is fine. 
If for some reason you want to use a different folder, click the Browse button, 
select the folder in the Choose Folder dialog box, and then click the OK button.
At the end of the installation process, the wizard offers to launch the Sling-
Player program for you. If you haven’t yet set up the Slingbox (as will be 
the case if you’ve just installed SlingPlayer on your first PC), decline this 
invitation, because you need to set up the Slingbox. But if you’ve installed 
SlingPlayer on a second or subsequent PC, accept this invitation, and move 
right along to Step 6.
4.
5.
Dealing with the “SlingPlayer Is Incompatible  
with This Version of Windows” Message
At this writing, some Slingbox models ship with a version of the SlingPlayer 
software that’s compatible with Windows XP and Windows 2000 but incom-
patible with Windows Vista. If you install this older version of SlingPlayer on 
Windows Vista, you’ll see a Program Compatibility Assistant dialog box the 
first time you try to run SlingPlayer (or when the Setup Wizard tries to run 
SlingPlayer for you):
Click the Cancel button, launch your web browser, and go to the Sling 
Media web site (www.slingmedia.com), where you can download a Windows 
Vista–compatible version of SlingPlayer. Install this version, and the problem 
should go away.

Project 21: Stream TV to Your PC or Handheld Device Anywhere  229
Step 3: Set Up the Slingbox
If you just completed Step 2, you should already be seeing the Slingbox Setup Wiz-
ard’s first screen. If not, choose Start | All Programs | Sling Media | Slingbox Setup 
Wizard to launch the wizard.
Once you’ve got the wizard running, follow these steps to set up the Slingbox:
Make sure you’ve connected the hardware as described in Step 1. Verify that 
the two lights at the right end of the front of the Slingbox are on steadily 
rather than blinking.
Click the Next button. The wizard grabs the settings and displays the TV 
picture, as shown in Figure 21-1.
1.
2.
Figure 21-1  
By the second screen 
of the wizard, you 
should be seeing a 
picture from your  
aerial or set-top box.
If necessary, adjust the volume by dragging the Volume slider. Then click the 
Next button.
If you see the Slingbox Update screen (see Figure 21-2), click the Next but-
ton, and wait while the wizard updates the Slingbox with new firmware. The 
update process may take several minutes, depending on the speed of your 
Internet connection. If the Slingbox fails to restart after a few minutes, click 
the Cancel button to close the Setup Wizard, and then choose Start | All Pro-
grams | Sling Media | Slingbox Setup Wizard to launch the wizard again.
3.
4.

230
Part III: Advanced
The Slingbox displays the Location Of Your Slingbox screen. Select your 
country in the Where Is Your Slingbox Located? list box, and then click the 
Next button. The wizard displays the Connection To Your Slingbox screen 
(see Figure 21-3), which shows the input the Slingbox is currently using.
If you’re getting a TV picture on the installation screens, you shouldn’t need 
to change the input (unless you have connected multiple inputs and are get-
ting the picture from the wrong input). If you do need to change the input, 
click the appropriate jack, and make sure you get a picture.
Click the Next button. The wizard displays the Television Source screen (see 
Figure 21-4).
Select the type of device you’re using, and then click the Next button. Unless 
you chose a noncontrollable device, the wizard displays the Device Brand 
screen.
Select the brand of device (or select Other if your device is not listed), 
and then click the Next button. If the wizard displays the Device Model 
screen, select the model (select Other if the model is not listed), and then 
click the Next button. The wizard displays the Control Code Setup screen 
(see Figure 21-5).
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Figure 21-2  
The wizard tells you 
if you need to update 
your Slingbox with new 
firmware.

Project 21: Stream TV to Your PC or Handheld Device Anywhere  231
Figure 21-3  
Tell the wizard which 
input you’ve connected 
the cable to.
Figure 21-4  
On the Television 
Source screen, tell the 
wizard what type of 
device the input is  
coming from.

232
Part III: Advanced
Verify that the infrared emitters are positioned over the infrared receiver, 
and then click the Power button on the Control Code Setup screen.
If all is well, the device turns off, and you lose the signal; if so, click the 
Power button to turn the device on again.
If the device doesn’t respond to the signal, verify that the infrared cable 
is plugged firmly into the Slingbox. The easiest way to check is to unplug 
it, and then plug it in again.
If the device still doesn’t respond, try changing the IR (infrared) signal 
speed in the drop-down list on the right side of the Control Code Setup 
screen. The choices are Fast, Medium, and Slow.
If changing the speed doesn’t help, reposition the infrared emitters, and 
then try again.
If you’re not sure whether the emitter is sending a signal, you can check by using a digital 
camera that has a screen. Turn on the camera, aim its lens at the emitter so that you can see 
the emitter on the screen, and then give the command again via the Slingbox software. If the 
emitter is working, you will see a pulse of white light on the camera screen. (This pulse is 
invisible when viewed directly with the eye.)
When the device is receiving input from the Slingbox, click the Next button. 
The wizard displays the Device Setup Complete screen.
From the Device Setup Complete screen, you can select the I Want To Set Up Another Device 
check box if you want to configure another device that you’ve connected to your Slingbox. 
Normally, you won’t need to do this—at least, not the first time you set up the Slingbox.
10.
●
●
●
●
11.
Figure 21-5  
On the Control Code 
Setup screen, test that 
the device is receiving 
input from the Slingbox.
tip
note

Project 21: Stream TV to Your PC or Handheld Device Anywhere  233
Click the Next button. The wizard displays the Name Your Slingbox screen.
Type a descriptive name for your Slingbox (making the name descriptive is 
especially important if you have more than one Slingbox), and then click the 
Next button. The wizard displays the Set Your Password screen.
In the Enter A Password For Your Slingbox area, type a password in both the 
Password text box and the Verify text box. This password is used to allow 
access to the Slingbox. You will share this password with anyone whom you 
allow to view content from the Slingbox.
In the Enter An Administrator Password area, type a password in both the 
Password text box and the Verify text box. This is the password you will 
need to enter to change the settings of the Slingbox, so make it a strong pass-
word and keep it to yourself.
The installation procedure continues in the next section, letting you set up remote 
viewing.
Step 4: Set Up Remote Viewing
Next, the Slingbox Setup Wizard lets you choose whether to set up remote viewing. 
You’ll need to set up remote viewing if you want to use the Slingbox across your In-
ternet connection. To set up remote viewing, follow these steps:
Click the Next button. The wizard displays the Remote Viewing screen 
(see Figure 21-6).
12.
13.
14.
15.
1.
Figure 21-6  
The Remote Viewing 
screen of the wizard 
lets you decide whether 
you want to set up a 
remote device now. 
Normally, you will want 
to do this.

234
Part III: Advanced
Make sure the I’m Ready To Setup Remote Viewing For My Slingbox check 
box is selected and that the A Do-It-Yourself Kind Of Person? check box is 
cleared. (If you prefer to use manual configuration, select the A Do-It-Your-
self Kind Of Person? check box, and then go directly to Step 5.)
Click the Next button. The wizard attempts to detect your router, and then 
downloads any updates that are needed for configuring it.
If the wizard displays the Router/Modem Password dialog box, prompting 
you to enter the username and password for the router or modem, type them, 
and then click the OK button.
If the wizard announces it has configured your router automatically, you’re 
all set. Skip the next step, and go right to Step 6. If the wizard displays the 
Remote Viewing – Manual Configuration screen, telling you that your router 
cannot be automatically configured, go to the next step.
Step 5: Configure Your Router Manually
If the wizard wasn’t able to configure your router automatically, you need to configure 
it manually:
Select the Manually Configure Your Router option button, and then click 
the Next button. The wizard displays the second Remote Viewing – Manual 
Configuration screen, which is shown in Figure 21-7.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1.
Figure 21-7  
The second Remote 
Viewing – Manual 
Configuration screen 
lets you get a tutorial 
on your router. When 
you’re ready, you can 
access the Slingbox  
network settings to 
change them manually.

Project 21: Stream TV to Your PC or Handheld Device Anywhere  235
To get a tutorial on configuring your router, choose the manufacturer and 
model in the two drop-down lists on the left side of the screen, and then 
click the Router Tutorial button. The wizard opens the tutorial in a browser 
window.
If the Setup Wizard doesn’t offer a configuration tutorial for your router model, consult the 
router’s documentation.
When you’ve learned how to configure the router, click the Change button 
in the Slingbox Network Settings group box. The wizard displays the third 
Remote Viewing – Manual Configuration screen, shown in Figure 21-8.
Type the IP address for the Slingbox in the IP Address text box. The IP address 
needs to be unique on your network—each computer, Slingbox, or other 
device must have its own IP address. In a typical network configuration, 
this is the item of information that you will need to change.
Enter the subnet mask in the Subnet Mask text box. The subnet mask will 
be the same for each device on the network. For most home networks, the 
subnet mask is 255.255.255.0. The Slingbox normally detects the subnet mask 
correctly.
Enter the IP address of your router in the Default Gateway text box. This 
is the internal IP address of your router, the one that is part of your local 
network. (The router also has an external IP address for its connection to the 
Internet.)
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Figure 21-8  
On the third Remote 
Viewing – Manual 
Configuration screen, 
apply the network set-
tings required to get the 
Slingbox working with 
your router.
note

236
Part III: Advanced
In the Port Number text box, enter the port number that the Slingbox 
should use.
Click the Next button. The wizard applies the settings to the Slingbox and 
returns you to the second Remote Viewing – Manual Configuration screen.
Click the Next button. The wizard displays the fourth Remote Viewing – 
Manual Configuration screen, on which you confirm the router configuration.
Make sure the Yes! My Router Is Now Configured option button is selected, 
and then click the Next button. The wizard displays the Setup Confirmation 
screen.
Click the Next button. The wizard saves your settings and then tests the 
remote connection.
If you see the Activate Remote Viewing screen shown in Figure 21-9, telling 
you that “The Slingbox can not be reached from the Internet,” follow these 
steps:
Select the Try Again option button, and then click the Next button. 
The wizard tries the connection again. If it establishes the connection, 
you’re done.
If the wizard displays the “The Slingbox can not be reached from the 
Internet” screen again, select the Change Network/Router Settings option 
button, click the Next button, and go back to step 1 in this list. Change 
the router settings, and then apply them. Again, if the wizard estab-
lishes the connection, you’re done.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
●
●
Figure 21-9  
If you see this screen, 
use the Try Again op-
tion button to try the 
connection again. If that 
doesn’t work, select the 
Change Network/ 
Router Settings button, 
and then change the 
router settings.

Project 21: Stream TV to Your PC or Handheld Device Anywhere  237
If the wizard displays the “The Slingbox can not be reached from the In-
ternet” screen a third time, try the Try Again option button once more. If 
that doesn’t work, select the Continue Anyway option button, and then 
click the Next button to reach the end of the wizard.
Step 6: Watch TV on Your PC via the Slingbox
Finally, you’re ready to watch TV on your PC via the Slingbox. Follow these steps:
Choose Start | All Programs | Sling Media | Launch SlingPlayer. SlingPlayer 
opens and automatically displays the Slingbox Directory dialog box, which 
lists the available Slingboxes, as shown here. 
Select the Slingbox you want to watch (if there’s only one, SlingPlayer will 
have selected it for you automatically), and then click the Watch button. 
SlingPlayer displays the Password dialog box, shown here.
Type the password in the Please Enter The Password Below text box.
Select the Log In As Administrator check box only if you want to log on to the Slingbox to change 
its configuration rather than to watch its output.
●
1.
2.
3.
note

238
Part III: Advanced
If you want to save the password so that you don’t need to enter it in future, 
select the Save This Password In My Profile check box.
Click the Connect button. SlingPlayer connects to the Slingbox and dis-
plays its current channel in a window, together with a remote control (see 
Figure 21-10).
To reposition or resize the SlingPlayer window, click the Dock Left button, 
the Dock Right button, or the Maximize button.
Click the buttons on the remote control to control playback.
When you have finished watching, click the Close button or choose  
Player | Exit.
If you have multiple Slingboxes, you can connect to another Slingbox by choosing Slingbox | 
Slingbox Directory (or pressing ALT-D), choosing the Slingbox in the Slingbox Directory dialog box, 
and then clicking the Watch button.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Figure 21-10  
SlingPlayer displays a 
window with a remote 
control that you can 
click to control  
playback.
Dock Left
Dock Right
Close
Minimize
Maximize
note

239
Project 22
Silence Your 
PC or Build an 
Ultra-Quiet PC
What You’ll Need
Hardware: Assorted PC components (each optional, depending on 
your PC), digital camera (optional)
Software: None
Cost: $100–1500 U.S.
S
ilence is golden. Eloquence is silver. (Some people assert that duct tape is silver 
too, because it can produce that golden silence.) And trying to concentrate and 
perform complex work in a noisy environment can be the trigger for the reddest 
of rages.
This project explains which components in your PC tend to make the noise and 
shows you how to deal with each of them in turn. What exactly you can do to hush 
your PC depends on what type of PC it is and how much time, effort, and money 
you’re prepared to put into it. 
You know the old saw about “I have my grandfather’s ax. My father replaced the 
handle, and I replaced the blade”? Well, quieting your PC can be like that. It’s probably 
not worth your while to replace every single noise-making component in your PC. So 
you’ll most likely want to listen to the noise coming from your PC, decide which of the 
silencing operations described in this project will make the most difference, and then 
work through the steps for those operations.
The end of the project looks briefly at the quick and easy—but expensive—solution: 
buying a fully silenced PC from a specialist manufacturer. That silence will cost you 
gold, but you may decide it’s a price worth paying.
The focus of this project is mostly desktop PCs. If your laptop PC is noisy, there’s usually not much 
you can do about it besides replacing the hard drive with a quieter model; connecting an external 
keyboard, mouse, and monitor; and placing the laptop as far from you as possible. See Project 7 
for instructions on replacing the hard drive in a laptop.
●
●
●
note

240
Part III: Advanced
Step 1: Understand Which PC Components Make  
the Noise—and Which You Can Silence
In any group of people, you’ll usually find several movers and shakers, and it’s much 
the same inside your PC. Here’s a quick summary of the usual culprits:
Power supply Most power supplies have noisy cooling fans that run con-
stantly.
Processor fan This is the fan that sits on top of the processor and keeps it 
from melting. Almost all current PC processors run so hot that they need 
cooling all the time.
Fans Most PCs have one or more fans to expel warm air from the case and 
bring in cooler air from outside it.
Hard drive The hard drive spins at several thousand revolutions per min-
ute all the time you’re using the PC. But there is an alternative, described 
later in this project.
Graphics card Many higher-powered graphics cards include a cooling fan. 
Some include two fans. These fans are usually small—and small fans tend to 
be noisier, because they need to spin faster than larger fans to shift a worth-
while volume of air. To make matters worse, some high-performance PCs 
have two of these noisy graphics cards.
Case Normally, your PC’s case should be lessening the noise the PC makes. 
But some cases vibrate noisily because of all the vibrating components in 
them.
●
●
●
●
●
●
Finding Ultra-Quiet, Silent, and Silencing  
Components for Your PC
Here are three web sites to consult when you’re looking for ultra-quiet, silent, 
and silencing components for your PC:
Quiet PC (www.quietpc.com) Sells a wide variety of parts, together 
with full explanations of what they do and what they’re good for. You 
can also visit the forums to find installation instructions. 
EndPCNoise.com (www.endpcnoise.com) Sells a wide array of 
quiet PC parts.
Silent PC Review (www.silentpcreview.com) Reviews silent and 
ultra-quiet components and is a great source of information. This web 
site doesn’t sell products, but it does link to manufacturer and affiliate 
sites, pointing you in the right direction for finding the components 
you need.
●
●
●

Project 22: Silence Your PC or Build an Ultra-Quiet PC  241
Step 2: Identify the Culprits and Open Your PC
Now that you know which components may be rowdy, examine your PC and try to 
identify the culprits. The PC must be running to make its noises, so start by seeing 
what you can determine with the case closed:
You’ll be able to tell immediately if the power supply is noisy by placing 
your ear close to it. The same goes for the case fan or fans.
You’ll definitely be able to tell if the optical drive is noisy, because there will 
be a whooshing noise when you start running a program or opening a docu-
ment from a CD or DVD.
If the case is vibrating, that should be pretty obvious too—especially if you 
can stop the noise by putting your fingers or hand against the case.
The hard drive will be spinning all the time the PC is running (unless you’ve 
configured the hard drive to go to sleep after a period of inactivity), so it will 
normally make a constant noise.
A whining or buzzing when you play demanding games may indicate that 
the graphics card gets loud when you work it hard—but as the processor 
will probably be working hard, you may not easily be able to tell which of 
the two is the offender.
Much of the remaining noise will come from the processor fan.
Now open your PC (as discussed next) to work out what’s making the noise in-
side the case. (If your PC won’t run while the case is open, see the Note.)
Some PCs check their case integrity on bootup and refuse to boot if the case is open. This can 
be a good security measure, but it’s a menace when you’re trying to reduce the noise your PC 
makes. If your PC performs this integrity check, look in the BIOS for instructions on disabling it 
temporarily while you work on silencing the PC. (See Project 6 for instructions on accessing your 
PC’s BIOS.) If you are not able to disable the integrity check in the BIOS, you may need to work 
component by component—replace the power supply if you think it is noisy, and then see how 
much the noise level has dropped; change the processor fan if that seems loud, and then check 
the noise level again; and so on. This is not a great way to proceed, so you may want to explore 
alternatives, such as removing the cover for an unused drive bay and poking in a microphone on 
a stick or straightened clothes-hanger to determine how much noise an individual component is 
making. If you choose to do this, use a flashlight to see what you’re doing, and make sure not to 
touch any component.
Open Your PC
For most of the remaining steps in this project, you need to open your PC’s case. To 
do so, follow these general steps. The specifics will vary depending on your PC’s case 
and configuration.
Shut down Windows, turn off your PC, and disconnect all the cables.
Put your PC on a table or other suitable surface.
●
●
●
●
●
●
1.
2.
note

242
Part III: Advanced
Open the side opposite the motherboard. For example, you may need to 
undo a latch, unscrew a couple of thumb-screws (the knurled kind you turn 
with your fingers), or unscrew case screws with a screwdriver.
Touch a metal part of the PC’s case to discharge any static electricity from 
your body before you touch any of the electro-sensitive components (that’s 
most of them).
You’re now ready to work on the PC’s internals.
Step 3: Silence Your PC’s Power Supply
The power supply is one area where laptops, with their external power bricks that 
cool themselves by convection, score over desktop PCs. Many desktop PCs come 
with noisy power supplies. That’s because the power supply is one of the less exciting 
components of a PC. Provided it can deliver the required wattage, many manufactur-
ers use as inexpensive a power supply as possible to help keep costs down. After all, 
they’re involved in an ongoing price war. (Think back…when you ordered your last 
PC, did you have a choice of power supply? Chances are that you didn’t. If you did, 
you were dealing with a quality PC manufacturer—and you may want to use them 
again.) If the power supply hums, whines, or buzzes, too bad—even if the customers 
whine even louder. 
If your PC’s power supply is noisy, there’s good news: There are plenty of ultra-
quiet power supplies on the market. Better news: There are even some silent power 
supplies (but they cost a bit more). Better news still: Replacing a power supply is far 
easier than most people think.
Buy a Quiet or Silent Power Supply
First, buy the power supply—or maybe scavenge an old power supply from that an-
cient PC you retired a couple of years back that used to run so quietly. 
Next, check the wattage your PC’s current power supply delivers. The easiest 
way to get the right wattage is to get a replacement power supply with the same watt-
age. If you’re lucky, you’ll find the wattage written on the part of the power supply 
that shows through the case or shows when the case is open; if not, you may need to 
remove the power supply to find the wattage written on a surface that was hidden.
The following list shows typical wattages for different types of PC:
PC Type
Wattage Range
Conventional PC
250–400W
Performance PC
500W or more 
Economical PC
200W or less
3.
4.

Project 22: Silence Your PC or Build an Ultra-Quiet PC  243
The wattage on a power supply is the maximum amount of power it can supply; it doesn’t draw 
that amount of power all the time. So if you put a higher-wattage power supply in your PC, the 
PC won’t suddenly start using more electricity than it used to—it will just have the capacity to 
use more electricity if you add more power-hungry components.
You have two main options when looking to bring down the amount of noise 
your PC’s power supply makes:
Quieter power supply Look for a power supply described as “quiet” or 
“semi-fanless” (or both). Quiet power supplies are ones designed to make 
less noise, usually by using a larger, slower-moving fan rather than a smaller, 
faster-moving fan. “Semi-fanless” power supplies run their fans only when 
necessary rather than running them the whole time (as standard power sup-
plies do). Look for a noise level of 30 decibels or less.
Silent power supply If you’re prepared to pay a bit more, you can get not 
just a “semi-fanless” power supply but one that is actually fanless and con-
tains no moving parts. A silent power supply typically has a heat sink that 
projects beyond your PC’s case and transfers the heat to the outside, like a 
miniature radiator. Most such power supplies are rated at 0 decibels—they 
produce no noise at all. (In truth, some may hum a bit as they get warm. But 
so may you.) Figure 22-1 shows a fanless power supply.
Replace the Power Supply
To replace the power supply in your PC, follow these steps:
Shut down Windows, and then open your PC as discussed in Step 2.
Optionally, take pictures of how the power cables are connected, to make it 
easier to connect the cables afterward. Alternatively, make a list or draw a 
diagram.
●
●
1.
2.
Figure 22-1  
Unlike fanless rock 
bands, fanless power 
supplies make no noise. 
The heat sink protrudes 
beyond the PC’s case 
and transfers heat to 
the outside.
note

244
Part III: Advanced
Unplug each connector in turn. Remember to release any retaining clips and 
to use patience rather than force for any stubborn connector.
There may be connectors that you can’t see—or can see but can’t unplug—as long as the power 
supply is in place. For example, the connector that delivers power to the motherboard is often 
obscured or made unreachable by the power supply. Be prepared to have to unplug another 
connector while you’re removing the power supply. If the cables are short, having an assistant to 
provide an extra pair of hands is helpful.
Unscrew the screws that hold the power supply in place:
Start with the screws that are farthest down, judging from the way the 
PC is lying or standing. For example, in a tower PC that’s lying on its left 
side (seen from the back), the screws on the right side of the power sup-
ply are at the top—so start with the ones on the left side.
The power supply is heavy enough to damage any component it lands 
on, so be sure to support it as soon as it’s loose.
If, when you start to move the power supply, you see another connector 
that’s still connected, either park the power supply somewhere safe, or 
have someone help you juggle the power supply and the cable.
Remove the power supply, and then set it aside.
Insert the new power supply, and then screw it firmly into place.
Depending on the PC’s layout, you may need to plug in one or more cables before you insert the 
power supply, because otherwise the power supply obscures the connections.
Connect the power cables, using your photo, diagram, or list for reference.
Close the PC, reconnect the cables, and fire it up.
Step 4: Silence Your PC’s Processor Fan
The power supply at least has the common decency to throw most of the heat it pro-
duces out of the PC’s case. But the cooling fan for your PC’s processor simply removes 
the heat from the processor and distributes it around the inside of the case—which 
probably already has more than enough heat of its own, thank you. (Additionally, if 
your PC has two processors, it will produce that much more heat.)
If you’ve determined that the processor fan makes more noise than you’re pre-
pared to tolerate, replace it. Various types of quiet processor coolers and silent coolers 
are available:
Quiet processor coolers These coolers typically use a heat sink combined 
with a large-diameter, variable-speed fan and are powerful enough to cool 
even the hottest processors. Figure 22-2 shows an example of a quiet proces-
sor cooler.
3.
4.
●
●
●
5.
6.
7.
8.
●
caution
note

Project 22: Silence Your PC or Build an Ultra-Quiet PC  245
Water-cooling systems are complex and are best left to enthusiasts. As you can imagine, a leak 
in a water-cooling system can hose your PC in two senses.
The best way to find a cooler is to check what type of CPU your PC has, and then 
use a site such as Quiet PC or EndPCNoise.com to see which coolers will fit. You can 
find the CPU type in the PC’s documentation or from the BIOS, but you may find it 
more convenient to use CPU-Z (see Step 1 of Project 1). The CPU tab of CPU-Z shows 
the processor’s name and package type near the top of the Processor group box (see 
Figure 22-4).
Silent processor coolers These coolers typically use either a heat sink 
cooled by convection or a liquid-cooled heat sink. Convection-cooled heat 
sinks can be large, like the Scythe Ninja Plus model shown in Figure 22-3, but 
usually do not deliver enough cooling capacity to cool the hottest processors.
●
caution
Figure 22-3  
For silent cooling, 
it’s hard to beat a 
convection-cooled 
heat sink—provided 
there’s enough space 
in your PC, and that its 
processor doesn’t run 
too hot.
Figure 22-2  
Quiet processor cool-
ers normally combine a 
heat-sink with a large-
bladed fan that can 
run at variable speeds. 
Many quiet processor 
coolers are large, like 
the one in the middle of 
this picture.
Processor cooler’s fan
Processor cooler

246
Part III: Advanced
Most replacement processor fans come with comprehensive instructions; if not, you can find ad-
vice online. However, replacing the processor fan is one task for which you might want to involve 
a hardware professional. If you get the replacement operation wrong, not only may the new fan 
get wrecked, but the processor may overheat and ruin itself and your PC’s motherboard.
After installing the processor cooler (or, preferably, having it installed profes-
sionally), check the processor’s temperature periodically to make sure the cooler is 
cooling it enough. If the cooler has an adjustable-speed fan, set it to a moderately 
high speed at first, let your PC run for a while, and then check the temperature. If 
the processor is remaining cool, turn the fan down a bit, let the PC run again, and 
then check the temperature once more. Continue this cycle to establish the lowest fan 
speed at which you can safely run the PC without the processor nearing the top of its 
temperature range.
There are two main ways to check the processor’s temperature. Ideally, your PC 
includes a Windows utility like that shown in Figure 22-5, which allows you to keep 
an eye on measurements such as the CPU temperature, motherboard temperature, 
CPU fan speed, power fan speed, chassis fan speed, and more. Failing that, you may 
have to restart your PC, access the BIOS, and find the information there, which is 
far less convenient. For example, in an AMIBIOS, you can typically go to the Power 
tab, select the Hardware Monitor item, and then press ENTER to display the Hardware 
Monitor screen.
Figure 22-4  
CPU-Z provides an easy 
way to check which 
processor and package 
type your PC has.
caution

Project 22: Silence Your PC or Build an Ultra-Quiet PC  247
Step 5: Silence Your PC’s Cooling Fans
The next source of noise you should consider tackling is your PC’s cooling fan or fans. 
Your PC may have one fan, two, or more. Usually, you’ll find one mounted on the 
back of the PC to pull warm air out of the case. Many tower PCs also have a cooling 
fan on the front to draw cool air into the case and create a better airflow.
Take a look at your PC’s fans, and listen to try to pick out the amount of noise 
they’re making. If they’re audible, grab a ruler and measure them. Your PC needs to 
draw plenty of air from outside the case to keep its inside cool, and the best way to 
provide this air quietly is by using larger fans that can shift plenty of air at a lower 
rotational speed. But the chances are that your PC has smaller fans that need to run at 
a high speed to shift enough air, thus making a good deal of noise.
A 120mm fan (about five inches—roughly the size of a regular CD) at the front 
and back of the case should provide plenty of cooling for a conventional PC. If your 
PC is loaded with everything but the kitchen sink, you might need even more cooling 
than that.
To fit larger cooling fans, you may need to cut holes in your PC’s case. See Project 11 for 
information on which tools to use and instructions on installing a fan.
If your case won’t accommodate 120mm fans (even with modifications), look to 
use multiple 80mm fans running at low speeds. Quiet-component sites offer low-
noise fans that cost a little more than regular fans but provide such a reduction in 
noise that paying extra is a no-brainer. Such sites also sell variable-speed fan control-
lers that let you adjust the fan’s speed by turning a knob on the outside of the PC.
Figure 22-5  
Your PC may include a 
monitoring utility that 
enables you to keep 
an eye on the CPU 
temperature easily and 
warns you when it ex-
ceeds the thresholds.
note

248
Part III: Advanced
Whichever type of fan you buy, also buy nonvibration mounts that help prevent 
the fan from transferring its vibrations to the PC’s case, even when the fan is running 
at higher speeds.
Step 6: Silence Your PC’s Hard Drive
Next on the list of noisy components is your PC’s hard drive (or drives—if your PC 
has multiple drives, it’ll be that much louder). Conventional hard drives rotate con-
tinuously unless the PC remains unused long enough for the drive to go to sleep. That 
means you hear the noise all the time when you’re using the PC, plus some when 
you’re not.
If you use a conventional hard drive in your PC, you can do two main things to 
make it quieter:
Dampen the drive’s noise To reduce the amount of noise the drive makes, 
you can encase it in a silencing jacket (see Figure 22-6). And to make sure 
that the drive’s vibration doesn’t make the case vibrate as well, you can put 
vibration-absorbing mounts between the drive and the PC’s case.
●
Figure 22-6  
A silencing jacket can 
make a dramatic  
difference to even a 
noisy, high-performance 
drive. The noise of a 
quiet drive will almost 
disappear—which  
is great.
Use a quiet drive Just as some power supplies are quieter than others, so 
are some hard drives quieter than others—some by accident, but the best by 
design. The quietest hard drives tend to use fluid bearings rather than metal 
bearings and tend to spin at 7200 RPM rather than at a faster speed. You’ll 
find recommendations for quiet hard drives at the quiet-PC sites mentioned 
earlier in this project. At this writing, the Samsung Spinpoint T series and the 
Seagate Barracuda 7200.10 series are widely available quiet drives.
●

Project 22: Silence Your PC or Build an Ultra-Quiet PC  249
Step 7: Silence Your PC’s Graphics Card
When the vendor promised your PC would deliver screaming graphics, you probably 
thought more in terms of getting a higher frame rate in BioShock than in terms of hav-
ing a shrill whine assailing your ears the whole time…but you got both. If the graph-
ics card is making noise that bothers you, do something about it. You may be able to 
replace the graphics card’s existing fan with a quieter model. But if you really want to 
bring the noise level down, look for a graphics card that uses a heat pipe rather than 
a fan for cooling. Figure 22-7 shows an example.
You may have to sacrifice some performance and pay a little more, but you will 
probably be surprised at the powerful but silent graphics cards that are available 
from the silence-specialist sites.
Once you’ve bought your replacement graphics card, replace it by following these 
general steps:
Shut down Windows, and then open your PC as discussed in Step 2.
Unscrew the retaining screw holding the graphics card in place.
Remove the card. You may need to wiggle it gently from side to side to 
loosen it.
1.
2.
3.
Making Your PC’s Hard Drive Completely Silent
All hard drives that use spinning magnetic platters make some noise. But 
there’s another type of hard drive that doesn’t have moving parts, and thus is 
silent. This type of drive is a solid-state device based on flash memory. You’ll 
see these drives referred to as flash hard drives, solid state drives (SSDs), or flash 
SSDs. These drives are much more shock-resistant than regular hard drives, 
provide better performance, require less power to run, and should last for 
a long time. However, they are far more expensive than conventional hard 
drives, so their use has historically been confined to high-end ultra-portable 
laptops. Major manufacturers including Dell, Sony, and Apple now offer flash 
SSDs in some laptop models—at a hefty price premium.
SSDs are relatively new, and until now their capacities have been far 
smaller than those of comparable conventional drives. However, the technol-
ogy is evolving fast. At this writing, 64GB flash hard drives are available in 
the 2.5-inch form factor used in most laptops, and drives of 256GB or more are 
available in the 3.5-inch form factor used by most desktops. Desktop drives 
of 512GB and larger should be available in the first quarter of 2008—and with 
luck, prices will begin to descend to affordable levels.
If the money is burning its way through your pocket, you can find some 
flash SSDs at online computer stores such as CDW Corp. (www.cdw.com). To 
find a wider variety, news, and evangelical enthusiasm, visit a specialist site 
such as DVNation (www.dvnation.com).

250
Part III: Advanced
Insert the new card, making sure that there’s enough room for its heat pipe 
or other cooling equipment. (In some PCs, you may have to move an existing 
card to a different slot to make room for the graphics card.)
Screw in the retaining screw.
Close the PC, reconnect the cables, and then start it.
Step 8: Replace the Optical Drive with a Quieter Model
If your PC’s optical drive is noisy, and you need to use it often, you can almost cer-
tainly find a quieter replacement from one of the sources mentioned in the sidebar 
near the start of this project. Technology is constantly marching onward, so look for a 
drive with similar or better features than your current drive has—but buy behind the 
cutting edge to get value for your money.
This step is near the end of the project because it typically offers less bang reduction for the 
buck than the other steps. Unless your PC’s optical drive is absurdly noisy, or you use it frequent-
ly, replacing it with a quieter model probably won’t make financial sense. But if you’re consider-
ing buying a new optical drive for your PC anyway, or if you’re buying components for a new PC, 
you should definitely shop around to find a quiet model.
To replace the optical drive, follow these general steps. The specifics will depend 
on your model of PC and optical drive.
Shut down Windows, and then open your PC as discussed in Step 2.
Disconnect the drive cable and the power cable from the optical drive. For 
some models, you may need to disconnect an audio cable as well.
Unscrew the retaining screws, and then slide the drive out of the PC.
Slide the new drive in, and then screw in the retaining screws.
Connect the cables you disconnected from the old drive.
Close the PC, reconnect the cables, and then start it.
4.
5.
6.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Figure 22-7  
A graphics card cooled 
by a heat pipe eliminates 
the noise made by a fan.
note

Project 22: Silence Your PC or Build an Ultra-Quiet PC  251
Step 9: Bring Down the Noise Level  
with a Sound-Absorbing Case or Foam
Unless you’ve gone the whole hog (with cheese fries) by choosing silenced and fan-
less components throughout your PC, it is still making some noise. Most likely, the 
hard drive is grumbling mutedly within its full-metal straitjacket, and the processor 
fan is sighing gently like a fresh breeze in the lilacs toward the end of a spring day. 
But that still adds up to some noise that you don’t want in your workplace, so you 
need a sound-absorbing case that confines the noise within the case as much as pos-
sible. (If you haven’t worked through several of the steps in this project and are stuck 
with a loud hard drive that makes your PC’s case buzz, a sound-absorbing case will 
probably seem a great idea.)
You have two main choices for keeping the sound within the case and muffling it 
as much as possible:
Line your existing case with acoustic foam.
Move your whole PC to a new, sound-absorbing case.
Let’s look at the easier alternative first.
Line Your PC’s Case with Acoustic Foam
PC-quietening sites such as those mentioned near the beginning of this project sell 
acoustic foam kits for silencing PCs. You stick sheets of foam to the case sides, floor, 
and roof—avoiding the components—and stuff acoustic foam blocks into empty drive 
bays. Figure 22-8 shows part of a case side with acoustic foam applied to it.
Cutting the foam sheets to the size you need and sticking them down neatly can 
take an hour or so, but it typically makes a big difference in the amount of noise that 
comes out through the case.
●
●
Figure 22-8  
Lining your PC’s case 
with acoustic foam 
helps absorb noise. 
Unless you buy a precut 
kit designed for your 
PC’s case, you need to 
cut around latches (as 
shown here) and other 
obstacles.

252
Part III: Advanced
You may also want to add antivibration feet to the PC’s underside to prevent it from transmitting 
vibrations to your desk, which can act as a sounding board.
Choose a Sound-Absorbing Case
If you’re planning a new PC, you can save some time and effort by buying a case that 
comes with a custom kit of acoustic foam pieces that are cut to fit it. For example, 
you can buy a quiet case such as the Antec Sonata II (which comes with a quiet 
power supply and quiet case fan) with a custom AcoustiPack kit from retailers such 
as EndPCNoise.com. Or you can go for one of the AcoustiCase line of cases from 
Quiet PC.
If you want a totally silent PC rather than a very quiet PC, you need to step up 
your budget to the next level and buy a silenced case such as one in the Zalman TNN 
series. TNN stands for Totally No Noise, and the cases live up to this by being built 
as large radiators. Each heat-producing component is cooled with a heat sink, and the 
heat is conducted to the outside of the case, where it is dissipated through fins.
The TNN cases are heavy—one model weighs 57 lb even before you add a moth-
erboard and hard drive—and work best with specific motherboards and graphics 
cards (Zalman provides a list). They are also very expensive. But if you need a silent 
PC, a TNN case can be a great solution. Figure 22-9 shows a TNN 500AF case, which 
retails for around $1500.
Move Your PC to the New Case
How exactly you move your existing PC’s components to the new case depends on 
the model of case you buy and what components your PC consists of. If you’re not 
comfortable working with your PC’s motherboard, consider bribing a geek friend or 
paying for a technician to do the work for you. Even if their hourly rates are painful, 
they’ll probably be less so than the cost of replacing expensive components that you 
wreck by accident.
Figure 22-9  
The Zalman TNN 
series of cases uses 
advanced cooling  
techniques to keep your 
PC silent.
tip

Project 22: Silence Your PC or Build an Ultra-Quiet PC  253
Step 10: Buy an Ultra-Quiet or Silenced PC
As you’ve seen in the previous steps, you can spend a bunch of money and effort in 
silencing your PC. But if you have money rather than effort to spare, you can—as 
usual in this world of ours—have someone else do the heavy lifting for you by simply 
buying an ultra-quiet PC or a fully silenced PC. Here are two manufacturers of ultra-
quiet PCs:
Hush Technologies Hush Technologies (www.hushtechnologies.com) builds  
several ranges of silent PCs designed for various purposes, including enter-
tainment, business, and medical. The Hush PCs use technologies such as those 
discussed earlier in this project to keep noise down to a minimum. For example, 
most of the PCs use heat pipes rather than fans to cool the processor and the 
graphics card, enclose the hard drive in an antivibration chassis, and use 
fanless power supplies. In addition, the entire case is designed to cool the 
PC by convection, much like the Zalman TNN case that you saw earlier in 
this project.
EndPCNoise.com In addition to selling quiet PC components, EndPC-
Noise.com also sells a range of completely quiet PC systems, ranging from 
value PCs to gaming PCs, “Powerhouse” PCs, and digital audio worksta-
tions. EndPCNoise.com uses quiet components throughout—quiet hard 
drives, quiet processor coolers, fanless video cards, and so on—together with a 
variety of muffled and silenced cases.
The prices of ultra-quiet or silenced PCs are high compared to those of normal, 
noisy PCs, but if you can afford the price, you will be repaid by tranquility and—with 
luck and diligence—increased productivity.
●
●

254
Project 23
Run Other 
Operating 
Systems on Top 
of Windows
What You’ll Need
Hardware: Nothing except your existing PC
Software: Microsoft Virtual PC, other OSes
Cost: Free to $300 U.S.
S
o far, this book has largely assumed that you’re running Windows on your PC—
either Windows Vista (which is gearing up to celebrate its first birthday at this 
writing) or Windows XP (which is still celebrating the fact that Windows Vista 
has so far failed to displace it on many PCs). As you know, Windows is your PC’s oper-
ating system or OS—the software that makes the hardware do something useful rather 
than simply sit there as intricate and expensive shapes of silicon, carbon, and steel. 
And most computers come with Windows, just like yours did. But what if you need to 
run another OS on your PC? Or simply want to?
This project shows you the possibilities for running another operating system—or 
several other OSes—on top of Windows. The next project shows you how to install 
another OS on your PC so that you can run either that OS or Windows (but not both at 
the same time).
First, though, let’s deal with the $64,000 question: Do you need to run another  
OS at all?
Step 1: Decide Which OSes You Need to Run
Maybe you’re scratching your head and saying, “But I’ve got Windows already—and 
it seems to be working fine. Why ever would I want to run another OS?” The usual 
reason for running another OS is so that you can run some software that won’t run on 
your main OS. For example, say you have a favorite game from back in the days of 
●
●
●

Project 23: Run Other Operating Systems on Top of Windows  255
Windows 95, when the underlying software architecture of Windows was substantially 
different from it its present form. That game might not run on Windows Vista, even 
if you use the Program Compatibility Assistant to apply supposedly suitable compat-
ibility settings. If so, you’re stuck—unless you find a way of running Windows 95.
You may also want to try another OS out of curiosity—or to save money. For 
example, you’ve probably heard a lot about Linux, the open source OS that you can 
download and install for free. Maybe you’d like to try it and find out whether it’s 
suitable for you, either on your main PC or on an old PC, but without wiping out 
your current OS, which would be more collateral damage than you can accept.
Step 2: Decide How to Run Those OSes
As you know, a PC typically runs a single OS. Unless you buy a Mac or buy a PC 
from a specialist vendor, chances are that your PC’s OS is Windows—and most likely 
the latest version. So if you buy a new PC at this writing, you’re most likely to get  
Windows Vista as your OS.
That doesn’t mean you’re stuck with Windows Vista (or whichever version  
of Windows you got). You have three options (the last of which is the focus of this 
project): 
Install another OS on your PC instead Usually, when you install a new 
OS, it overwrites or otherwise replaces the existing OS. If you want to do 
this, typically you simply insert the installation media for the new OS (for  
example, by putting a DVD in your PC’s optical drive), restart the PC, accept 
the BIOS’s invitation to start the PC from the optical drive, and then follow 
the prompts for installing the OS. However, you more likely want to install 
a new OS on your PC without preventing the current OS from operating  
successfully. This is possible with the following options.
Create a dual-boot setup on your PC In a dual-boot setup, you typically 
create two separate partitions, or areas, on your hard disk, and then install a 
different OS on each. Using separate partitions keeps the OSes from interfer-
ing with each other. In a dual-boot setup, you can run only one OS at a time. 
Project 24 shows you how to create dual-boot (and multiboot) setups.
Run virtual-machine software Virtual-machine software, also called  
PC-emulation software, is a program that runs on your existing OS (for 
example, Windows) like other programs, and through software imitates 
the behavior of a PC’s hardware. You can then run a separate OS on the 
virtual-machine software. Read on to learn more about this option.
Step 3: Understand What Virtual-Machine  
Software Is and What It Does
A virtual-machine program installs on Windows much like any other program, ex-
cept that it puts some deep hooks (that’s actually a technical word, but it’s descriptive 
in its normal meaning too) into Windows to allow it to perform the clever tricks that 
enable it to emulate a PC.
●
●
●

256
Part III: Advanced
Once you’ve installed the virtual-machine program, you install an OS on it—just 
as you would install the OS on actual hardware, except that in the virtual machine, 
all the hardware is emulated. You then run the OS on the virtual machine. The virtual 
machine operates largely like a regular PC, except that it’s actually running inside a 
program in Windows—so you can use both Windows and the OS on the virtual ma-
chine at the same time.
Most virtual-machine programs let you run one or more other OSes at once. Generally speaking, 
the more OSes you run at once, the slower each of them runs. So unless you need to run multiple 
OSes at the same time within the virtual machine, it’s normally best to run only one at a time.
As you might guess, virtual machines have some disadvantages:
Running a virtual machine is almost always slower than running the same OS 
“natively” (directly) on the same hardware. But if you have a reasonably fast 
PC with plenty of memory (RAM), performance should be adequate. (More on 
this in a moment—and look back to Project 1 if your PC needs more RAM.)
There are some limitations to what you can do with virtual machines. For 
example, audio and video performance ranges from unacceptable to truly 
pitiful, so don’t plan any demanding multimedia activities such as recording 
audio, processing video, or watching TV on a virtual machine. However, for 
less demanding programs, such as word processing or e-mail, virtual ma-
chines can be an adequate solution. For example, if you need to run a Linux 
program on a Windows PC so that you can avoid buying an expensive Win-
dows program, a virtual machine can be a neat way of saving money and 
working around the problem.
You can’t install OSes designed for other types of computers. For example, 
you can’t install Mac OS X on a virtual machine on a PC, because Mac OS X 
requires different hardware configurations. (In short, Mac OS X won’t run 
on a PC.) But almost all OSes designed for modern PCs will install and run 
successfully on most virtual-machine programs described here.
Because this book focuses on the bottom lines of time, effort, and money, we’ll 
look next at the easiest way of installing another OS on your Windows PC: Microsoft  
Virtual PC. Not only does Virtual PC make the process of installing and running  
another OS as easy and painless as possible, but the price is right: Virtual PC is free.
If you find you don’t like Virtual PC, try the 30-day evaluation versions of VMware Workstation 
(www.vmware.com) or Parallels Workstation (www.parallels.com).
Step 3: Download and Install Virtual PC
To download and install Virtual PC, follow these steps:
Open your web browser and go to the Microsoft Downloads web site  
(www.microsoft.com/downloads/).
●
●
●
1.
note
tip

Project 23: Run Other Operating Systems on Top of Windows  257
Find a link for downloading Virtual PC, and then click it. Internet Explorer 
displays the File Download – Security Warning dialog box.
Click the Run button. Internet Explorer downloads the file, and then launches 
the installation. On Windows Vista, you need to go through User Account 
Control for the Virtual PC 2007 Installer program (Windows XP does not 
have the User Account Control feature). The Microsoft Virtual PC Wizard 
then launches and displays its first screen.
Click the Next button, and then accept the license agreement on the next 
screen if you want to proceed. Click the Next button. The wizard displays the 
Customer Information screen.
Type the username you want associated with Virtual PC in the Username 
text box, and type an organization name in the Organization text box if you 
want to. The wizard enters your Windows username in the Username text 
box, but you can change it.
In the Install This Application For area, choose whether to make Virtual PC 
available to all users of the PC (select the Anyone Who Uses This Computer  
option button) or to keep it to yourself (select the Only For Me option button).
Click the Next button. The wizard displays the Ready To Install The Program 
screen.
By default, the wizard installs Virtual PC in a folder named Microsoft  
Virtual PC within the Program Files folder, Windows’ recommended location 
for programs. Normally, it’s best to use this folder, but if you want, you can 
choose a different folder by clicking the Change button, using the Change 
Current Destination Folder dialog box, and then clicking the OK button.
When you’re ready to install Virtual PC, click the Install button, and then 
leave the wizard in peace for a few minutes. When the wizard displays the 
Installation Complete screen, click the Finish button.
Step 4: Install an Operating System on Virtual PC
Once you’ve installed Virtual PC on Windows, you’re ready to create a virtual ma-
chine and install an OS.
Create a Virtual Machine for the Operating System
First, create a virtual machine—the pretend PC onto which you will install the OS. 
Follow these steps:
Start Virtual PC running. For example, choose Start | All Programs | Microsoft 
Virtual PC.
The first time you run Virtual PC, the program notices that you have no virtual 
machines, so it starts the Virtual Machine Wizard to walk you through the 
process of creating a suitable virtual machine for the OS you want to install.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
1.
2.

258
Part III: Advanced
If you (or someone else) have already created a virtual machine, Virtual PC displays the Virtual 
PC Console window. This window lists the virtual machines available and lets you start a virtual 
machine, change its settings, or delete it. Click the New button to launch the New Virtual Ma-
chine Wizard.
Click the Next button. The wizard displays the Options screen.
Make sure the Create A Virtual Machine option button is selected, and then 
click the Next button. The wizard displays the Virtual Machine Name And 
Location screen.
In the Name And Location text box, type the name you want to give the 
virtual machine. For example, you might use the name of the OS you’re in-
stalling.
By default, the wizard creates the virtual machine in the My Virtual  
Machines folder, which is in your user folder. If your PC’s hard drive has 
plenty of free space, this is as good a place as any. But if you need to create 
the virtual machine on another hard disk, click the Browse button, use the 
Existing Virtual Machine Name And Location dialog box to select the folder, 
and then click the Save button. Table 23-1 shows recommended hard disk 
3.
4.
5.
6.
note
Operating System
Recommended Drive Size
Recommended RAM
Windows Vista
16GB
1GB
Windows XP
4GB
512MB
Windows 2000
2GB
256MB
Windows Me
1GB
128MB
Windows 98
1GB
128MB
Windows 95
1GB
64MB
Linux (most versions)
8GB
512MB
Table 23-1 Recommended Drive Sizes and RAM for Operating Systems on Virtual Machines

Project 23: Run Other Operating Systems on Top of Windows  259
sizes and amounts of RAM for virtual machines, leaving enough space to 
install and run plenty of programs. If you’re planning to store many large 
files on a virtual machine, allow more space.
Click the Next button. The wizard displays the Operating System screen, 
shown here with the Operating System drop-down list open:
Click the Operating System drop-down list, and then choose the OS from 
the list. If the OS you’re installing doesn’t appear, choose Other. The Default 
Hardware Selection area shows the details of the memory, virtual hard disk, 
and sound hardware that the configuration you’ve chosen provides.
Click the Next button. The wizard displays the Memory screen:
If the amount of RAM is adequate (refer to Table 23-1 for recommendations), 
leave the Using The Recommended RAM option button selected. If you want 
to increase the RAM (as is normally the case), select the Adjusting The RAM 
7.
8.
9.
10.

260
Part III: Advanced
option button, and then use either the slider or the text box to specify the 
amount of RAM. The text box is usually the easier means of setting an exact 
figure.
Click the Next button. The wizard displays the Virtual Hard Disk Options 
screen.
In the Do You Want To Use area, select the A New Virtual Hard Disk option 
button, and then click the Next button. The wizard displays the Virtual Hard 
Disk Location screen:
The Name And Location text box shows the full path and name of the virtual 
hard disk that the wizard will create. You can change the name or the loca-
tion. Normally, the default name and location are fine, but in some cases, you 
may want to locate the virtual hard disk on a different (real) hard disk for 
space reasons. In this case, click the Browse button, use the Virtual Hard Disk 
Location dialog box to select the folder, and then click the Save button.
In the Virtual Hard Disk Size text box, set the size for the virtual hard disk. 
The default size may be adequate, but refer to Table 23-1 for suggested sizes.
Click the Next button. The wizard displays the Completing The New Virtual 
Machine Wizard screen, which summarizes the choices you made.
Verify the choices. If necessary, 
click the Back button to return to 
an earlier screen and change one 
of the choices. When you’re satis-
fied, click the Finish button. The 
wizard closes, and a listing for 
the virtual machine appears in 
the Virtual PC Console:
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

Project 23: Run Other Operating Systems on Top of Windows  261
Install the Operating System
With your virtual machine created, you’re ready to install the OS. This example uses 
the Xandros distribution of Linux as the OS, but the steps are similar for other OSes. 
Follow these steps:
In the Virtual PC Console, click the virtual machine you just created (it may 
be selected already), and then click the Start button.
The virtual machine starts, and then tries to boot itself (see Figure 23-1). As yet, 
there’s no OS installed, and no CD or DVD, so it tries to boot from the network. 
It then fails and gives you the message “Reboot and Select proper Boot device 
or Insert Boot Media in selected Boot device.” Don’t worry—this is normal.
If you’re quick, you may be able to insert the CD or DVD as soon as the virtual machine starts, 
and then choose CD | Use Physical Drive Letter (where Letter is the letter assigned to the PC’s 
optical drive) before the virtual machine notices it doesn’t have an OS. Generally, though, it’s 
easier to insert the disc at your leisure, and then restart the virtual machine. Another option is 
to insert the disc before you start the virtual machine—but if you do this, you usually have to 
deal with an AutoPlay dialog box when Windows reads the disc.
Choose CD | Use Physical Drive Letter (where Letter is the letter assigned to 
the PC’s optical drive) in Virtual PC.
Insert the CD or DVD for the OS in the optical drive.
If you have an ISO image (a file containing the image for a CD or DVD) containing the OS, you 
can use that instead without burning it to disc. Choose CD | Capture ISO Image, navigate to the 
image in the Select CD Image To Capture dialog box, and then click the Open button.
1.
2.
3.
4.
note
Figure 23-1  
The virtual machine 
starts, looking like a 
real PC. For technical 
reasons, the first boot  
is doomed to failure.
note

262
Part III: Advanced
In Virtual PC, choose Action | Reset. Virtual PC displays a warning dialog 
box whose title bar shows the name of the virtual machine. The dialog box 
tells you that resetting the virtual machine will lose all unsaved changes. 
That’s fine, because the virtual machine contains no changes.
Click the Reset button. Virtual PC restarts the virtual machine.
Depending on the way the CD (or DVD) or ISO image is set up, the virtual  
PC may prompt you to press SPACEBAR or any key to boot from the disc. If this 
happens, press SPACEBAR or any key. Other OSes are set up to boot automatically 
without prompting you. In this case, wait while the OS boots. Depending on 
the OS, you may then see an installation wizard or a screen of installation  
options, or the installation process may simply run on its own.
Follow through the rest of the installation routine, choosing options where 
required. For example, most OSes let you choose which components to  
install, as in the example shown in Figure 23-2.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Moving the Focus Between the Virtual Machine and Other Windows
As you know, the focus determines which window receives the keypresses 
from the keyboard and the clicks from the mouse. Normally, you switch focus 
by clicking in a different window with the mouse or by pressing either ALT-TAB 
or WINDOWS KEY–TAB until Windows activates the window you want.
As soon as you start installing an OS with a graphical user interface in a 
virtual machine, life becomes more complicated. Once you put the focus in the 
virtual machine, you can switch it from window to window in similar ways 
(the specifics depend on the OS). For example, once you’ve clicked inside a 
virtual machine running Windows, pressing ALT-TAB switches focus among the 
windows in the virtual machine, not among the windows on your real PC.
At first, you need to release the virtual machine’s grip on the focus manu-
ally by pressing the right ALT key. But once you’ve installed the OS on the vir-
tual machine, you can usually install Virtual Machine Additions from within 
the OS. These Additions enable the virtual machine to grab the mouse pointer 
as soon as it enters the Virtual PC window and release it when it exits the 
window. This makes switching between the virtual machine and your real PC 
much easier.
If Virtual PC prompts you to install the Virtual Machine Additions while 
you’re installing the OS, select the Don’t Show This Message Again check box, 
and then click the OK button. You can’t install the Additions until after the end of 
the installation process. See the section “Install the Virtual Machine Additions,” 
later in this project, for instructions.

Project 23: Run Other Operating Systems on Top of Windows  263
At the end of the installation, you usually need to restart the virtual machine 
so that the OS can finish configuring itself.
When the OS has restarted, you can start using it by clicking inside the vir-
tual machine window. Figure 23-3 shows a Linux virtual machine browsing 
a Windows network.
To toggle the virtual machine between a window and full screen, press RIGHT ALT–ENTER. You can 
also choose Action | Full-Screen Mode to switch from a window to full-screen mode, but not to 
switch back.
Step 5: Install the Virtual Machine Additions
To improve graphics performance in the virtual machine, to add mouse pointer  
integration (which enables the virtual machine to grab and release the mouse pointer), 
and to add other features such as folder sharing, you must install Virtual Machine 
9.
10.
note
Figure 23-2  
The installation routines 
for most OSes let  
you choose which  
components to install.

264
Part III: Advanced
Additions within the virtual machine. The Virtual Machine Additions install using  
a setup routine on the OS inside the virtual machine (as opposed to installing from 
the PC that’s running Virtual PC).
Virtual Machine Additions are available for Windows Vista Business, Ultimate, and Enterprise 
editions; Windows XP Professional and Tablet PC Edition; Windows 2000 Professional; Windows 
98 Second Edition; and several versions of OS/2 Warp, a Windows 95 competitor still grimly 
clinging to life in some long-term technologies, such as ATMs.
Follow these steps to install the Virtual Machine Additions:
In Virtual PC, choose Action | Install Or Update Virtual Machine Additions. 
Virtual PC displays the dialog box shown here, with the title bar containing 
the name of the virtual machine that will be affected:
1.
Figure 23-3  
Once your OS is  
installed, it’s ready  
for use.
note

Project 23: Run Other Operating Systems on Top of Windows  265
Click the Continue button. Virtual PC launches the Virtual Machine Additions 
setup routine, which displays its first screen.
Click the Next button, and then follow through the setup routine. Accept the 
default settings, because there is no reason to change them.
When the setup routine prompts you to restart the virtual machine, click the 
Yes button.
When the virtual machine restarts, you will be able to activate the virtual ma-
chine by moving the mouse pointer into its window, and return to the host 
PC by moving the mouse pointer out of the virtual machine window. You 
will also be able to drag files from Windows Explorer windows on the host 
PC and drop them in a Windows Explorer window on the virtual machine 
to copy them there.
As you’ve seen in this project, a virtual machine is an easy way to try out another 
OS, or perform light work on another OS, without removing Windows from your PC. 
But if you want to run another OS full-bore while still keeping Windows on your PC, 
you need to create a dual-boot setup. Turn the page.
2.
3.
4.
5.

266
Project 24
Install Another 
Operating 
System 
Alongside 
Windows
What You’ll Need
Hardware: Nothing except your existing PC
Software: System Commander (optional), other operating systems
Cost: Free to $300 U.S.
S
o you need to run another operating system as well as Windows? If you choose 
not to use a virtual-machine program (as described in Project 23), you can  
create a dual-boot setup or a multiboot setup—installing two or more operating  
systems (OSes) on the same computer.
This project describes three ways of creating dual-boot setups using some widely 
used OSes. Even if none of the combinations is the one you want, these examples should 
give you an idea of how to proceed with the OSes you want.
Before you attempt to create a dual-boot setup in any of the ways described in this project, create a 
fresh, current backup of your existing OS. See Project 16 for instructions for backing up and restoring 
your PC.
Step 1: Create a Dual-Boot Setup with  
Windows Vista and Windows XP
This is the easiest dual-boot setup to create—provided that you install Windows XP 
first and that you have either some unallocated space on your hard disk or another 
disk or drive on which to install Windows Vista. Because Windows XP was released 
●
●
●
caution

Project 24: Install Another Operating System Alongside Windows  267
years before Windows Vista, Windows XP doesn’t know the details of Windows Vista’s 
boot process, and tends to overwrite files it shouldn’t.
Given that the normal reason for wanting to create this dual-boot setup is that 
you have a Windows XP PC and want to see how well Windows Vista compares,  
the first criterion is easy enough to meet. If you need to add another hard disk to  
a desktop PC, see Project 7.
To create a dual-boot setup with Windows Vista and Windows XP, follow these 
steps:
Install Windows XP if it’s not already installed.
Insert the Windows Vista DVD in the optical drive.
Restart Windows. When your PC prompts you to boot from the CD drive, press 
SPACEBAR or any other key. The Windows Vista installation routine starts.
If your PC doesn’t offer to boot from the optical drive, you may need to change the BIOS settings 
to make it do so. See Project 6 for instructions.
On the first Install Windows screen, choose your language (for example, Eng-
lish), the time and currency format (for example, English [United States]), 
and your keyboard type (for example, US).
Click the Next button. The installation routine displays the second Install 
Windows screen.
Click the Install Now button. The installation routine displays the Type Your 
Product Key For Activation screen.
Type your product key in the box, allowing Windows to enter the hyphens 
for you at the end of each group of five characters.
Clear the Automatically Activate Windows When I’m Online check box  
unless you’re dead certain you want Windows to activate itself automatically at 
the first possible opportunity. It’s usually much better to verify that Windows 
is running satisfactorily before you activate it, as the activation process ties this 
copy of Windows to this particular PC.
Click the Next button, and then accept the license agreement on the next 
screen if you want to proceed. The installation routine displays the Which 
Type Of Installation Do You Want? screen.
Click the Custom (Advanced) button. (The Upgrade button will be unavail-
able unless you have launched the Windows Vista installation routine from 
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
note

268
Part III: Advanced
within Windows XP rather than during booting.) The installation routine 
displays the Where Do You Want To Install Windows? screen:
Select the disk or unallocated space that you want to use. If you want to 
create a new partition in unallocated space, click the New button, enter the 
partition size in the Size box that appears (as shown here), and then click the 
Apply button.
When you’ve chosen the disk or space, click the Next button. The rest of the 
installation routine then runs, and you get to set up Windows Vista.
After you log on, you can use Windows Vista.
When you want to switch to Windows XP, restart Windows. The Windows 
Boot Manager screen appears, as shown next. Press UP ARROW or DOWN ARROW 
to select the Earlier Version Of Windows item (which represents Windows XP), 
and then press ENTER. Windows XP starts.
11.
12.
13.
14.

Project 24: Install Another Operating System Alongside Windows  269
Step 2: Create a Dual-Boot Setup  
with Windows and Linux
Some distributions of Linux are smart enough to automatically create a partition on 
an existing hard disk that has Windows installed. At this writing, the majority of 
Linux distributions that can manage this trick, work with Windows XP or another 
earlier version of Windows, such as Windows 2000 Professional, rather than with 
Windows Vista—but Windows Vista–friendly versions may have arrived by the time 
you read this.
To create this type of dual-boot setup, you need to have enough space on your 
hard disk to create a new partition and to install Linux.
Before you start, check the compatibility of your PC’s hardware with the Linux distribution 
you’re planning to use. Generally speaking, the more mainstream your PC’s hardware, the 
better the chance you have of finding a Linux driver for it. More drivers tend to be available for 
hardware that has been around for a year or more, as it takes a while for Linux programmers to 
create drivers for newer hardware.
To create a dual-boot setup with Windows and Linux, follow these general steps:
Set Windows up as usual. (Chances are that Windows came preinstalled on 
your PC, in which case you’re all set to install Linux.)
Purchase or download the OS you want to install. This example uses  
the Xandros distribution of Linux. If you download the OS, burn it to CD  
or DVD.
1.
2.
note

270
Part III: Advanced
Start Windows, and then log on as usual.
Insert the CD or DVD in your PC’s optical drive. Windows automatically 
launches the installation routine, as in the example shown in Figure 24-1.
3.
4.
Figure 24-1  
Some Linux distributions 
run automatically from 
Windows, which makes 
installation easy.
Follow the instructions for preparing your PC to boot from the CD or DVD.
If the new OS gives you the choice of keeping Windows or getting rid of it, as 
in Figure 24-2, make sure you choose the option for keeping it.
When the installation routine has completed, you usually need to restart 
your PC so that the new OS can finish configuring itself. When the new OS 
restarts, you can start using it.
To launch Windows, use the other OSes command to restart the PC. When 
it restarts, you will see a boot menu, such as the example shown here. Press 
DOWN ARROW to select the Windows item on the menu, and then press ENTER. 
Windows starts, and you can log on as usual.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Project 24: Install Another Operating System Alongside Windows  271
Step 3: Create a Dual-Boot or Multiboot Setup  
with Other Operating Systems
As you’ve seen earlier in this project, creating a dual-boot setup is a ticklish process. 
Get it wrong, and you may find yourself with your main OS wrecked and needing 
reinstallation. And to add insult to injury, the installation of the destructive new OS 
may have failed too. If you’re prepared to pay to avoid such problems, consider buy-
ing software such as System Commander from VCOM (www.v-com.com). System 
Commander manages the boot process, enabling you to create dual-boot or multiboot 
setups with little or no fuss.
Get and Install System Commander
To get System Commander, go to www.v-com.com, pay for the latest version, and 
then download it. You have the option of having a CD of the software shipped for 
an extra fee, which gives you a bootable CD that you can use to rescue System Com-
mander if you manage to hose it by installing an OS the wrong way. You can also burn 
the bootable CD yourself, which is cheaper and faster.
To install System Commander, double-click the downloaded file, and then click 
the Install System Commander button on the System Commander screen.
Figure 24-2  
When installing another 
OS alongside Windows, 
be careful to make the 
right choice (to keep 
Windows) on screens 
like this one.

272
Part III: Advanced
Follow through the installation process until the Create Diskettes screen, which 
lets you create a bootable CD containing utilities and recovery tools or create disks 
containing those tools. These days, most PCs can boot from the optical drive, but you 
may choose to make disks instead if your PC has a floppy drive. Select the appropri-
ate option button, click the Next button, and then follow the instructions for creating 
the CD or disks. Label the CD or disks, test the CD or the disks immediately to verify 
that they work, and then store them safely.
Note the user ID and password that the System Commander Security Settings 
screen gives, and then finish the installation.
You must restart Windows to allow System Commander to write itself to the 
boot sector. During the boot process, you’ll see the Welcome To System Commander  
message.
Click the Close button (the × button) to close the message. System Commander 
then displays the OS Selection Menu window:
From here, you can click the OS or drive you want to boot. For example, in the 
previous illustration, you can boot Windows Vista, boot from a floppy, or boot from a 
CD or DVD. But what you probably want to do at this stage is install another OS.
Install Another Operating System
To install another OS, follow these steps from the OS Selection Menu window:
Click the OS Wizard button. System Commander displays the Backup  
Recommendations screen.
Click the OK button. System Commander displays an Operation Tips screen. 
These tips are worth reading, but once you’ve done so, you’ll probably want 
to clear the Show This Screen At Start check box so that this screen doesn’t 
appear the next time you install another OS.
1.
2.

Project 24: Install Another Operating System Alongside Windows  273
Click the Next button. The OS Wizard displays the Select The Type Of OS 
Installation screen.
Select the New Installation option button. (Your other choices are to reinstall 
the same version of an OS that’s already installed, or to install a new version 
of an OS on top of the existing version.)
Click the Next button. The wizard displays the Select The OS Type You Wish 
To Install screen.
If the category of OS you want is listed, select its option button. Otherwise, 
select the Show All OSes option button.
Click the Next button. The wizard displays a screen that lists the OSes within 
the category you chose. (If you selected the Show All OSes option button, 
you see a larger screen with the full list of OSes.) 
Click the Next button. If the wizard displays another screen with further 
versions of OSes, pick the one you want, and then click the Next button. The 
wizard displays a screen confirming you’re ready to install the OS.
Select the I Have The Necessary Installation Boot CD option button, and 
then click the Next button. The wizard displays the OS Wizard Action Plan 
screen:
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

274
Part III: Advanced
In the Selected Drive drop-down list, choose the drive on which you want 
System Commander to create the new partition. (If your PC has only one 
drive, you have no choice here.)
In the Space text box, enter the size of the partition to create, in megabytes.
Click the Finish button. The wizard creates the partition, displaying a Prog-
ress screen while it does so.
When the OS Wizard Complete screen appears, read the instructions:
Click the OK button. When System Commander prompts you to insert a 
bootable CD or DVD, insert the disc, and then click the OK button.
System Commander starts the installation routine (the next illustration 
shows an example). Follow through the installation as usual.
Once you have finished the installation, the new OS appears in the OS Selection 
Menu when you restart your PC. You can then boot the new OS—or any of the other 
OSes you have installed.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

Index
275
1GB memory modules, 6–7
2GB memory modules, 6–7
9X Media X-Top, 88
16-bit sound, 156
24-bit sound, 156–157
32-bit sound, 156
80mm fans, 247
120mm fans, 247
512MB memory modules, 5–6
802.11a wireless equipment, 185
802.11b wireless equipment, 185
802.11g wireless equipment, 187
802.11n wireless equipment, 185, 187
44100 Hz sample rate, 156
A
access points, wireless, 187–188, 191
accounts
Skype, 25–27
Windows user, 133
acoustic drums, 153
acoustic foam, 251–252
acoustic guitars, 152
acoustics, recording room, 148–149
Acronis True Image Home application, 177
Activate Remote Viewing screen, 236
activation process, Windows Vista, 183
active partitions, 215–218
ad hoc wireless networks
adding PCs to, 199–200
disconnecting PCs from, 200–201
overview, 187, 195–196
planning, 196
setting up first PC, 197–199
shutting down, 201
adapters
network, 96
wireless network, 188, 195
Add A Contact dialog box, 42–43
Add Tags picture, 207
Add to Library dialog box, 143
addresses
Instant Messaging, 42
IP, 100–101, 235
Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) encryption 
algorithm, 214
aerial TV antennas, 227
AES (Advanced Encryption Standard) encryption 
algorithm, 214
AGP (Aperture Graphics Port), 86
All Pages option button, 209
Allow Sharing With Anyone On The Same Network As 
This Computer option, 191
Allow Sharing With Anyone With A User Account And 
Password For This Computer option, 190
Always Allow Pausing setting, 160
Always Allow Playing setting, 160
American Megatrends Inc. (AMI), 54
AMIBIOS, 54, 57, 59–60, 62–64
Amie Street music site, 174
analog LCDs, 81
analog TV, 46, 124
analog video connectors, 79–80
antivibration feet, 252
Aperture Graphics Port (AGP), 86
ASCII characters, 198
Assign Drive Letter Or Path screen, 75

276
Index
attachments, e-mail, 19
Audacity software
downloading, 154
file formats settings, 157–159
gain, 170
input/output settings, 155–156
installing, 154–155
interface settings, 159–161
panning, 170
projects
creating, 165–166
exporting to audio files, 173
recording level, 167–168
recording quality settings, 156–157
song distribution, 174–175
tagging song files, 173–174
temporary folders, 161–162, 166
tracks
adding, 170
aligning, 171–172
applying effects to, 169
recording, 168
stereo, 172
user interface, 163–165
audio. See Audacity software; media sharing;  
recording studios
Audio And Video Setup Wizard, 39–40
audio chat, 39–41
audio encoders, 158–159
audio file formats, 157–159, 166, 173
audio hardware, 23–24, 150–152
audio input/output settings, 155–156
audio projects. See also Audacity software
creating, 165–166
exporting to audio files, 173
.aup file extension, 166
AutoPlay dialog box, 12–13, 191, 227
Autoscroll While Playing setting, 159
B
backing up PCs, 176–179
Backup And Restore Center window, 177
Bandwidth Meter site, 15–16
Basic Input/Output Systems (BIOSes)
accessing, 55–56
booting PC from optical drive, 57–60
changing settings, 10, 107
navigating screens, 57
overview, 53–55
passwords, 60–64
bass drums, 153
bass guitars, 152–153
bays, drive, 67
bearer channels, 20
BIOSes. See Basic Input/Output Systems
BitLocker Drive Encryption dialog box, 216–217
BitLocker Drive Encryption Wizard, 220–222, 224–225
BitLocker Drive Preparation tool, 215–216
BitLocker encryption
active partitions, 216–218
decrypting disks, 224–225
downloading, 215–216
installing, 215–216
overview, 213–215
starting PCs, 222–224
turning on, 220–222
USB drives, 218–219
Bitmap Image (BMP) format, 207
bitrates, 159
blocking PCs from shared media, 134
BMP (Bitmap Image) format, 207
bonding, modem, 19
Boot Device Priority items, 59
bootable disks, 58
booting
from optical drive, 57–60
virtual machines, 260
broadband networks, 111–112
Broadcast address field, 112
Buffalo Technology Inc., 144
C
cable Internet, 21
Cable Select feature, 72
cable staplers, 95
cable strippers, 94–95
cable tackers, 95
cable testers, 94, 99
cable TV
connecting Slingbox to, 227
tuners, 46–47
cables
Cat 5E, 92
Cat 6, 92
drive, 67, 72
DVI-to-D-sub converter, 80
Ethernet, 92–93
home theater, 123–127
network, 92, 97–99
patch, 92
RCA, 126
running, 97
STP, 95
S-Video, 126
Call Phones tabs, 33
Call Skype Test Call buttons, 28
cameras
video, 34–35
webcams, 34–35, 40–41
captive portals, 187

Index  277
case integrity checks, 241
cases, PC
mounting larger fans, 120–121
noises, 240–241
overview, 117
sound-absorbing, 252
tools, 118–119
viewing windows, 121–122
Category 5 Enhanced (Cat 5E) cable, 92
Category 6 (Cat 6) cable, 92
cathode ray tube (CRT) monitors, 81
CD-ROM drives, 58–59, 146
Change Network/Router Settings option button, 236
Channels drop-down list, 155
Choose File And Printer Sharing Options screen, 190
citywide wireless networks, 187
cloning hard disks, 70
CNET Bandwidth Meter site, 15–16
Color Format drop-down list, 206
compatibility
SlingPlayer, 228
webcam, 35
Complete PC Backup and Restore feature
backing up, 176–179
restoring, 180–183
Complete PC Backup Wizard, 178–179
Complete PC Restore confirmation screen, 182–183
Completing The New Virtual Machine Wizard  
screen, 260
component video, 125–126
composite video, 126
compressing
audio files, 173
hard drive contents, 76
conduits, 93
Connect To A Network Wizard, 192–193, 197–200
Connection To Your Slingbox screen, 230
connection types, disk enclosure, 77
connections, Internet. See Internet connections
connectors
D-sub, 79–80, 125
DVI, 80, 124–125
graphics, 80–81
network, 92
power, 67
subminiature, 125
unplugging, 244
video, 79–80
contacts
Skype, 29–32
Windows Live Messenger, 42–43
Control Code Setup screen, 230, 232
Control Panel Setup: Enable Advanced Startup Options 
Properties dialog box, 218–219
Control toolbar, 163
conventional phone calls, 32–33
converter cables, DVI-to-D-sub, 80
coolers, processor, 244–246
cooling fans, 120–121, 240–241, 244–248
costs
projector, 130
TV tuners, 47
CPUID web site, 3
CPU-Z application, 3–5, 245–246
cpuz files, 3
Create A Desktop Icon option, 25
Create Diskettes screen, 272
credit, Skype, 32
crimping tools, 95
CRT (cathode ray tube) monitors, 81
Crucial System Scanner tool, 5
cryptographic keys, 214–215
Current Selection option button, 209
Custom Setup option, 48
Customer Information screen, 257
cutting cables, 97
cymbals, 154
D
Data Form command, 211
data protection. See BitLocker encryption
decibel settings, 161
Decrypt The Volume button, 225
decryption. See BitLocker encryption
Default gateway field, 112
default settings
Audacity, 156
BIOS, 55
Windows Media Player sharing, 135
Delta 1010LT audio interface, 151
Deny dialog box, 134
desktop PCs
adding memory, 6–9
adding TV tuners, 46
Detailed List View, 109–110
Device Brand screen, 230
Device drop-down list, 156
Device Model screen, 230
Device Setup Complete screen, 232
DHCP (Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol), 
100–101, 111
dial-up Internet connections, 17–20
digital cable TV tuners, 46
digital LCDs, 81
Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) connections, 20–21
digital telephone lines, 20–21
Digital Tigers SideCar external video interface, 89
Digital Tigers Zenview multimonitor setups, 88
digital TV signals, 46, 124
Digital Visual Interface (DVI) connectors, 80, 124–125

278
Index
digital zoom, 203
digitized documents
organizing, 209–212
overview, 202
scanners
installing, 204
scanning, 204–209
selecting, 203
dimensions, hard disk, 77
Disable BitLocker Drive Encryption option, 225
disconnecting wireless networks, 192–193
Disk Management window, 66, 74
disk space, server, 145
disks, decrypting. See BitLocker encryption
Display Settings dialog box, 84–86, 128–129
distributing songs, 174–175
Do Not Allow File And Printer Sharing option, 190
Do Not Share Your Contact Details With Them option 
buttons, 31
Dock command, 165
documentation, PC, 5
documents. See also digitized documents
hard copies, 202
tracking systems, 210
downloading
Audacity software, 154–155
BitLocker Drive Preparation tool, 215–216
CPU-Z application, 3
Knoppix software, 115–116
managers for, 20
scanner drivers, 204
Skype, 24–25
Virtual PC operating system, 256–257
Windows Live Messenger, 35–36
Windows updates and drivers, 115–116
downstream speeds, DSL, 20–21
Drag The Icons To Match Your Monitors box, 85
Dremel tools, 118
drive bays, 67
drive cables, 67, 72
drive letters, 75–76
drive mapping, 104
drive sizes, 258
drivers
audio interface, 151–152
Linux, 269
scanners, 204
Windows, 115–116
drums, 153–154
DSL (Digital Subscriber Line) connections, 20–21
D-sub connectors, 79–80, 125
dual-boot setup
with other operating systems, 271–274
overview, 266
with Windows and Linux, 269–271
with Windows Vista and XP, 266–269
dual-channel memory, 4
dual-DVI graphics cards, 82
DualHead2Go external video interface, 89
Duplicate My Desktop On All Displays (Mirrored) 
option, 84, 128
duplicate songs, 143
DVDs option, 178
DVI (Digital Visual Interface) connectors, 80, 124–125
dynamic compression, 169
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP), 
100–101, 111
dynamic microphones, 152
Dynamic Range Compressor dialog box, 169
E
Edit toolbar, 160, 164
effects, audio, 169
Effects menu, 169
EFS Enhancements package, 216
electric guitars, 152–153
electronic drums, 153
e-mail
attachments, 19
programs, 19
sending songs via, 175
emitters, infrared, 227, 232
emoticons, 44
Enable Dragging Of Left And Right Selection Edges 
setting, 161
Enable Edit Toolbar setting, 160
Enable Meter Toolbar setting, 161
Enable Mixer Toolbar setting, 160
enclosures, hard disk, 77–78
encoders, audio, 158–159
Encrypt The Volume screen, 221–222
encryption. See also BitLocker encryption
overview, 214–215
wireless network, 185, 196, 198
End Session dialog box, 114–115
EndPCNoise web site, 240, 253
enhanced playback, 48
escape (ESC) key, 57
Ethernet Big Disk NAS Server series, 144
Ethernet cables, 92–93
Excel, 210–211
expenses. See costs
exporting
projects to audio files, 173
uncompressed audio, 158
Express Setup option, 48
ExpressCard network adapters, 96
ExpressCard TV Cards, 46–47
ExpressCard wireless adapters, 188
Extend The Desktop Onto This Monitor check box, 85
Extend Your Desktop controls, 84
extended desktop displays, 84
extenders, media, 127

Index  279
external audio interfaces, 150–152
external graphics connectors, 80
external monitors, 84
external video interfaces, 88–89
Extras Manager, Skype, 25
F
fanless power supplies, 243
fans
processor, 120–121, 240–241, 244–248
projector, 130
Fast Ethernet, 92
fiber-optic Internet connections, 21–22
field replaceable units (FPUs), 68
File Download – Security Warning dialog box, 35
file formats
audio, 157–159, 166, 173
graphics, 207
file saws, 118
File Type drop-down list, 206
Find command, 211
FireWire connections, 77
fixed IP addresses, 100
flash drives, 109, 191, 249
flatbed scanners, 203
flat-rate ISP connections, 18
Float command, 165
foam, acoustic, 251–252
focus, 262
folders
Audacity software temp, 161–162, 166
hard drives mounted in, 76
network, 104
organizing documents in, 209
Public Music, 142–143
Sample Music, 142
Shared Music, 142–143
Format And Repartition Disks check box, 183
Format Partition screen, 76
formatting, hard disk, 74–77
FPUs (field replaceable units), 68
free space, hard drive, 162
full-screen mode, 263
G
gain, 170
General tab, 139
Ghost application, 177
Gigabit Ethernet, 92
Give Your Network A Name And Choose Security 
Options screen, 197
goggles, 118
graphics cards
for 30-inch LCDs, 82
adding, 87–88
assessing, 79–80
ports, 126–127
silencing, 240–241, 249–250
slots for, 86–87
graphics connectors, 80–81
graphics file formats, 207
greenfield conditions, 185
Group Policy Object Editor window, 218
groups, 43
Guide options, 48–49
guitars, 152–153
H
hard copies, 202
Hard disk option, 178
hard disks/drives
booting order, 58
choosing to add or replace, 68
converting old into portable, 77–78
formatting, 74–77
installing, 70–73
overview, 65
partitions, 215
purchasing, 68–69
silencing, 240–241, 248–249
software, 69–70
storing Audacity temp folders in, 161–162
verifying current, 65–68
hardware
audio, 150–152
external video interface, 88–89
hard disks, 68–69
Knoppix requirements, 106
wired network, 91–96
hardware resolution, 203
HDMI (High-Definition Multimedia Interface) 
connections, 124
headsets, 23–24, 39
heat pipes, 249–250
heat sinks, 243
height, hard disk, 68
hexadecimal characters, 198
High-Definition Multimedia Interface (HDMI) 
connections, 124
hi-hats, 154
home recording. See recording studios
Home Server, Windows, 145, 176
home theaters
cables, 127
connecting PC to TV or projector, 127–129
selecting connection type, 123–127
using Windows Media Center, 129–130
hot-plugging monitors, 83
hotspot wireless networks, 187
hubs, 92

280
Index
HughesNet satellite Internet, 21
Hush Technologies, 253
I
IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers) 
wireless equipment standards, 185, 187
IM (Instant Messaging), 20, 42. See also Windows Live 
Messenger
Import Pictures And Videos dialog box, 205–206
infrared emitters, 227, 232
infrastructure wireless networks, 186
Initialize Disk dialog box, 74–75
Install Skype Extras Manager option, 25
Install Windows screen, 180–181
installing
additional memory, 8–10
Audacity software, 154–155
BitLocker Drive Preparation tool, 215–216
CPU-Z application, 3
hard disks, 70–73
Internet connections, 22
iTunes, 137–138
RAM, 11–12
scanners, 204
Skype, 24–25
SlingPlayer software, 227–228
Virtual PC operating system, 256–257
Windows Live Messenger, 35–36
Instant Messaging (IM), 20, 42. See also Windows Live 
Messenger
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) 
wireless equipment standards, 185, 187
instruments, musical. See recording studios
Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) 
connections, 20
interface settings, Audacity program, 159–161
interfaces
Audacity software, 159–161, 163–165
external audio, 150–152
external video, 88–89
internal audio interfaces, 151
internal PC case lights, 122
Internet connections
cable, 21
dial-up, 17–20
DSL, 20–21
fiber-optic, 21–22
installing, 22
ISDN, 20
Knoppix, 111–114
ordering, 22
overview, 15, 16–17
satellite, 21
sharing, 199
verifying current speed, 15–16
wireless, 21
Internet Options dialog box, 19
Internet service providers (ISPs), 22
invitations, IM, 42
Iomega Corporation, 144
IP address field, 112
IP addresses, 100–101, 235
ISDN (Integrated Services Digital Network) 
connections, 20
ISO images, 261
ISO Recorder donationware, 261
ISPs (Internet service providers), 22
iTunes
accessing shared libraries, 140–141
disconnecting users from shared libraries, 
139–140
installing, 137–138
overview, 137
sharing library with local users, 138–139
sharing music effectively, 141–143
J
JPEG (JPG) format, 207
jumpers, 72
K
Keep The Custom Settings I Currently Have option, 190
Keyboard tab, 161
keyboards
navigating BIOS screens with, 57
server, 145
Knoppix software
backing up files with, 115
downloading, 115–116
overview, 105–106
recovery CDs, 106–107
testing
attaching USB drives, 109–111
connecting to network and Internet, 111–114
launching, 107–109
logging out, 114–115
Windows updates and drivers, 115–116
Konqueror window, 108–109, 113–114
L
LaCie company, 144
LAME encoder, 158–159
laptop PCs
adding monitors to, 88–89
hard drive replacement, 68, 71–73
increasing memory in, 5–6, 8–10
network adapters for, 96

Index  281
in recording rooms, 150
sending video output to external graphics ports, 128
silencing, 239
TV tuner connections for, 46
latency, 171
LCD (liquid crystal display) monitors, 81–83
letters, drive, 75–76
libraries, shared media. See also media sharing
defined, 132
iTunes, 138–143
Windows Media Player, 133–137
Library Sharing dialog box, 137
license agreements
BitLocker encryption, 216
Windows Live Messenger, 35–36
LinkStation series NAS devices, 144
Linux, 106, 269–271
liquid crystal display (LCD) monitors, 81–83
live distributions of Linux, 106
Live ID, Windows, 37
Live Messenger. See Windows Live Messenger
Local Area Connection Properties dialog box, 101
local users, iTunes, 138–141
location
server, 146
wireless network adapter, 196
Location Of Your Slingbox screen, 230
logarithmic waveforms, 161
Look For Shared Libraries check box, 140
low-noise hard disks, 69
M
main monitors, 85
Maintain Pictures In Output check box, 209
malware, 24
Manage Wireless Networks window, 193–194
manual IP address assignments, 100
Map Network Drive dialog box, 104
mapping drives to network folders, 104
master (primary) disks, 72
Matrox external video interfaces, 89
M-Audio audio interfaces, 150–151
Max Bandwidth reading, 4
Media Center, 48–51, 129–130
media extenders, 127
Media Player, 132–137
media servers, 144–146
media sharing
iTunes
accessing local user’s shared library, 
140–141
disconnecting users from shared libraries, 
139–140
installing, 137–138
overview, 137
sharing library with local users, 138–139
sharing music effectively, 141–143
media servers, 144–146
overview, 131–132
Windows Media Player, 133–137
Media Sharing dialog box, 133–137
Media Types column, 135
memory. See also random access memory
CPU-Z application, 3–5
information sources, 5
installing, 8–10
needed, 2
options for adding more, 5–7
overview, 1
purchasing, 7
ReadyBoost feature, 11–14
memory modules, 2, 5–10
Memory screen, 259–260
memory slots, 4–7
Memory tabs, 4
Menu bar, 165
metal cutters, 119, 122
metal files, 119
metal pliers, 119
Meter toolbar, 161, 165, 167–168
metropolitan wireless networks, 187
mice, 145
microphones, 23, 34–35, 40, 152–154
Microsoft Office Excel, 210–211
Microsoft Office OneNote, 210
Microsoft Office optical character recognition (OCR) 
features, 207–209
Microsoft Virtual PC Wizard, 257
Microsoft Windows. See also Windows Vista
dual-boot setup with, 269–271
reinstalling, 70
Minimum Of dB Mode Display Range setting, 161
mirror sites, 106
mirrored desktops, 84
Mixer toolbar, 160, 164
MobilePre USB audio interface, 150–152
modems, 18–19
module size, 4
monitor clips, webcam, 35
monitors
adding second, 82–83
adding to laptops, 88–89
multiple, 86–88
options, 79–81
overview, 79
positioning, 84–86
resolution, 82
selecting, 81–82
server, 145
size, 81–82

282
Index
motherboards, 54, 70, 86–87
mounting drives, 110
mouse, 145
movies. See home theaters; media sharing
MP3 encoders, 158–159
MSN Home page, 36
multiboot setups, 271–274
multifunction printers, 203, 205
multimedia, 19
music. See media sharing; recording studios
music sites, 174–175
Mute button, 168
N
Name server field, 112
Name Your Slingbox screen, 233
names, searching for in Skype, 30
NAS (network-attached storage) devices, 144
native resolution, 81
netcardconfig program, 111–112
network adapters, 96
Network and Sharing Center window, 101–102, 112, 193
Network Connection Details dialog box, 112
network device boots, 58–59
network drives, 144
network folders, mapping drives to, 104
Network mask field, 112
network names (SSIDs), 189
network-attached storage (NAS) devices, 144
networks
connecting to with Knoppix, 111–114
connectors, 92
detecting hardware, 189
scanners, 205
server connections, 145
switches, 91–92, 99
wired
adapters, 96
assigning IP addresses via DHCP, 100–101
cables, 97–99
connecting PCs, 100
connecting switches, 99
connecting to shared folders, 103–104
hardware, 91–96
overview, 90–91
sharing files through Public folder, 101–102
wireless
ad hoc, 187, 195–201
adapters, 188, 195
benefits of, 184–186
connecting PCs, 192
disconnecting from, 192–193
equipment, 187–188
managing multiple, 193–194
overview, 184
reconnecting to, 192–193
settings, 188–191, 191, 191–192
types of, 186–187
versus wired, 90
New Display Detected dialog box, 83–84, 128
New Scan dialog box, 205–206
New Simple Volume Wizard, 75–76
New Virtual Machine Wizard, 258
nicknames, 43
No Authentication security option, 197
noises
graphics card, 249–250
hard disk, 69
hard drive, 248–249
identifying, 240–241
opening PCs, 241–242
overview, 239
power supply, 242–244
processor fans, 240–241, 244–248
in recordings, 149–150
replacing optical drives, 250
sound-absorbers, 251–252
ultra-quiet PCs, 253
nonvibration fan mounts, 248
Norton Ghost application, 177
Norton Save & Restore application, 177
nudges, 44
O
OCR (optical character recognition), 207–209
Office, Microsoft, 207–211
Ogg Vorbis file format, 158
On-Disk.com, 106
OneNote application, 210
Open File – Security Warning dialog box, 3
opening PC cases, 241–242
OpenOffice.org program suite, 106
Operating System screen, 259
operating systems (OSes). See also dual-boot setup; 
Virtual PC operating system
for media server creation, 145
selecting, 254–256
setting up new hard disks with, 69–70
Operation Tips screen, 272
optical character recognition (OCR), 207–209
optical drives
booting from, 57–60, 108, 267
replacing, 250
optical zoom, 203
Optional Setup screen, 48–49
Options screen, 258
OS Selection Menu window, 272
OS Wizard Action Plan screen, 273–274
OS Wizard Complete screen, 274
OSes. See operating systems

Index  283
P
panning, 170
Paper Size drop-down list, 206
Parallels Workstation software, 256
Parental Ratings column, 135
part numbers, memory, 5
partitions, 75, 108–109, 215–218
passphrases, network, 189–190, 200
Password dialog box, 237
passwords
ad hoc Network, 198
BIOS, 60–64
BitLocker encryption, 221, 223
iTunes, 138, 140
Skype, 26
Slingbox software, 233, 237–238
Windows Live Messenger, 38
patch cables, 92
Pause button, 160
PC Cards, 46–47, 96, 188
PC-emulation software, 255
PCI (Peripheral Component Interconnect), 87, 96
PCI Express, 87
PCI network adapters, 188
PCI sound cards, 151
PCI TV cards, 46–47
PCs (personal computers). See cases, PC; hard disks/
drives; home theaters; networks; noises
Perforce Software Configuration Management  
System, 212
Peripheral Component Interconnect (PCI), 87, 96
personal computers (PCs). See cases, PC; hard disks/
drives; home theaters; networks; noises
personal invitations, 42
Phoenix Technologies Ltd, 54
PhoenixBIOS, 57–59, 61–62
phone calls. See Skype; video phones
Photo Gallery, Windows, 204–205, 210
pixels, 82
placement, monitor, 85–86
Play Other Tracks While Recording New One check 
box, 155
playback, 160
Playback drop-down list, 155
plugs, RJ45, 95, 98
PNG format, 207
podcast stations, 175
pop shields, 152
portable disks, 77–78
ports
for home theaters, 126–127
network switches, 91–92
uplink, 99
positioning
monitors, 84–86
wireless access points, 188
power connectors, 67
power supplies, 77, 240–244
power-line networking, 227
Preview button, 206
prices. See costs
primary (master) disks, 72
primary monitors, 85
processor fans, 120–121, 240–241, 244–248
processors, server, 145
Profile drop-down list, 206
Profile For Skype Test Call windows, 28
Program Compatibility Assistant dialog box, 228
projectors, 127–130. See also home theaters
Properties dialog box, 41
Public Music folder, 142–143
pulling cables, 97
punch-down tools, 94, 98
Q
Quality tab, 156–157
Quiet PC web site, 240
R
raceways, 93
radio stations, 175
RAM (random access memory)
copying Knoppix to, 116
installing, 11–12
requirements, 2
server, 145
for virtual machines, 258–260
ratings, media, 135
RCA cables, 126
reactivating Windows Vista, 183
Ready To Install The Program screen, 257
ReadyBoost feature, 11–14
receiving calls
Skype, 32
Windows Live Messenger, 44
reconnecting wireless networks, 192–193
Recorder Storage screen, 50
recording
audio tracks, 168
music. See Audacity software
TV, 50–52
Recording Defaults screen, 51
recording levels, 167–168
recording projects, 165–166

284
Index
recording studios
Audacity software
downloading, 154
file formats settings, 157–159
input/output settings, 155–156
installing, 154–155
interface settings, 159–161
recording quality settings, 156–157
temporary folders, 161–162
audio hardware, 150–152
miking instruments, 152–154
overview, 147
preparing rooms as, 147–150
reflections, sound, 148
regions, 48–49
reinstalling Windows, 70
remote controls, 46, 238
remote TV viewing, 233–234
removable devices, 58
Removable Disk Properties dialog box, 13–14
replacing hard disks/drives. See hard disks/drives
Require PIN At Every Startup button, 220
Require Startup USB Key At Every Startup button, 220
resolution
home theater, 129
monitor, 81–82, 85
scanner, 203
webcam, 35
Resolution text box, 206
resonance, 149
resource sharing. See networks
Restore The Following Backup area, 182
Restore Your Entire Computer From A Backup  
screen, 182
restoring PCs, 180–183
RJ45 plugs, 95, 98
rotary tools, 118
Router/Modem Password dialog box, 234
routers. See also networks
manual configuration of, 234–237
remote viewing tutorials, 235
setting to assign IP addresses, 100
Roxio DigitalMedia LE software, 107
running cables, 97
rural Internet connection options, 18
S
Samba (SMB) protocol, 113
Sample Music folder, 142
satellite Internet connections, 21
satellite TV, 227
Save & Restore application, 177
Save The Recovery Password screen, 221
Save This Network check box, 200–201
Say Hello! dialog box, 30
Scan New Document dialog box, 208
scanners
choosing, 203
installing, 204
scanning of documents, 204–209
screws
fan, 120
power supply, 244
Seagate Technology LLC, 144
secondary (slave) disks, 72
security, network, 190, 197–198, 200
Security Warning dialog box, 154
Select The OS Type You Wish To Install screen, 273
Select The Type Of OS Installation screen, 273
Selected Pages option button, 209
semi-fanless power supplies, 243
Send Text To Word dialog box, 208–209
Server Message Block (SMB) protocol, 113
servers
DHCP, 100
media, 144–146
Set BitLocker Startup Preferences screen, 220
Set Up A Connection Or Network Wizard, 189–191
Set Up A Wireless Ad Hoc Network screen, 197
Set Your Password screen, 233
Setup Wizard, 227–228
Share Your Contact Details With Them option buttons, 31
shared drives, 113–114
shared media. See media sharing
Shared Music folder, 142–143
Shared Storage NAS Server, 144
sharing. See also media sharing; networks
Internet connections, 199
resources, 196
sheet-fed scanners, 203
shielded twisted pair (STP) cables, 95
Show Different Parts Of My Desktop On Each Display 
(Extended) option, 84, 128
Show My Desktop On The External Display Only 
option, 84, 128
SideCar external video interface, 89
signal configuration, TV, 48–49
Sign-in Assistant, 36
silencing jackets, 248
silencing PCs. See noises
Silent PC Review web site, 240
single-channel memory, 4
size
disk enclosure, 77
monitor, 81–82
volume, 75
Skype
account setup, 25–27
audio hardware, 23–24

Index  285
contacts
adding, 29–31
calling, 31–32
conventional phone calls, 32–33
downloading, 24–25
installing, 24–25
overview, 23
receiving calls, 32
sound equipment, 27–29
Skype Test Call contacts, 29
SkypeOut features, 32
slave (secondary) disks, 72
Slingbox Directory dialog box, 237–238
Slingbox Setup Wizard, 229–237
Slingbox software
configuring routers manually, 234–237
connecting, 226–227
installing, 227–228
overview, 226
remote viewing, 233–234
setting up, 229–233
watching TV, 237–238
Slingbox Update screen, 229–230
“SlingPlayer Is Incompatible with This Version of 
Windows” message, 228
slots
graphics cards, 86–87
memory, 5–7
SMB (Server Message Block) protocol, 113
snare drums, 153
sockets, wall plate, 93
Software Playthrough check box, 155
software resolution, 203
solid state drives (SSDs), 249
Solo button, 168
song distribution, 174–175
Song Information dialog box, 174
Sort command, 211
sound boxes, 150–152
sound cards, 146
sound equipment, 27–29
sound reflections, 148
sound-absorbing cases, 252
Source drop-down list, 206
Source pane, 140–141
SourceForge.net web site, 154
speakers, 39
Specify Volume Size screen, 75
spectrograms, 159–160
speed. See also Internet connections
of cable connection, 21
of dial-up connections, 18
digital telephone lines, 20–21
requirements for ReadyBoost, 12
of virtual machines, 256
of wireless networks, 185–186
spell checking, 209
spreadsheets, tracking documents with, 210–211
spring clips, 11
SSDs (solid state drives), 249
SSIDs (network names), 189
standing waves, 148
stands, webcam, 35
staplers, cable, 95
Star Ratings column, 135
StarBand satellite Internet, 21
Start Skype When The Computer Starts option, 25
Status bar, 165
stereo tracks, 172
StorCenter series NAS devices, 144
STP (shielded twisted pair) cables, 95
streaming media, 132. See also Slingbox software
studios, recording. See recording studios
subminiature connectors, 125
subnets, 132, 235
supervisor passwords, 60–64
S-Video cables, 126
switches, network, 99
synchronizing audio tracks, 171
System Commander, 271–274
system drives, 162
system partitions, 215
System Recovery Options dialog box, 181
T
T568A wiring standard, 98
T568B wiring standard, 98
Tag These Pictures text box, 207
tagging
picture files, 209
scanned documents, 210
song files, 173–174
tapered reamers, 119
TCP/IP subnets, 132
telephone calls. See Skype; video phones
telephone lines, 18, 20–21
television (TV). See also Slingbox software
signal configuration, 48–49
tuners
choosing, 46–47
overview, 45
recording TV, 50–52
setting up Windows Media Center, 48–49
watching TV, 49
watching through PC
cable, 127
choosing connection type, 123–127
connecting PC to TV or projector, 127–129
overview, 123–130
using Windows Media Center, 129–130
Television Source screen, 230–231

286
Index
temperature, processor, 246
temporary folders, 161–162, 166
test recordings, 168
testing USB devices, 13
text conversations. See Windows Live Messenger
text recognition, 207–209
This Is My Main Monitor check box, 85
thumb drives, 109
TIFF format, 207
Timeline feature, 165
Time-Shift tool, 171–172
tin snips, 119
toms, 154
toolbars
Audacity software, 163–165
Windows Live Messenger, 36
tools
PC case, 118–119
wired network, 93–95
tower-style PCs, 70
TPMs (Trusted Platform Modules), 215, 217–218, 222–223
track alignment, 171–172
tracking documents, 209–212
Tracks area, 165
tracks, audio
adding, 170
aligning, 171–172
applying effects to, 169
recording, 168
stereo, 172
TripleHead2Go external video interface, 89
True Image Home application, 177
TrueCrypt software, 225
Trusted Platform Modules (TPMs), 215, 217–218, 222–223
tuner configuration, 48–49
tune-ups, modem, 18
TV. See television
Type The Network Security Key Or Passphrase  
screen, 200
U
Uncompressed Export Format drop-down list, 157–158
underpinning tracks, 170
unmounting drives, 110
Update Spectrogram While Playing setting, 160
updating Windows, 115–116
uplink ports, 99
urban Internet connection options, 18
USB 2 connections, 77
USB devices
2.0 memory, 12
connections for, 35
removal of, 14
scanners, 204
testing, 13
TV tuners, 45
USB drives
attaching, 109–111
key, 218–219, 223–224
USB network adapters, 96, 188
Use BitLocker Without Additional Keys button, 220
User Account Control
Audacity software, 154
BitLocker encryption, 224
iTunes, 137–138
scanner installation, 204
SlingPlayer software, 227
Windows Media Player, 133–134
User Account Control dialog box, 24
V
variable-speed fans, 121
VGA (Video Graphics Array) connections, 79–80, 125
vibration-absorbing mounts, 248
vibrations, in recording studios, 149
video cameras, 34–35
video cards, 89
video connectors, 79–80
Video Graphics Array (VGA) connections, 79–80, 125
video phones
cameras, 34–35
microphones, 34–35
overview, 34
Windows Live Messenger
adding contacts, 42–43
configuring, 39–41
downloading, 35
installing, 35–36
making calls, 43–44
receiving calls, 44
signing on, 38–39
signing out, 44
Windows Live ID, 37
videos, 175. See also home theaters; media sharing
viewing windows, 121–122
Village Tronic VTBook external video interface, 88
Virtual Hard Disk Location screen, 260
Virtual Hard Disk Options screen, 260
Virtual Machine Additions installation, 262
Virtual Machine Name And Location screen, 258
Virtual Machine Wizard, 257–260
Virtual PC Console window, 258
Virtual PC operating system
downloading, 256–257
installing, 256–257
installing additions, 263–265
installing OSes on, 257–263
virtual-machine software, 255–256
Vista. See Windows Vista
VMware Workstation software, 256
vocals, 152
volume, audio, 167

Index  287
volumes, 75
VTBook external video interface, 88
W
wall plates, 93, 97–99
wall warts, 97
watching TV
through PC
cable, 127
choosing connection type, 123–127
connecting PC to TV or projector, 127–129
overview, 123–130
using Windows Media Center, 129–130
tuners, 49
water-cooling systems, 245
wattage, 242–243
WAV files, 158
waves, standing, 148
webcams, 34–35, 40–41
Welcome window, 38
WEP encryption, 196, 198
What Level Of Decryption Do You Want? screen, 224–225
When Importing Uncompressed Audio Files Into 
Audacity group box, 157
Where Do You Want To Install Windows? screen, 268
Windows. See also Windows Vista
dual-boot setup with, 269–271
reinstalling, 70
updates and drivers, 115–116
Windows BitLocker Drive Encryption Password Entry 
screen, 223
Windows Boot Manager screen, 268
Windows Complete PC Backup and Restore feature
backing up, 176–179
restoring, 180–183
Windows Complete PC Backup Wizard, 178–179
Windows Complete PC Restore confirmation  
screen, 182–183
Windows Home Server, 145, 176
Windows Live Messenger
adding contacts, 42–43
configuring, 36–41
configuring audio and video, 39–41
creating Windows Live ID, 37
downloading, 35
installing, 35–36
overview, 34
receiving calls, 44
signing on, 38–39
signing out, 44
video calls, 43–44
Windows Live Today window, 39
Windows Live Toolbars, 36
Windows Media Center, 48–51, 129–130
Windows Media Player, 132–137
Windows Photo Gallery, 204–205, 210
Windows Security Alert dialog box, 26
Windows Vista
Business Edition, 176–179
connecting to shared folders, 103
dual-boot setup with, 266–269
Enterprise Edition, 214
installation DVD, 180
setting to get IP addresses via DHCP, 101
sharing files with Public folder, 101–102
Ultimate Edition, 176–179, 213–216
Windows XP, 266–269
wire snakes, 94
wired Ethernet ports, 187
wired networks
adapters, 96
assigning IP addresses via DHCP, 100–101
cables, 97–99
connecting PCs, 100
connecting switches, 99
connecting to shared folders, 103–104
hardware, 91–96
overview, 90–91
sharing files through Public folder, 101–102
wireless access points, 187–188, 191
wireless Internet connections, 21
Wireless Network Setup Wizard, 191–192
wireless networks
ad hoc
adding PCs to, 195
disconnecting PCs from, 200–201
to existing networks, 199–200
overview, 187, 195, 196
planning, 196
setting up first PC, 197–199
shutting down, 201
adapters, 188, 195
benefits of, 184–186
connecting PCs, 192
disconnecting from, 192–193
equipment, 187–188
managing multiple, 193–194
overview, 184
reconnecting to, 192–193
settings
applying to access points, 191
applying to PCs, 191–192
creating, 188–191
types of, 186–187
versus wired, 90
Wireless-G equipment, 185
wiring standards, 98
Workstation software, 256
WPA encryption, 196, 198
WPA2-Personal encryption, 198

288
Index
X
Xdialog box, 111–112
XP, Windows, 266–269
X-Top multimonitor setups, 88
Z
Zalman TNN case series, 252
Zenview multimonitor setups, 88

