www.ebook3000.com

Do-It-Yourself
Digital Home Office
PROOJECTS
24 cool things you didn’t know you could do!
cnet

About the Author
S. E. Slack is a lifestyle and technology writer and author with more than 17 years of 
experience in business and technical writing. She specializes in simplifying complex 
topics. Slack has written seven books and numerous articles that have appeared inter-
nationally in business magazines and online business sites.
Working from her home office, Slack has also been an executive and business 
transformation communications consultant to IBM, Lenovo International, and State 
Farm Insurance. In addition, she writes for Microsoft, IBM, CDW, Sony, and other 
companies. As a corporate consultant, she has written general, strategic, marketing, 
and technical internal communications and education.
Slack is married and has a toddler at home, who routinely helps mommy learn 
new and more inventive ways to keep the home office humming.
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

Do-It-Yourself
cnet
Digital Home Office
PROJECTS
24 cool things you didn’t know you could do!

Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Manufactured in the United States of America. Except as permitted under the
United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database
or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher. 
0-07-151090-7
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: 0-07-148983-5.
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use
names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designa-
tions appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps. 
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or for use in corporate training programs.
For more information, please contact George Hoare, Special Sales, at george_hoare@mcgraw-hill.com or (212) 904-4069. 
TERMS OF USE 
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors reserve all rights in and to the 
work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of
the work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, dissemi-
nate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial
and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms. 
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCU-
RACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMA-
TION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRAN-
TY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your require-
ments or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inac-
curacy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill has no responsibility for the content
of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental,
special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the
possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort
or otherwise. 
DOI: 10.1036/0071489835
www.ebook3000.com

We hope you enjoy this
McGraw-Hill eBook! If
you’d like more information about this book,
its author, or related books and websites,
please click here.
Professional
Want to learn more?

For Greg and Alia, who keep me in smiles when the days get long and 
the deadlines are tight.
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank

vii
Contents 
Foreword   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  
ix
Acknowledgments .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  
xi
Introduction 
  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  
xiii
 Part I   Organize Your Workspace
 
Project 1 
Set Up a PC Messaging Center.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
3
 
Project 2 
Expand Your Desktop with Multiple Monitors  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
15
 
Project 3 
Perk Up Your Infrastructure with a Webcam.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
25
 
Project 4 
Set Up a Docking Station for Your Laptop  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
37
 
Project 5 
Turn Your Monitor into a TV .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
45
 
Project 6 
Create an e-Shipping Center  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
53
 Part II    Take It on the Road
 
Project 7 
Get and Send E-mail Anywhere  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
69
 
Project 8 
Set Up a Mobile GPS  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
79
 
Project 9 
Use Office Applications from Anywhere.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
87
 
Project 10 
Remote Control: Remotely Connect to Your PC or Get Help  .  .  .  .  .  .   
97
 Part III   Communicate with Clients and Employers
 
Project 11 
Turn Your PC into a Virtual Conference Room  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
115
 
Project 12 
Talk for Free on Your PC  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
123
vii
For more information about this title, click here
www.ebook3000.com

 
Project 13 
Create Your Own Wiki Collaborative Space  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
135
 
Project 14 
Set Up a Virtual Private Network  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
143
 Part IV   Enhance Your Sales and Marketing
 
Project 15 
Earn Advertising Incomes from Your Blog or Web Site  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
161
 
Project 16 
Establish an eBay Store  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
167
 
Project 17 
Set Up a Commerce Web Site   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
179
 
Project 18 
Create a Podcast from Your Home Office.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
191
 
Project 19 
Set Up an RSS Feed for Your Web Site  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
201
 Part V   Work Securely from Home
 
Project 20 
Turn an Old PC into a Network Server  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
219
 
Project 21 
Automate Your File Backups  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
235
 
Project 22 
Teach Your PC to Recognize Your Voice   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
245
 
Project 23 
Set Up a Wireless Network .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
259
 
Project 24 
Secure Your Wireless Network and Computers  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
273
Index 
  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   
291
viii  Contents 

ix
Foreword
T
he home office combines industriousness and organization with our personal 
style. It’s not a new idea, but it has taken a quantum leap forward in this age of 
digital, Internet-connected everything.
For some, a home office is an alternate company office, allowing us to multitask 
family responsibilities while getting our work done—in our pajamas! Telecommut-
ing’s stigma as a goof-off is fading fast as companies and employees realize a lot more 
gets done when commute time and in-office interruptions are taken out of the equa-
tion. And working at home no longer means being less present: digital phone technol-
ogy, web conferencing, e-mail, VPN, and instant messaging are the tools that make the 
at-home employee almost as present as if they were sitting in a cube.
For others, a home office means a place to run a home-based business, whether 
it’s an eBay storefront or a consulting service. Thanks to the Web, a home-based sole 
proprietorship may, to the customer, look indistinguishable from a brick & mortar 
company with many employees.
But for most of us, a home office is where we take care of the business of life. 
Managing finances, writing and e-mailing, doing our taxes, editing a home movie, or 
printing party invitations; the home office is where life gets organized, creating more 
time to enjoy it.
These and many other scenarios are what we teach you in this book. Some projects 
enable your gear, like setting up a webcam or a second monitor on your PC. Others 
save you money, like using VoIP for calling and conferencing. And still other proj-
ects extend the home office to wherever you want to be, through mobile and wireless 
technologies.
Whatever “home office” means to you, we’re about to show you how to make it 
amazing with the clear, concise projects in the pages to follow. Enjoy wearing your 
pajamas!
Brian Cooley
CNET Editor-at-Large
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank

xi
Acknowledgments
T
here are many people behind the scenes who bring a book from concept to the 
bookshelf. First and foremost, I’d like to thank Roger Stewart at McGraw-Hill 
for giving me the opportunity to share my experiences with other home office workers 
through this book. Without his vision and guidance, this book would never have been 
written. Thanks, Obi-wan! I’d also like to thank the editors at CNET for working with 
McGraw-Hill to provide a terrific series of informative books for consumers.
Carly Stapleton at McGraw-Hill was immensely helpful and invaluable as I was 
writing this book. Carly, you are a joy to work with! From a production standpoint, 
kudos go to Vasundhara Sawhney and Bill McManus for all the work they did to make 
me look and sound good in print. And a big thank you to everyone behind the scenes 
who helped with graphics and overall editing. Your expertise is greatly appreciated.
I cannot write these acknowledgments without mentioning Neil Salkind and 
Studio B. Neil, you are a continued inspiration to me and I thank you from the bottom 
of my heart for all you do for me. You are head and shoulders above all other agents; 
you have my undying trust and loyalty. Studio B, too, is forever in my heart. From 
Linda and Jamie, to Renee, Julie, and Lisa; it’s a pleasure working with an agency that 
understands writers and works so hard to keep me happy. I couldn’t do what I do 
without each and every one of you.
Finally, I must thank Greg and Alia. The two of you keep me sane, and remind me 
that every moment of life should be savored.
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank

xiii
Introduction
T
his book is designed to help you create a tech-savvy home office environment 
so you can do what you do best: your work. Each of the 24 projects in this book 
was carefully planned to meet your needs as a home office worker.
The book is organized into parts, with projects in each section ranging in difficulty 
from easy to advanced. Every project is designed as a stand-alone project; you don’t need 
to complete a particular project before you can begin the next. As you consider a project, 
don’t be afraid to try it even if it is challenging or advanced. You just might be surprised 
at how quickly you can complete a project, regardless of your technology skill level.
Part I, “Organize Your Workspace,” offers projects that can help you organize your 
office. Whether you have a simple desk to work from or an elaborate office space, each 
project brings unique organizational aspects to any home office.
In Part II, “Take It on the Road,” you’ll discover how to use the Internet and other 
technologies to your advantage. Each project was developed after careful research into 
the mobile reality of today’s home office environment. Just because you work from 
home doesn’t mean you have to be stuck there!
Part III of the book, “Communicate with Clients and Employers,” addresses proj-
ects that can help you stay in touch with others outside your home office. You can stay 
visible and accessible, no matter what your home office environment.
Part IV, “Enhance Your Sales and Marketing,” shows you a variety of ways you 
can generate additional income and take advantage of the latest technologies to locate 
customers and clients. Regardless of your occupation, these projects will spark ideas 
for you.
Finally, in Part V “Work Securely from Home,” you’ll discover different methods to 
make your computer work with you instead of against you.
As you work through the projects in this book, you’ll notice that the beginning of 
each project offers information about what you’ll need for the project and the difficulty 
level involved. Each project is divided into manageable steps with helpful hints and 
tips to guide you along the way.
Don’t be shy! Jump right into any project in the book—you can start wherever you 
like. As you complete each one, give yourself a pat on the back and then jump into 
another project. You’ll be your own IT department before you know it!
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank

Part I
Organize Your
 Workspace
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank

3
Project 1
Set Up a PC 
Messaging 
Center
What You’ll Need:
Operating system: Windows 98, 2000, ME, XP, or Vista
Software: Message center software
Hardware: Voice-enabled analog modem, sound card, microphone, 
speakers, phone line
Cost: $30–$199
Difficulty: Easy
F
ew people who work from home have the luxury of a large office space, let alone 
the desk space to hold a computer, telephone, answering machine, and fax ma-
chine. Yet all of those things are required in today’s 24/7 world, especially for 
home office users who travel and must check in often for voicemail and fax messages. 
The solution is to turn your PC into a message center: one that can let you read, listen 
to, and manage daily information.
There is software on the market that lets you do exactly that. To get your PC to 
work smarter for you and become a virtual assistant, you need to choose a message 
center software program, get it installed, and start using it. Once you do, you’ll dis-
cover what others have learned: your computer can do more for you than just house 
documents. It can keep you organized, in touch with others, and one step ahead of the 
constantly moving world around you.
These programs are great because they turn your computer system into a true of-
fice assistant. As long as you have Internet access, you can take the assistant with you 
wherever you may go.
●
●
●
●
●
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

4  Project 1
Step 1: Install the Hardware
To complete this project, you need a voice-enabled data/fax modem, a sound card, 
a microphone, speakers, and a phone line that can connect to your modem. The mo-
dem receives and sends phone calls through your computer, the sound card transfers 
sound to your computer, and the microphone and speakers allow you to leave and 
receive voice messages.
Newer computers typically have these items built-in, but if you have an older 
system, you need to determine whether or not your computer needs one or all of 
them. Instructions for determining whether you have a sound card or a modem on 
a Windows XP or Vista system are listed here. Older systems will follow similar steps; 
check Microsoft.com for specific instructions for an older operating system.
To get on the Internet, you are probably using a DSL or cable modem. Both are 
great modems, but they don’t connect to a phone line in the way an analog modem 
does. In fact, with cable modems, the entire concept is to use cable lines to receive 
and send signals—not phone lines. DSL modems use phone lines as a transport me-
dium only; they don’t dial out or accept phone calls. Faxing and, of course, answering 
phone calls require an analog modem and a telephone line along with the ability to 
dial a telephone number.
To use messaging center software, your modem must be a data/fax modem that 
connects to a standard, analog phone line. The phone line plugs directly into the mo-
dem through a phone plug in the back of your computer if your modem is internal; 
otherwise it just plugs into an external modem sitting on your desk. Using an analog 
modem should not disrupt the use of other modems on your system.
The phone line connected to your computer should be one that you use for business—you don’t 
need a new phone number. You can bypass the modem by picking up the telephone handset on 
your desk before the modem answers.
When the modem is in use, other calls are blocked. If you typically make and receive a lot of 
phone calls, you might want to invest in a second phone line so that calls and faxes can be 
received on the modem while you’re on the telephone.
As for headphones, microphones, and speakers, well, you probably already know 
if you have those. The headphones are external and plug into the front or back of your 
computer. Some headphones include a microphone although you can purchase one 
separately too.
Microphones may also be included in a webcam, but your sound quality might not be as high as 
when using a microphone with a headset.
How do you know if you have speakers? Simple—if you hear more than a “beep” 
on your computer, you have speakers. If you don’t, you need to purchase some ex-
ternal speakers from your local computer store. You plug them into the back of your 
computer and place them on your desk wherever you want.
tip
note
tip

Set Up a PC Messaging Center  5
Windows XP
To check for hardware and sound on a Windows XP system:
Right-click My Computer.
Click Properties.
In the System Properties dialog box, click the Hardware tab.
In the Device Manager section, click Device Manager.
When the Device Manager window opens, you will see a list of all the hard-
ware installed on your computer.
Click the plus sign next to Modems to expand the information about mo-
dems. If you do not see “Modem” or any items listed under Modems, you do 
not have a modem installed.
Click the plus sign next to Sound, Video And Game Controllers to see infor-
mation about sound cards. If you do not see any sound cards listed, you do 
not have one installed.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
www.ebook3000.com

6  Project 1
Windows Vista
To check for hardware and sound on a Vista system:
Click the Start button and type Device Manager in the Instant Search box.
Click Device Manager when it appears under Programs. When the Device 
Manager window opens, you will see a list of all the hardware installed on 
your computer.
Click the plus sign next to Modems to expand the information about mo-
dems. If you do not see “Modem” or any items listed under Modems, you do 
not have a modem installed.
Click the plus sign next to Sound, Video And Game Controllers to see infor-
mation about sound cards. If you do not see any sound cards listed, you do 
not have one installed.
1.
2.
3.
4.

Set Up a PC Messaging Center  7
Step 2: Choose Your Software
Message center software can receive and send faxes, answer the phone for you and 
take voicemail messages, and reassign e-mails to voicemail. Beyond the hardware 
mentioned here, you do not need to set up any additional equipment. The software 
translates all the incoming information to your computer for you.
Many messaging software programs will answer fax calls but not voice calls if your telephone 
service offers distinctive ring services. Otherwise, your computer will answer all calls.
There are several programs on the market that work well with most Windows 
operating systems; some have simple approaches to handling faxes and voicemail, 
while others have more comprehensive messaging center approaches. A few offer 
services to manage the system for you on a subscription basis, while others allow you 
to download a program once and manage your own system. If you don’t want to deal 
with installing regular updates, a subscription service is a good choice. On the other 
hand, you’re paying for that convenience every month—and some of these programs 
can be downloaded free if you’re willing to take on some of the long-term upkeep.
A few fax modems supply message center software along with the modem. There 
are literally dozens of programs to choose from; some are shareware, others are pro-
prietary. Home versions of this type of software are typically the least expensive, 
but also do not have all the capabilities business versions have. However, check out 
the home versions anyway—if you don’t send or receive faxed documents and don’t 
need an answering service often, the home version might be perfect for you.
No matter which program you choose, it must have at least these three items in 
order to make it a true message center:
Ability to compose, edit, send, and receive faxes
Voicemail system that can handle an unlimited number of messages 
(depending on the size of your hard drive, of course)
Compatibility with your voice-enabled modem and your e-mail program
A fourth item is becoming available on a limited basis: the ability to retrieve e-
mail messages by phone, either the entire message or notification of new messages. 
It’s not standard in most of these programs yet, but if you find one with this option 
that suits your budget and needs, it’s worth taking a good look at. This feature means 
you don’t need to drag a laptop with you or find an Internet connection; you can 
simply use any telephone to dial in for your messages.
If you’re using Windows Vista, check carefully to be certain the software you choose will work 
with Vista. Sometimes the software will partially work—you might be able to use the program 
for messaging purposes but Help files created in earlier versions of Windows by the software 
provider might not work in Vista.
●
●
●
tip
tip
www.ebook3000.com

8  Project 1
It does take some time, by the way, to get used to working with this kind of soft-
ware. That’s because it takes traditional office concepts and takes them to a different 
level—you’re used to checking a phone for voicemail messages, for example, or grab-
bing a piece of paper from a fax machine. Moving to an electronic messaging system 
means your computer becomes your source of information—you need to build in 
some time in your learning curve to get used to doing all these types of things on 
your computer.
Many message center software programs offer trial versions. Take advantage of this—you some-
times can test the software for up to 30 days to determine how well it will work for you. If you 
don’t like it, try another program until you find what you like.
Step 3: Install Your Software
Once you choose the message center software that meets your needs, you need to 
install it on your computer. If you purchased it in a store, use the installation CD pro-
vided. If you downloaded it online, like the example in Figure 1-1, follow the prompts 
provided by the software. Before you install it, be sure your modem and sound card 
have been installed and are working.
Figure 1-1 
Venta Fax and Voice 
5.71 downloading off 
the Web.
As you step through the installation prompts, keep these things in mind:
If you will use the program often, accept prompts that ask whether you want 
the program icon placed on your Start menu or toolbar.
Carefully note the installation folder destination for your software. Some 
programs do not automatically install to the Program Files folder, and if you 
need to uninstall and reinstall it later for some reason, you’ll save yourself 
some time!
Your software should have a Program Settings or Properties area where you can 
view pretty much everything involved with your program, such as Modem, Fax, 
Voice, Transmission, and Print settings. When the installation is complete, if you 
●
●
note

Set Up a PC Messaging Center  9
experience trouble with any of these during testing, you should check this area first 
to determine the current settings. In the example shown in Figure 1-2, the Caller ID 
program setting clearly indicates that the modem being used does not support Caller 
ID settings. Most programs have similar easily identifiable information. You may find 
a new modem is required rather than a reinstallation of your software.
Figure 1-2 
In this Program 
Settings dialog box, 
the right pane states 
in red that this feature 
is not supported by 
the currently installed 
modem.
If you have a voice modem but your message center software doesn’t seem to recognize it as a 
voice modem, it could be that your modem is what’s sometimes referred to as a “soft 
modem”—a modem with capabilities defined by the driver rather than the modem itself. To 
some software, this type of modem appears to be nonvoice. Check with your modem 
manufacturer to see if an additional driver will add the recognition your software needs.
Step 4: Test and Use Your Message Center
Once you have installed the program, you need to walk through it to be sure all 
aspects of it work the way you expect. This is critical because if, for example, the 
program does not recognize your modem or has some other issue, you can do some 
troubleshooting now instead of waiting until you have an urgent message to send 
and finding out then. In Figures 1-3 and 1-4, you can see how testing determined 
a communication error between the modem and the software.
note
www.ebook3000.com

10  Project 1
Figure 1-3 
The demo screen 
allowed input for a test 
fax and did not show 
any potential problems.
Figure 1-4 
Upon dialing, a notice 
appeared advising that 
the selected modem 
had not been found.

Set Up a PC Messaging Center  11
This notice prompted checks to the system to determine the cause of the modem 
error. As you walk through each section to test it, wait to set up personal preferences 
until you have confirmed that the entire software package is working as it should.
Setting Up Phone and Address Books
You can typically import contact information from your e-mail program by accepting 
prompts from your message center software. The information will automatically flow 
into your message center’s phone and address books as long as you have selected 
software that is compatible with your e-mail program.
It’s a good idea to import contact information on a regular basis if you add new 
contacts often—that can save you time when you’re in a hurry and just need to send a 
quick fax, for example. If your contact list hasn’t been updated recently, take the time 
now to do it. Message center software won’t be able to determine whether a contact’s 
fax number is current or not; you’ll save yourself time and aggravation in the long 
run by cleaning up any problems with your contacts now.
When you set up preferences for your phone and address books, you may see the 
warning shown in Figure 1-5 when using Microsoft Outlook as your e-mail program. 
This is designed to protect you from malicious programs accessing your contact list. 
Go ahead and select a time limit for your message center software to access Outlook 
and click OK.
Figure 1-5 
Microsoft Outlook is 
cautious when new 
programs want to 
access its contact lists 
for information.
Sending and Receiving Faxes
Many message center programs require that a source document be converted to 
a facsimile format. This is typically handled in Windows applications by opening the 
document you want to fax and selecting the option of printing to the message center 
program. During the installation process, your software should have installed this 
feature. If you can’t find the program as your printer, check Help for your program. 
You may need to uninstall and reinstall the program.
When the fax document is created, your message center software will offer you op-
tions for creating a cover page, information header, stamps, and other design features. 
www.ebook3000.com

12  Project 1
Choose the options you want, and follow your program’s prompts (such as saving the 
fax, the number it should be sent to, etc.) to send the fax.
Incoming faxes are typically saved in a graphic format such as TIF. This makes 
them easy to view and open with any image viewer. Some programs, however, do 
automatically convert incoming faxes to PDF files—you’ll need the Adobe PDF 
reader to view those.
Some message center software is compatible with distinctive ring services from the phone 
company as long as the fax modem is Distinctive Ring Capable. This compatibility feature stops 
the program from answering voice calls, for example, when you only want it to accept faxes. 
Without this feature and accompanying modem, the program can’t tell the difference in the 
calls until the handset is lifted and it can analyze the fax sounds.
Accessing Voicemail
Voicemails are saved in an audio format file such as WAV so that your computer can 
save and play them from designated areas. In VentaFax, for example, incoming voice-
mails are saved in the Inbox folder under the Message Manager. Simply open the folder 
and open the individual audio files to hear your messages. If you have remote access to 
your computer (see Project 10), you can access these voicemails while on the road, too.
If you want your incoming messages automatically forwarded to you via e-mail, 
you need to set that feature up in the software you’re using. Most programs send 
e-mail messages by their own built-in SMTP protocol rather than the e-mail system 
note

Set Up a PC Messaging Center  13
you typically use. If you need to, you can find the SMTP server settings in your e-mail 
account properties. Ask your IP provider for help if you aren’t sure where to find 
them.
You’ll want to follow your software’s setup instructions for the announcement that callers will 
hear; do that during this test phase. Recording is easy—most message center programs even 
let you do it in any recording program. Always play back the recording before finalizing it to be 
sure the sound quality is crisp and clear. You may want to dial in to see what the announcement 
sounds like over an actual phone line—sometimes computer recordings sound great on a 
computer but not so great on a phone. Keep at it until you get it just the way you want it.
Your message center software may have additional features or steps to follow; 
just take your time and walk through each item carefully. These programs are de-
signed for simplicity and ease of use, so there shouldn’t be any steps that you can’t 
follow easily or for which you can’t quickly obtain help. Once you’re set up, there is 
one more question: What are you going to do with all that new-found room on your 
desk now?
note
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank

15
Project 2
Expand Your 
Desktop 
with Multiple 
Monitors
What You’ll Need:
Operating system: Windows XP, Windows Vista
Software: None
Hardware: Two monitors; one video card with two or more moni-
tor connections or an additional Peripheral Component Interconnect 
(PCI) video card to add to your already installed video card
One open PCI slot
Tools: Phillips screwdriver
Cost: $100 and up
Difficulty: Easy
I
f you are the type of person who is constantly switching between applications 
and Internet windows on your computer screen, you might need to add another 
monitor to your computer. Adding a second monitor to your system essentially 
broadens the number of items you can see on your system at once—it’s sort of like 
having a huge monitor that’s split in half, with different programs displayed on each 
half of the screen.
For example, you can have your e-mail program and instant messaging program 
displayed on one monitor while you are working diligently on your Excel spread-
sheet on the other monitor. Instead of wondering whether you have a new e-mail or 
message, you can simply glance occasionally at the other monitor and check. If you 
do receive a message you want to respond to, just move your mouse across monitors 
and respond, then move your mouse back and keep working in Excel. Or, let’s say 
that Excel spreadsheet has lots of columns that can’t be viewed on a single screen. No 
problem—just stretch Excel across both monitors to facilitate viewing of more columns 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

16  Project 2
at once. You can also drag programs from one monitor to another to help you with 
organization or tasks.
With Windows XP and Vista operating systems, support is already there for ad-
ditional monitors—up to ten, in fact. In this project, we’ll focus on adding just one 
additional monitor. You can repeat the steps if you decide to add more in the future.
Additional monitors can be added to some laptop computers but not all. Check your owner’s 
manual or with your manufacturer to see whether your laptop computer video card can support 
multiple monitors.
Step 1: Obtain a Second Monitor
Before you can install a second monitor on your PC, you need to obtain one. Costs can 
vary widely depending upon the kind of monitor you add. A good rule of thumb to 
follow is to use a second monitor that has the same size or larger image area as your 
current monitor and use the same type of monitor. The entire reason to add multiple 
monitors is to broaden your screen, so there’s no point in going smaller—you might 
as well not bother, unless your first screen is a fabulously expensive type and you 
simply can’t afford to buy that kind again. Monitor size is measured diagonally, by 
the way, just like your television set.
There are two types of monitors used with desktop PCs: LCD and CRT monitors. 
LCD technology—the use of a liquid crystal display—was initially used on laptop com-
puters and other portable devices because it offered low power requirements and was 
lightweight, portable, and compact. CRT technology—officially known as cathode ray 
tube—has been used in televisions for decades and was the first choice as a monitor for 
desktop PCs as they became popular. CRT monitors (see Figure 2-1) are much larger in 
size than LCD monitors (see Figure 2-2). LCD monitors are thinner and take up much 
less desk space than CRT monitors. For example, an LCD monitor might have a depth 
of 4 inches while a CRT monitor might have a depth of 12 inches or more.
Figure 2-1 
A CRT monitor
note

Expand Your Desktop with Multiple Monitors  17
Personal preferences and budget can often make the decision for you when com-
paring monitors. To optimize desk space and minimize screen glare, go with LCD 
monitors. They are also much easier to lift due to the smaller size. Other bonuses for 
LCD monitors? Less radiation and heat are emitted from an LCD monitor than from 
a CRT monitor.
Using LCD and CRT monitors together means you will have differences in screen 
quality and sharpness—you can do it, but it’s not the optimum working environ-
ment. It’s particularly helpful if all monitors have the same adjustability features as 
well. When you work with multiple monitors all day long, it’s a little disconcerting 
to have one screen darker than another. You won’t go blind or anything, but when 
working for long stretches, similar views on both screens will make your life more 
comfortable.
Figure 2-2 
An LCD monitor
www.ebook3000.com

18  Project 2
Due to a lack of electromagnetic shielding, some CRT monitors become distorted when placed 
next to another CRT monitor. If you start seeing purple or green along the edges of the screen 
when you place monitors next to each other, try moving them a little farther apart. If the moni-
tors are too far apart to use comfortably, or the distortion doesn’t disappear, then try using a 
different monitor or make the switch to LCD screens. LCD monitors produce pictures differently 
and don’t require the electromagnetic shielding. Leaving distorted CRT monitors together for 
long periods of time can cause permanent and irreversible damage to the monitors.
Here are some things to consider when shopping for your new monitor.
If You Have LCD Screens
If you are using LCD screens, keep the following in mind:  
Corners of the screens should not change in color or brightness.
Both monitors should be the same from a brightness perspective when view-
ing light and dark images alike.
Both monitors should automatically adjust to the timing of the analog (VGA) 
signal.
If You Have CRT Screens
If you are using CRT screens, the following items should be considered: 
Both monitors should show images that do not change in dimension or have 
any distortions when the images change.
Both monitors should have adjustable screen geometry (representation of 
lines and shapes). Lines should not have curves near the edge of the display 
and circles should not be oval or egg-shaped.
Check for differences in convergence—both screens should be clear and crisp 
with no colors on the edges.
If you are a digital photographer or graphic artist, it might be wiser for you to stick with one large 
monitor rather than add multiple monitors. The addition of multiple monitors can sometimes make 
the colors you see on the screens differ from the printouts. A single, CRT monitor is probably the 
best choice for you.
Step 2: Verify the Number of Monitor 
Connections You Have
Look on the back of your computer and see how many video connections you have. 
They will look like one of the connectors shown in Figure 2-3. If you need to in-
stall an additional video card, follow the instructions included with your new card. 
●
●
●
●
●
●
note
note

Expand Your Desktop with Multiple Monitors  19
There are multiple types of video cards that can be used, including EDI interface, 
S-video, composite VGA, PCI, and PCI-E.
You can’t add a second AGP video card into a system. You can add a PCI video card to an AGP 
video card or a PCI-E video card, however. Some systems support multiple PCI-E cards but those 
are few and far between as of this writing.
Step 3: Install an Additional Monitor
Now that you have your second monitor, it’s time to install it. The first step is to shut 
down your computer. Next, unplug your computer—this ensures accidentally touch-
ing something in the case won’t cause your system to crash and burn. Most systems 
still have power running through the motherboard when Windows shuts down. If 
yours does, plugging a peripheral such as a video card into your system while it is still 
plugged in to a power source can cause damage to both the motherboard and the video 
card. Next, pull your tower out so you can sit somewhere comfortably and work on it.
You need to open your computer case only if you need to add a video card.
Then follow these steps:
Open your computer case.
Plug your additional monitor into the card as shown in Figure 2-4.
Now, turn on your computer.
1.
2.
Figure 2-3 
Shown here are three 
types of video card 
monitor interfaces 
(from top): EDI inter-
face (digital), S-video, 
and composite VGA 
(analog).
note
note
www.ebook3000.com

20  Project 2
Windows XP
Follow these steps to extend your Windows XP desktop to a new monitor:
When Windows XP launches, click the Start button and choose Settings | 
Control Panel.
In the Control Panel, double-click Display to open the Display Properties 
dialog box.
In the Display Properties dialog box, click the Settings tab, shown in 
Figure 2-5.
Click the monitor icon representing the monitor you are adding to your 
system.
Place a check mark in the Extend My Windows Desktop Onto This Monitor 
check box.
Click OK.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Figure 2-4 
Once the video card 
is inserted, your ad-
ditional monitor will 
be plugged into it as 
shown here.

Expand Your Desktop with Multiple Monitors  21
If the Extend My Windows Desktop Onto This Monitor check box does not display, your video 
adapter may not support multiple monitors. Video adapters that are part of the motherboard 
instead of plug-in cards must be set as VGA.
Windows Vista
Follow these steps to extend your Windows Vista desktop to a new monitor:
When Windows Vista launches, click the Start button and choose Control 
Panel.
Click Personalize.
Click Display Settings.
Click the monitor icon representing the monitor you are adding to your 
 system.
Place a check mark in the Extend The Desktop Onto This Monitor check 
box.
Click OK.
If your computer doesn’t recognize your second monitor, go to the Display Properties dialog box 
and click the Troubleshoot button for help. You may need to install additional drivers for the 
video card to work properly. The correct driver should come with the video card if you purchased 
one, or you can obtain the driver from the video card manufacturer’s web site. This is a simple 
download and installation process that typically has instructions provided on the web site or in 
the box.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Figure 2-5 
The Settings tab of the 
Display Properties dia-
log box is where you 
tell your computer to 
include your additional 
monitor as part of 
your entire desktop, 
allowing your screen 
to expand to multiple 
monitors.
note
note
www.ebook3000.com

22  Project 2
Step 4: Arrange the Monitors
Now that you have multiple monitors installed, you will see that one monitor displays 
the Logon dialog box when you start your computer and that most windows open on 
this monitor. This monitor is your primary monitor. You can also determine the pri-
mary monitor through the Display Properties dialog box, as shown in Figure 2-6.
Figure 2-6 
The primary monitor is 
indicated in the Display 
Properties dialog box. 
It is not always the 
monitor marked as 
number one—hover 
your cursor over the 
monitor icons to see 
which one is primary.
If you want a different monitor as your primary monitor, go to the Settings tab in 
the Display Properties dialog box and follow these steps:
Click the monitor you want to designate as your primary monitor.
Place a check mark in the Use This Device As The Primary Monitor check 
box.
Click OK.
If you want to arrange your monitors differently but keep your primary monitor the 
same, go to the Settings tab in the Display Properties dialog box and follow these steps:
Click Identify. This displays a large number on every monitor so that you 
can see clearly which monitor corresponds to the icons in the Settings tab. 
Review Figure 2-5 to see how the numbers display.
1.
2.
3.
1.

Expand Your Desktop with Multiple Monitors  23
Click the icon for the monitor you want to move. Drag it to the new position 
in the Settings tab to match the physical arrangement of your monitors, as 
shown in Figure 2-7.
Click Apply.
Monitor icons in the Settings tab of the Display Properties dialog box do not have to correspond 
to the physical locations of monitors but their placement does determine the movement of items 
between monitors. If you like to move things from monitor to monitor by dragging them up or 
down, place the monitors on top of one another. Alternately, place the icons beside one another 
to drag items right or left.
That’s it—you now have multiple monitors to help you organize your work and 
expand the screen space for easier access to all your programs. Take a look at my desk 
in Figure 2-8 to see how your desk could look!
2.
3.
Figure 2-7 
Each monitor is 
identified by a 
separate number so 
that you can always 
tell where it is located 
and move it to a new 
location if necessary.
note
www.ebook3000.com

24  Project 2
Figure 2-8 
The author’s desk, 
where she can’t 
function without her 
three LCD monitors 
to track everything.

25
Project 3
Perk Up Your 
Infrastructure 
with a Webcam
What You’ll Need:
Operating system: Windows XP, Windows Vista
Software: Included with webcam
Hardware: Webcam, CD-ROM drive, computer speakers, sound card, 
USB port, microphone (if not provided with the webcam)
Cost: $25 and up
Difficulty: Easy
I
f you aren’t using a webcam yet, you likely will be soon. That’s because so many 
different programs are including video capabilities in them and, as they do, more 
and more people are getting used to the once-futuristic idea of video-phoning and 
video-conferencing. Instant messaging programs are including the video option as 
a standard feature now, which means that instead of text chats and phone calls, you 
will have colleagues ringing you for a quick video chat.
This isn’t a bad thing—working at home means you are often out of sight to em-
ployers or clients, and we all know “out of sight” can translate to “out of mind.” Using 
a webcam to stay in touch often can make employers and clients feel more comfortable 
since they can see and talk to you as if you were right in their office.
Webcams work best with cable, satellite, or DSL Internet connections. For a web-
cam to work effectively, you need to lose the dial-up and upgrade to a broadband con-
nection. Your picture will be virtually worthless on dial-up and you’ll have spent your 
time and money on a product that will simply look cool beside your monitor.
One last thing: If you decide to install a webcam, you will need to have an Internet 
messaging program to use it with, such as Microsoft Live Messenger, Skype, or AOL 
Instant Messenger. If you currently use a messaging program, check its video capabili-
ties before purchasing your webcam. If you don’t currently use one, find out what your 
colleagues use and install it. After all, there is no point in having a webcam if you don’t 
have anyone to chat with.
●
●
●
●
●
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

26  Project 3
Step 1: Select a Webcam
Some newer laptops are offering webcams built right into the laptop case, so if you 
have one of these, you don’t need to worry about installing a webcam at all. The rest 
of us, however, need to purchase a separate webcam that installs into a USB port on 
our desktop or laptop. Once a webcam is installed, it will typically work with any 
program that offers video capabilities.
Some webcams come with built-in microphones, while others require you to pur-
chase a separate microphone and headset. We recommend purchasing a webcam with 
a built-in microphone. It’s easier to use, but the main reason is that built-in micro-
phones are designed to reduce feedback more effectively when using the webcam.
The key question to ask when shopping for a webcam is, how do you plan to use 
it? The answer you give will determine the type of webcam you need to shop for.
Webcam Will Be Used with a Desktop Computer
If you will be using your webcam primarily while you sit quietly at your home of-
fice desk, you’ll be fine with one that stands alone beside your monitor, like the 
one shown in Figure 3-1, or one that sits on top of it. Some desktop webcams, like 
the Logitech model shown in Figure 3-1, offer face-tracking features, so if you have 
Figure 3-1 
A Logitech QuickCam 
Orbit MP desktop 
webcam with face-
tracking features.

Perk Up Your Infrastructure with a Webcam  27
a tendency to walk or stand near your desk while you talk, the webcam will simply 
follow you. You can use a webcam designed for laptops on your desktop, but beware: 
these are typically designed to sit atop thin monitors and can be a bit difficult to keep 
stable on top of a CRT monitor.
Webcam Will Be Used with a Laptop Computer
If you travel often and want to use a webcam with your laptop computer, you want 
one that’s lightweight and easy to set up while you’re on the road. Some webcams 
are designed specifically for laptops—they are tiny enough to perch atop the edge 
of your monitor when your laptop is open, as shown in Figure 3-2. These sometimes 
don’t allow for much adjustability, however, and can be a bit distracting when you 
work, so you may want to go with a slightly larger one with adjustable features that 
can sit beside the laptop.
Figure 3-2 
Webcams for laptops 
are designed to perch 
on top of your laptop 
screen for easy use 
and portability.
When working with a laptop, it might be worthwhile to check out wireless 
webcams, too. If you purchase one, you won’t need to follow the instructions in this 
project that pertain to plugging the webcam into the USB port.
www.ebook3000.com

28  Project 3
Digital video cameras are now being produced that double as webcams. If you want to use one 
of these rather than a camera designed specifically for your computer, follow the instructions 
included with your digital video camera to be sure you have the proper connections and drivers 
installed.
Optimal Webcam Specifications
No matter which webcam you buy, there are some basic options that should not be 
compromised. Primary complaints about webcams involve the video—it’s too pixi-
lated or blurry. While this can sometimes be caused by broadband speed, even slower-
speed connections can be improved by using a webcam that has high video capture 
speed and resolution. We recommend the following minimum specifications:
1.3 pixels gross sensor resolution
CMOS sensor type
30 frames per second digital video capture speed
640×480 digital video capture resolution
1280×960 still image capture resolution
Built-in microphone
Webcams are typically USB-connected, but some newer ones are designed to work with 
FireWire, a connection that is faster than a USB connection. However, many computers do not 
have a FireWire port, so before you purchase your webcam, be sure to verify how it will connect 
to your computer. This illustration shows the FireWire port as a vertical port between two 
horizontal USB ports and two headphone ports:
Step 2: Install the Webcam
Once you have chosen a webcam, installation will go pretty quickly. Every camera 
has its own setup/installation CD, and you should follow the steps it outlines for 
your particular camera. Before you begin, however, you need to identify where your 
USB port is. If you’re using a laptop, the USB port is located on the side or back of the 
laptop case. On desktop systems, it is located at the back of the tower case, as shown 
in Figure 3-3, unless you have a newer system, in which case it may be located on the 
front of the computer case.
●
●
●
●
●
●
note
note

Perk Up Your Infrastructure with a Webcam  29
Next, confirm that your computer speakers are working. If you can hear a ding 
on your computer as an e-mail comes in or when you do something your comput-
er doesn’t like, they work. If you can’t hear a ding, follow the steps outlined next 
corresponding to your operating system.
Windows XP
Click the Start button and choose Settings | Control Panel.
Open the Sounds And Audio Devices Properties dialog box, shown in 
Figure 3-4.
On the Volume tab:
Be sure Mute is not checked.
Move the Device Volume slider to High.
Click the Advanced button under Device Volume. Check your Wave 
sound volume and be sure it is not muted. Close the Volume Control 
dialog box.
Click the Speaker Volume button. Move the Left and Right sliders to 
High. Click OK.
Click the Advanced button under Speaker Settings. Check to be sure your 
speaker setup is correct in the Speaker Setup drop-down box. Click OK.
1.
2.
3.
●
●
●
●
●
Figure 3-3 
Most webcams use 
a USB connector and 
port like the ones 
shown here on the 
back of this computer.
www.ebook3000.com

30  Project 3
On the Audio tab:
Click Volume under Sound Playback. Be sure nothing is muted in the 
Master Volume dialog box, as shown in Figure 3-5. Close the dialog 
box.
Click OK.
4.
●
●
Figure 3-4 
The first place to 
troubleshoot sound 
problems is in the 
Sounds And Audio 
Devices Properties 
dialog box, accessed 
from the Control 
Panel.
Figure 3-5 
Sometimes the Master 
Volume under the 
Audio tab isn’t muted 
or turned down.

Perk Up Your Infrastructure with a Webcam  31
You should have sound now. If not, continue troubleshooting in the Sounds and 
Audio Devices Properties dialog box.
Windows Vista
Click the Start button and choose Control Panel.
Double-click Sound.
On the Playback tab, select Speakers. Click Properties.
In the Speakers Properties dialog box, click Levels.
Check that the speaker icon is not muted.
Increase the sound if necessary by clicking and dragging the sound bar to 
the right.
Click OK.
Now, go ahead and insert your webcam setup/installation CD into your 
CD-ROM drive. If the setup program doesn’t start automatically in Windows XP or 
Windows Vista:
Click the Start button and choose Run.
Type d:\setup in the Run dialog box. If your CD-ROM drive is not on the 
D: drive, type in the correct drive letter with :\setup following it.
Follow the instructions in your camera setup program. 
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
1.
2.
3.
www.ebook3000.com

32  Project 3
Plug in your camera only when prompted. Plugging in the camera at the wrong time can cause a 
variety of problems.
Step 3: Test Your Webcam
Now that your webcam is installed, you need to make sure others can see you. One of 
the easiest ways to test this is to open your instant messaging program and go to the 
video test section, as shown in Figure 3-6. It’s usually located in the Tools or Options 
menu of messaging programs. In the Skype example shown here, the Video section 
allows you to click a button to test your webcam. When you click the button, a video 
window pops up. If you can see yourself, your camera is working.
Figure 3-6 
Most instant messaging 
programs allow you 
to instantly test your 
video and see what 
the person you are 
chatting with sees.
If you can’t see yourself, you need to do some troubleshooting.
Troubleshoot first within the instant messaging program to be sure you have fol-
lowed the correct steps to enable video in the program. If all those steps appear fine, 
you need to check your webcam properties, as described next based on operating 
system.
Windows XP
Double-click My Computer on your desktop.
Locate and select the icon for your webcam.
1.
2.
caution

Perk Up Your Infrastructure with a Webcam  33
Select Properties.
Many webcams have a Diagnostics section in the Properties dialog box. In 
Figure 3-7, Logitech’s Test Camera button is shown. When the button was 
clicked, the Test Successful dialog box appeared. If your test is not successful, 
a different dialog box would appear with prompts for proceeding through 
troubleshooting steps.
3.
4.
Figure 3-7 
Logitech uses a simple 
Test Camera button. 
Other manufacturers 
may call the diagnostics 
test something 
different.
Windows Vista
Click the Start button and choose Control Panel.
Select Classic View. Double-click Device Manager.
Expand Imaging Devices.
1.
2.
3.
www.ebook3000.com

34  Project 3
Double-click the icon for your webcam. In the General tab, check to see that 
Device Status says “This device is working properly.” If it has a different 
message, follow the instructions provided.
If absolutely everything fails (which is rare), uninstall the webcam and reinstall it. 
You may have missed a step in installation or something else may have gone wrong. 
If a reinstall does not work, contact your webcam manufacturer.
Step 4: Adjusting Your Webcam
Depending on the webcam you choose, you may be able to adjust features such as 
zoom, face tracking, brightness, color, contrast, flicker, image enhancement, and more. 
These features are often accessed through your webcam Properties dialog box or the 
Video section of your instant messaging program. In Figure 3-8, the Logitech Quick-
Cam PTZ Properties dialog box was opened through the Skype Options menu.
It’s worth taking a little time to walk through each of the features and make sure 
they are adjusted the way you like. Pay attention to items such as low light boost (this 
helps improve the picture if you are in a dimly lit room) and zoom. Use zoom if your 
camera is more than two feet from your face—let your colleagues see your lovely smile 
up close and personal. Now all you need to do is log onto your instant messaging 
program like the folks in Figure 3-9 and find someone to chat with—(almost) in 
person.
4.

Perk Up Your Infrastructure with a Webcam  35
Figure 3-8 
In this example, Zoom 
and Face Tracking 
features, as well as the 
camera’s direction, are 
all adjustable.
Figure 3-9 
Video calls add that 
personal touch when 
talking with colleagues 
or clients.
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank

37
Project 4
Set Up a 
Docking Station 
for Your Laptop
What You’ll Need
Operating system: Windows XP, Windows Vista
Software: None
Hardware: Docking station
Cost: $75 and up
Difficulty: Challenging
I
n today’s mobile society, many people are using laptop computers as a primary 
computer system. Then, they return home and copy documents to their desktop or 
use slow-moving synchronization programs to transfer documents back and forth 
and update calendars. Why would you do this when you can get rid of your desk-
top computer altogether and turn your laptop into a networked desktop workstation 
when you’re back at the office?
Docking stations, as shown in Figure 4-1, can help you stay organized by letting 
you hook up everything related to your laptop computer in one place, and allowing 
you to just slide your laptop computer into a single connector. Voilà! Your laptop com-
puter has just become a networked desktop workstation through the use of a single 
plug that connects your laptop to a keyboard, printer, network, and other devices. Un-
plug your laptop from the docking station and it becomes portable again. And, docking 
stations are compact, so they don’t take up a lot of room on your desk. 
You don’t have to get rid of that desktop computer, by the way—docking stations 
can be linked to both a desktop and a laptop for synchronization purposes. Once you 
find the docking station you want to use, it’s fairly easy to set it up and get going.
●
●
●
●
●
See a CNET video on setting up a docking station for your laptop at http://
diyoffice.cnet.com.
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

38  Project 4
Some manufacturers use terms such as “expansion base” or “base station” instead of “docking 
station.”
Step 1: Select a Docking Station
Most laptop manufacturers create docking stations for the laptop computers they sell, but 
proprietary docking stations can be expensive to purchase. Manufacturers of peripheral 
products produce universal docking stations like the one shown in Figure 4-2—products 
that work with a variety of laptops instead of just one brand. No matter which brand 
you choose, today’s docking stations are not the clunkers they were ten years ago—they 
Figure 4-1 
A docking station can 
turn your laptop 
computer into a 
desktop workstation 
with a single click.
Figure 4-2 
Universal docking 
stations work with 
many different laptop 
brands.
note

Set Up a Docking Station for Your Laptop  39
are typically slim, compact designs with plug-and-play connections and often include 
USB and Ethernet ports. Some also have monitor/video ports; the type and number of 
ports will vary by manufacturer and model.
You may hear the term “port replicator” when shopping for your docking station. These are 
similar to docking stations but typically contain fewer connections. For example, a port replica-
tor might not have an S-video jack or headphone jacks.
What to Look for in a Docking Station
Many laptops use a proprietary connector to dock with a docking station or port rep-
licator. Proprietary docking stations normally have all ports, including video, built 
in as pass-through devices. In addition, some docking stations have additional slots 
for add-on devices like video or sound cards—even hard drives. This might make it 
easier for you to use a docking station but can limit your options. If your laptop uses 
a USB port instead, it can most likely use a universal docking station and give you 
more options.
Look for the following when shopping for a docking station:
Compatibility with your laptop manufacturer Even when a docking sta-
tion says it is universal, there are still universal docking stations that do not 
work with all manufacturers. Triple-check before you buy and be sure the 
one you choose is guaranteed to be compatible with your laptop manufac-
turer, as well as your model.
Number and type of ports Do you just need a keyboard and mouse setup? 
Do you want to play video games on a 19-inch monitor? Do you want to 
synchronize programs between a desktop and laptop, or will you use this 
docking station solely with your laptop? Determine what you want to do, 
then look for a docking station with the flexibility and expandability to sup-
port your needs. The best ones offer extra ports and the ability to connect to 
LCD or plasma screens.
Price Docking stations vary in price from $75 on up. If budget is a concern 
for you, determine the type and number of ports you absolutely must have 
and work through your decision from there. It’s easy to get sidetracked by all 
the cool features as companies try to outperform one another.
Extras If you will be using the laptop as your primary computer, you need 
a docking station that offers keyboard adjustability options and the option to 
raise the laptop’s display to eye level. Don’t skimp on these two extras unless 
you are connecting to a desktop system that offers both.
Security If you can find it, get a docking station with electronic undocking 
features as well as physical ones. This will allow you to set security features 
with your operating system that prevent others from removing the laptop 
from its docking station.
●
●
●
●
●
tip
www.ebook3000.com

40  Project 4
Step 2: Install the Docking Station
You have done the hardest part of this project by shopping for and finding the right 
docking station for your needs. Some docking stations have very specific instructions 
but most follow these basic steps:
Shut down your laptop computer and unplug all peripheral attachments: 
power cord, mouse, cameras—anything that is attached to your laptop 
should be removed and you should be holding only the case.
On the back or side of your laptop, find the USB connector that you will use 
to connect to the docking station. You may need to slide a panel open—many 
laptops have sliding panels that protect their ports. Figure 4-3 shows an 
example of how a docking station and laptop work together.
Plug in your laptop to the docking station. The first time you do this, pay 
close attention to the guide pins that are typically provided with docking 
stations. Those will line up with your laptop’s connectors. You should hear 
a click when the connection is made.
Plug in the docking station’s power cord.
Attach the peripherals you unplugged earlier.
Turn on your laptop computer.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Figure 4-3 
This Kensington note-
book docking station 
sits below the laptop.

Set Up a Docking Station for Your Laptop  41
If the Add New Hardware Wizard dialog box opens, follow the prompts it provides. While your 
peripherals should all work automatically, there may be some laptops that need to perform an 
extra step or two.
Step 3: Use the Docking Station
Most docking station and laptop combinations are hot-pluggable, meaning you can 
have the laptop running when you plug it in. Read the instructions that came with 
your particular docking station to determine how your model works. It’s never a bad 
idea to be on the safe side and shut down the laptop computer. Remove it from the 
docking station for a few minutes, then plug it back in and turn it on. If everything is 
working fine, you’re ready to hit the road confidently. If you experience any trouble at 
all, go to the docking station instructions and be sure you have followed all the steps 
it recommends.
When attached to a docking station, your laptop will be running off AC power and should begin 
charging the battery. When you remove the laptop, it will switch to battery power unless you 
plug the power cord into an AC outlet.
Step 4: Security Considerations
If you’re concerned that unauthorized people might remove your laptop from 
its docking station, there are some security precautions you can take if your docking 
station has electronic undocking features:
Check manufacturer guidelines to see whether you can assign a password to 
prevent anyone from undocking your laptop from its station.
Use an antitheft device, such as a security cable. Some of these have alarms 
that can scare away would-be thieves.
In Windows XP, you can enable a security policy (shown in Figure 4-4) that 
requires the user to log on before undocking a portable computer from its 
docking station. By default, a logon is not required, so you must disable the 
default.
You must be logged on as an administrator to change security policy options.
Windows XP
To apply security features in Windows XP, follow these steps:
Click the Start button and choose Programs or All Programs.
Select Administrative Tools and click Local Policies | Security Options in the 
left task pane.
●
●
●
1.
2.
note
note
note
www.ebook3000.com

42  Project 4
In the right task pane, double-click Devices: Allow Undock Without Having 
To Log On.
In the Devices: Allow Undock Without Having to Log On Properties dialog 
box, select Disabled, as shown in Figure 4-4.
Click Apply.
Be aware that someone could still try to physically remove your laptop from its docking station, 
even if passwords or logon procedures are required. If this happens, your laptop could be irrepa-
rably damaged—assuming, of course, you retrieve the laptop from the person who removed it. If 
you don’t retrieve it, it might make you happy to know they may never be able to use the laptop!
Windows Vista
To apply security features in Windows Vista, follow these steps:
Click the Start button and type Local Security Policy in the Start Search 
box.
Click Local Security Policy under Programs.
3.
4.
5.
1.
2.
Figure 4-4 
Windows XP offers 
the option of requiring 
users to log onto the 
laptop before the 
laptop can be 
physically removed 
from a docking station.
note

Set Up a Docking Station for Your Laptop  43
Expand Local Policies in the left navigation pane. Click Security Options.
In the right task pane, double-click Devices: Allow Undock Without Having 
To Log On.
In the Allow Undock Without Having To Log On Properties dialog box, 
select Disabled.
Click Apply.
Click OK.
Now that you know how to install a docking station, you’ll wonder why you 
never used one before. The amount of time savings alone is worth the cost of these 
devices, and when you routinely work in and out of the home, every minute counts.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank

45
Project 5
Turn Your 
Monitor
 into a TV
What You’ll Need:
Operating system: None
Software: None
Hardware: Computer monitor, video source, external TV tuner box, 
speakers
Cost: $99 and up
Difficulty: Challenging
T
he price has dropped on personal computers so much that it’s often cheaper 
now to purchase a new system with a monitor than one without since so many 
companies now include monitors as enticement. As a result, you may have an 
extra monitor lying around. It may be a perfectly good one but if you decide to store 
it rather than attach it to your new system for a multiple-monitor setup, you could be 
wasting a great opportunity. Why not turn your old monitor into a television for your 
office?
You can do it pretty quickly by adding a few items to your monitor and, depending 
upon the monitor you have, you could very well wind up with a better picture than the 
one on the TV in your living room. Not everyone needs all the hardware listed above, 
by the way. Take a read through this project before making any purchases; you might 
just have everything you need hiding in a closet. There is no computer attached to 
this—just the monitor.
If you prefer to add television to your computer rather than to a stand-alone monitor, those 
instructions are included in Step 5 of this project. Review Steps 1 to 3 to be sure you have all 
bases covered, then skip to Step 5.
●
●
●
●
●
note
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

46  Project 5
Step 1: Check Your Monitor
If the monitor you have has built-in speakers and standard TV inputs such as an 
S-video or composite input, you may not need any additional hardware. You can just 
plug it into an audio-visual source such as your cable box or satellite dish if it has 
the same connections, and start watching your favorite shows. See Figure 5-1 for an 
example of a monitor with these ports.
Figure 5-1 
Most older monitors 
only have Super VGA 
connections. If the 
back of yours looks 
similar to this, you 
need to purchase an 
external TV tuner.
Most older monitors, however, just have SVGA connections and rely on external 
speakers. This means you do need to purchase an external TV tuner and connection, 
and may want to upgrade your speaker system. Don’t worry if your monitor only has 
a VGA connection, by the way. Regular TV signals come through at the standard VGA 
resolution of 640×480 pixels, so you’re not missing out on anything in the picture you 
receive.
If your monitor does not have built-in speakers or a connection for speakers, be sure your tuner 
box does. You can plug in speakers (sometimes just one) to the tuner box for sound.
Step 2: Check and Connect Your Speakers
If your monitor has built-in speakers, you’re set. If not, you’ll want to obtain external 
speakers for the monitor like the ones shown in Figure 5-2 or hook up the monitor 
and tuner box into a stereo system. These don’t need to be expensive; just basic speak-
ers that make noise will work fine. After all, you’re not setting up a surround-sound 
system here—are you? If you are, then purchase speakers accordingly and just make 
sure they will work with your monitor and tuner.
Connect your speakers to your monitor and move on to Step 3.
tip

Turn Your Monitor into a TV  47
Step 3: Select a TV Tuner Box
External TV tuners are just small boxes that contain the same audio-visual ports 
that televisions have. These boxes attach to your monitor and the television signal 
source—think of a tuner as sort of an intermediary between your monitor and TV 
signal. It converts the signal from the source to a signal that the monitor can under-
stand. You can hook up DVD or VCR players to most tuners, as well as video game 
systems.
If you need to purchase an external TV tuner box, you need to decide whether to 
go with an analog or digital box. With any TV tuner box, you want to be able to adjust 
your picture for brightness, contrast, saturation, gamma, and sharpness.
If you plan on hooking up a VCR or DVD player, you want a tuner box that has 
at least composite and S-video inputs. External tuner boxes typically work with both 
LCD and CRT monitors, and newer ones are even compatible with plasma and pro-
jection displays.
Composite
video input
Left and right
audio input
S-Video/Component
video input
A/V IN
S - IN
EARPHONE
Earphone
jack
Figure 5-2 
External speakers like 
these from Logitech 
should be connected 
to your monitor 
before connecting to 
your tuner.
www.ebook3000.com

48  Project 5
Internal tuners are available as well if you prefer to have your desktop computer workstation 
monitor double as a television. These are PCI-card based and deliver most of the same features 
as the external tuner boxes. Because most home office users already have enough happening 
on their desktop workstations, this project focused on stand-alone monitors and external 
tuner boxes.
When to Go with an Analog Tuner
Use an analog tuner when you have a standard cable or satellite box or typically only 
watch VHF and UHF stations. This type of tuner also works well with video game 
consoles and VCR or DVD players. Some VCRs also act as analog tuners—it might be 
worth checking out an old VCR to see if yours could double as your TV tuner. How-
ever, they don’t always have S-video output, which you’ll need if you want to use a 
DVD player.
When to Go with a Digital Tuner
Go with a digital tuner like the one shown in Figure 5-3 when you have a digital an-
tenna, cable, or satellite connection. DTV and HDTV all come through a digital con-
nection, for example, and many digital tuners now support those signals as well. Not 
all do, however, so check carefully before you put down your money.
Figure 5-3 
Digital tuner boxes 
like this one from Aver 
Media receive DTV 
and HDTV signals.
External tuner boxes usually come with remote controls because the boxes are typically stored 
behind the monitor, which makes them hard to access once everything is connected. Plus, these 
boxes don’t have room for numeric buttons (for channel-changing) or other television features 
such a volume controls and menu navigation buttons.
note
note

Turn Your Monitor into a TV  49
Step 4: Connect the Tuner 
to Your Monitor and Speakers
Well, here’s the tough part of this project. Let’s take a look at the actual connections 
you’ll need to make on your tuner. As this illustration shows, you will be inserting 
the tuner’s power adaptor, the monitor, and the cable from the cable or satellite box 
or antenna. There will be other input and output options, but unless you’re doing 
something beyond watching television, you won’t need to worry about those.
Always follow manufacturer instructions, of course, but essentially things will go 
like this:
Take the tuner out of the box.
Plug the computer monitor into it as shown in Figure 5-4.
1.
2.
Figure 5-4 
The monitor plugs 
directly into the 
tuner box.
www.ebook3000.com

50  Project 5
Plug the tuner into the cable or satellite box or television antenna using 
a standard TV cable, as shown in Figure 5-5.
3.
Figure 5-5 
A standard TV cable 
plugs into the tuner 
from the television 
source.
Plug the tuner into a power source.
Turn on the tuner.
Turn on your monitor.
Start watching television (see Figure 5-6). You might need to use the remote 
control for your cable or satellite box as well as the remote control for the TV 
tuner.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Figure 5-6 
You can be watching 
your shows within 
minutes.

Turn Your Monitor into a TV  51
There might be a lot of extra cords in the manufacturer’s box that you are tempted 
to play with. Those are for your DVD player or games and other peripheral devices, 
and may even be to connect a PC to the tuner. You don’t need any of them to watch 
plain old television, so don’t let them confuse you as you set things up.
If you want to watch DVDs or videos or play games, just plug those peripheral items into the 
tuner box and turn them on. There are no special attachments required.
Step 5: Connect the Tuner to Your Computer
If you prefer to have television as another feature on your desktop (or laptop) com-
puter, there are just a few additional steps in the process. Your computer can be on 
while you perform these steps:
Take the tuner out of the box.
Remove the monitor cable from the back of the computer. Leave it attached 
to the monitor, though.
Plug the VGA cable into the tuner box.
Plug the other end of the VGA cable into the computer where you removed 
the monitor cable.
Plug the computer monitor cable into the tuner box (VGA out).
Plug the speaker out cable from the tuner into the line in jack on your com-
puter.
Plug the tuner into the cable or satellite box or television antenna using a 
standard TV cable.
Plug the tuner into a power source.
Turn on the tuner.
Start watching television. You might need to use the remote control for your 
cable or satellite box as well as the remote control for the TV tuner.
If you don’t want the television picture to fill an entire monitor screen while you work, choose 
a tuner that offers picture-in-picture.
Other Considerations
If you choose to use a CRT monitor, check the tuner to see the output resolution 
and refresh rates (the number of times, or “frequency,” that the screen is redrawn 
each minute) it can produce and try to match the tuner’s rates to your monitor’s 
rates as closely as possible. Refresh rates differ depending on the resolution and most 
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
note
tip
www.ebook3000.com

52  Project 5
decrease as resolutions increase. The higher the refresh rate, the more clearly the pic-
ture will appear.
Some older monitors can only refresh at 60 Hz. This can provide a picture but can 
also cause a noticeable flicker. The flicker can cause eye strain and be an annoyance. 
Refresh rates of 72 Hz and above are considered “flicker free.” Remember, even if 
the monitor can get to a higher resolution and refresh rate, the tuner has to be able to 
produce a picture at that resolution and rate also.
LCD monitors produce pictures differently than CRTs so there is no flicker. How-
ever, LCDs have an inherent property that is called “motion-blur.” Each pixel or dot 
on an LCD screen is produced by lighting a specific cell or cells, which creates a 
sharper edge than a CRT pixel and makes an LCD picture crisper and the text easier 
to read. The drawback is that the cells in some of the earlier LCDs weren’t able to shut 
off or change colors very quickly. So when something on the screen moved, the ob-
ject tended to blur because the pixels or cells “faded” to the new color in the object’s 
previous position. Newer LCD cells have become quicker at turning off or changing 
to a new color due to both enhancements in LCD technology and software algorithm 
improvements, making the blur almost unnoticeable.

53
Project 6
Create an
 e-Shipping 
Center
What You’ll Need
Internet access: Yes
Software: None
Hardware: None
Cost: $0
Difficulty: Challenging
W
hen you work from home, you can’t take advantage of services that you 
would normally find at a standard business location. Things that you take 
for granted in a corporate environment—cafeteria, receptionist, shipping 
dock—are all part of your responsibility now. Since your cafeteria is probably your 
kitchen and the receptionist is now you, it’s probably also time to get better organized 
with your own e-shipping department.
You don’t have to send or receive much mail to take advantage of this project. It 
comes in handy whether you make one trip to the post office each year or trot down 
there daily. Just avoiding one lengthy stand in line is probably worth the time and effort 
it will take to set up your e-shipping center.
These centers work by taking advantage of the online services offered by the U.S. 
Post Office as well as other shipping companies, such as UPS and FedEx. You can print 
postage online, have boxes and other supplies delivered directly to your door, and 
arrange for front porch pickups whenever you need them.
An e-shipping center is helpful because you can typically log into your account 
from anywhere at any time, and there is no special software to install or update. 
Everything is handled on the carrier’s web site. Almost all of the carrier’s normal services 
are available to you when using online options, and the web sites are designed to make 
it easy for you to compare costs vs. delivery times per service. You can also obtain 
shipping reports, track deliveries, and store contact information in an online address 
book.
●
●
●
●
●
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

54  Project 6
You only need Internet access to get started with this project—and a willingness 
to get your office a little bit more electronically organized.
The cost to set up an e-shipping center is a big fat zero. But actual shipping, of course, is not free!
Step 1: Determine Your Shipping Needs
Most shipping providers are fairly similar, but since every home office has different 
needs, you should do some comparison shopping. Minor differences in address books 
or access to shipping records might be a major headache if you don’t understand how 
those differences will impact you.
No matter which provider you choose, there are several benefits to setting up an 
e-shipping center in your home office:
Increased productivity You can ship and track from any desktop with an 
Internet connection, and you never have to hop in the car to send an over-
night letter or package again.
Improved client communication Automatic e-mail notices are sent for you 
to alert others when a package has shipped and what the tracking number is.
Error reduction The automatic address books improve shipping accuracy.
To make some determinations about the type of services you need from an 
e-shipping vendor, ask yourself: What’s the largest number of contacts I might pos-
sibly need to include in my address book? How long do I want to access the vendor’s 
shipping records? Do I send a lot of large boxes or overnight deliveries?
Vendors vary with the numbers of contacts that they allow you to maintain in 
their online address books; some are limited, some are not. Shipping records are typi-
cally kept on the vendor’s web site, so vendors make records available online only 
for a limited amount of time because of space limitations. Shipping large boxes or 
items requires that your e-shipping vendor have a strong ground-shipping program. 
Finally, vendors vary in the options they offer for overnight deliveries. These options 
are discussed in more detail in the following section.
Take a few minutes to take a look back at the last 3 months and determine what 
you spent on shipping, too. If you spend large enough amounts on shipping on a 
regular basis, it could qualify you for a discount with some vendors.
Step 1: Learn About e-Shipping Options
No matter what you ship, as long as it’s legal and not flammable, you’ll find a carrier 
to ship it. Each carrier, however, offers slightly different e-shipping services, so it can 
literally pay to take the time to do your homework. You’ll want to consider the ship-
ping services provided, along with the types of products that can be ordered online 
and the types of tools the carrier provides to make it easy for you to track your ship-
ments and related costs online.
●
●
●
note

Create an e-Shipping Center  55
Shipping Services
While there are local shipping services available, the four heavyweights in the industry 
are national carriers everyone has heard of. I’ll be referring to these throughout this 
project since they are the most likely choice for most people. Here are the national car-
riers, along with some basic information about the services they provide. All except the 
U.S. Post Office will ship freight (packages typically weighing more than 150 pounds).
DHL Web Shipping, www.dhl.com Arrange for pickup, print shipping 
labels on your printer, track shipments online, notify recipients via e-mail, 
save up to 300 customer addresses, and access shipping records for 99 days. 
DHL account required; no software to download.
FedEx Ship Manager, www.fedex.com Arrange for pickup, print shipping 
labels on your printer, track shipments online, notify recipients via e-mail, 
save up to 300 customer addresses, and access shipping records for 45 days. 
FedEx account required; no software to download.
UPS Internet Shipping, www.ups.com Arrange for pickup, print shipping 
labels on your printer, track shipments online, notify recipients via e-mail, 
save up to 2000 customer addresses, and access shipping records. UPS ID 
and credit card or UPS account required; no software to download. The UPS 
resource page for small business owners is shown in Figure 6-1.
●
●
●
Figure 6-1 
UPS Internet Ship-
ping has a variety of 
resources for small 
business owners, as 
do DHL, FedEx, and 
the USPS.
www.ebook3000.com

56  Project 6
USPS Shipping Assistant, www.usps.com/shippingassistant This is the 
U.S. Post Office’s service. Arrange for pickup, print shipping labels on your 
printer, track shipments online, notify recipients via e-mail, save customer 
addresses, and access shipping records on your own computer. Accepts post-
cards and letters. Free software download and user ID is required.
Packages heavier than 70 pounds cannot be mailed through the USPS.
Shipping Products
When you choose a shipping service, consider the types of shipping products it of-
fers, too. If one service offers free boxes, for example, but charges you more for ship-
ping than the next carrier, then perhaps the free boxes aren’t such a great deal for your 
needs. Products will vary based on the carrier, but here is a compilation of the types of 
products offered. You can order all of these online, depending upon the carrier.
Free materials Depending upon the service, you can ask for free boxes and 
other shipping materials, such as overnight envelopes, tubes, and boxes. 
These free boxes are delivered to your front door by several carriers.
Flat-rate boxes You can order most priority and express boxes and enve-
lopes ahead of time with a flat-rate product. This eliminates the need for 
printing postage on your printer and sometimes offers a better rate than 
standard shipping options.
Prepaid shipping You can purchase envelopes and cards with postage al-
ready affixed. This is very useful if you typically send items of the same size 
and weight.
Free stickers and labels Having these on hand saves a trip to the carrier 
just to grab a small “urgent” or “signature required” sticker or something 
similar.
Items shipped in boxes should have enough room for complete cushioning around the item.
Shipping Tools
Since this e-shipping center will be run from your computer and your home office, 
the online tools offered by a shipping company should be carefully considered. For 
example, printing labels or postage online can save you a lot of time. Be careful: some 
of these services are free with certain carriers, whereas other carriers charge a fee.
Here is a sample of the online tools offered by different carriers, and what they do:
Postage calculation Allows you to select the type of service for your ship-
ping needs and calculate the postage required based on the size of the item 
and type of service chosen.
●
●
●
●
●
●
tip
tip

Create an e-Shipping Center  57
Print mailing labels Allows you to print mailing labels directly from your 
printer.
Print postage Lets you purchase postage labels with and without postage 
and print it out on your printer.
The USPS offers Customized Postage through several vendors, which lets you add your own 
unique images and photos to your postage.
Tracking and delivery confirmation Lets you verify the delivery of your 
shipment online.
Rates and transit times By entering the weight and size of an item, as well 
as the delivery location, allows you to determine the postage rate as well as 
the expected delivery date and time for your shipment.
Order supplies Allows you to order shipping and packing supplies online 
for delivery to your front door.
Billing and payment Allows you to view and pay shipping bills online. 
Some carriers also offer rebilling and invoicing services as well.
Return services Lets your customers return items to you by completing an 
online form with their web browser. You can also preprint return labels when 
you know the recipient will have to return something to you.
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
tip
www.ebook3000.com

58  Project 6
E-mail notices Allows you to request that e-mail notices be sent to anyone 
you like—including yourself! These help recipients stay in the loop concern-
ing delivery.
View, edit, or void shipments Allows you to see everything about your 
shipment online, and make changes as needed.
There will be other niche tools offered by carriers, but these are ones most com-
monly used for an e-shipping center.
If you mail a lot of items through the USPS, you might want to consider a postage meter to help 
speed up mailing. The meter is a separate postage printing machine placed in your office; it 
prints postage directly onto your mail or onto an approved label.
Insurance
Should you insure your shipments? Good question. Every shipment is different, and 
every carrier has different insurance options. They also vary in the types of delivery 
confirmation services they offer, although every carrier will offer at least a basic de-
livery tracking option.
If you are sending valuable merchandise through the mail, it might be worth 
the money to insure it against loss, damage, or theft. Remember, though, that you 
are only covering the item for the actual value—insurance won’t cover any extra ex-
penses involved in tracking the item or losses involved in a delivery that didn’t make 
it on time.
Insurance can typically be purchased for a reasonable cost (the USPS, for exam-
ple, offers insurance on items up to $500 for about $6.)
FedEx often runs online specials to save you money as incentive for using its online shipping 
services.
●
●
note
tip

Create an e-Shipping Center  59
Step 2: Create Your Profile
Once you decide upon a carrier, you need to create a profile or account with the 
carrier. This is pretty simple stuff; they will want your name, address, phone, pay-
ment information (so they can charge you for the services), and other basic business 
details.
Just fill in the blanks as the carrier instructs. You may be required to enter credit 
or credit card information to establish an account.
Once you enter this information and your account is created, the online system 
retains all the information you enter for shipments for at least a limited time. You also 
have access to all the online services offered by the carrier.
Step 3: Send Your Shipment
No matter which vendor you choose, there are some basic steps to follow every time 
you ship something.
Choose the Best Service for Your Shipment
Every shipment deserves the right service, so you want to find the best way to get 
your shipment to its destination on time. Even if you decide to use one carrier as your 
primary shipping provider, when you have urgent or bulky deliveries, it’s a good 
idea to do a quick check online with a couple of carriers to make sure you’re getting 
the best rate and delivery time for your shipment.
www.ebook3000.com

60  Project 6
Each carrier offers an online service finder that helps you determine the right ser-
vice for that carrier, and lets you find information quickly and easily. Don’t be afraid 
to switch carriers once in awhile, even if you are convinced your chosen carrier is the 
best. You might be pleasantly surprised at new options a carrier is providing, or that 
your carrier’s delivery time can be substantially beat by another carrier.
Use the Address Book
Online address books are provided by every carrier and are extremely helpful in sav-
ing time. With any carrier, however, delivery is only as good as the address provided. 
If your online address book is not up-to-date with proper names and addresses, your 
shipment can be delayed. Be sure to do a quick check of every recipient, especially if 
you haven’t sent a package to that recipient for some time.
Adding new addresses to an online address book is very similar to adding them 
to your e-mail address book—name, address, and phone number are required, but 
beyond that, not much else is necessary, as you can see in Figure 6-2. You can add, 
edit, or delete contacts as needed. Each time you enter a new contact to create a label, 
the online address book will keep the information and store it for a limited amount of 
time (at least 90 days).
You can also keep a Ship From address online so that you don’t need to keep fill-
ing in your return address information. Editing a Ship From address is easy and can 
be done with every individual shipment if you like, but the overall concept is to have 
one Ship From address that remains constant so that you aren’t continually spending 
time on updates.

Create an e-Shipping Center  61
Creating online labels is very simple when you use the address book, too. The 
required information is dropped into the correct fields for you when you select a de-
livery address as long as you remember to mark the Save In Address Box check box, 
as shown in Figure 6-3. All you need to do is give the address a quick check the next 
time you use that address, in case information has changed.
Before you print a shipping label, you will be given a chance to review the label to 
ensure its accuracy. You will also have a chance to cancel the label completely before 
printing it. It’s a good idea to print a sample label; most carriers offer this option so 
you can verify that your printer is able to print the label properly on the paper. It’s a 
good idea to print two labels (one without postage) if your carrier doesn’t offer pack-
ing slips. You can slip the second label into the package itself just in case the exterior 
label becomes damaged or unreadable.
Figure 6-2 
Each carrier offers 
easy-to-use online 
address books.
www.ebook3000.com

62  Project 6
Figure 6-3 
Checking Save In 
Address Book keeps 
the delivery address 
and contact informa-
tion in your online 
address book.

Create an e-Shipping Center  63
Some carriers offer the option of importing address books or spreadsheets into the online 
address book.
Prepare the Item for Shipment
If you can’t use a standard box or envelope from your carrier, use a new box when-
ever possible to pack your items. The more often a box is used, the more it loses its 
shape and ability to protect your item. Any box should be free of punctures, rips, 
tears, or other damage. Every box should have a maximum gross weight printed on 
it somewhere; don’t exceed that weight!
You should also be sure that previous labels or other previous shipment details 
are removed or at least hidden (use a big, thick black marker to cover old address-
es) so that the carrier doesn’t become confused about where the item should be 
delivered.
When you enter package information online (see Figure 6-4), you need to be as 
accurate as possible. Just because you underestimate the size or weight of a package 
doesn’t mean the carrier won’t come back to you for the extra postage required—or 
worse, ask your recipient for the extra postage.
Figure 6-4 
Package information is 
easily entered online.
tip
www.ebook3000.com

64  Project 6
Special Guidelines
If you are shipping sensitive materials, be sure to follow the guidelines on your carri-
er’s web site. Electronic media, for example, can potentially be damaged if not packed 
properly. Each carrier will have different guidelines for different types of items.
Heavy packages also have special guidelines. If the package isn’t heavy enough 
to qualify for freight shipment but is still heavy (over 70 pounds or so), then you need 
to take extra care in preparing the item for shipment. Ideally, heavy items should be 
placed in boxes with stitched or stapled construction. Some carriers require the use of 
“heavy package” stickers to warn delivery drivers of the weight.
Freight shipments have completely different guidelines. Depending upon the 
shipment, you may be required to place your shipment on a pallet. If so, you are 
charged by the pallet instead of by the box. If you aren’t sure whether your shipment 
requires the use of a pallet, contact the carrier’s customer service.
UPS has strength guidelines for boxes posted on its web site.
Schedule a Pickup
Scheduling a pickup is a pretty simple process no matter which vendor you use. 
While you can certainly deliver your packages to your vendor, you might want to go 
the next step and take advantage of this convenience.
DHL Enables you to schedule pickups for the same or next day. $3 per 
package is charged and an account with DHL is required (www.dhl.com.)
FedEx Enables you to schedule Express pickups for the same or next day; 
FedEx Ground and FedEx Home Delivery will schedule pickups for the next 
day and up to two weeks in advance. Freight services are available. Fees start 
at $4 per package and a FedEx user ID is required(www.fedex.com.) 
UPS Offers same-day, next-day, and other scheduled pickups for all of its 
package delivery services. Up to 30 total UPS Ground and UPS 3 Day Select 
packages can be included in a single pickup. Between $2 and $4 is charged 
per package, depending upon the service selected, although extra charges 
could apply on weekends. Freight services are available, and anyone with 
a credit card can use the pickup services. Go to www.ups.com/pickup.
USPS Offers Carrier Pickup and Pickup On Demand Service. Carrier Pick-
up is free. You can schedule the service for the next postal day and include 
any number of packages in a single pickup. Anyone can use this service on-
line, actually. All that’s needed is the address so that the request can be sent 
to the proper mail carrier. Pickup On Demand costs $13.25 but allows you to 
send an unlimited number of packages in a single pickup. At least one pack-
age must be sent Priority Mail or Express Mail in either service to qualify 
the pickup, but you can include other letters and packages in the pickup. 
Same-day requests can be made and requests can be scheduled up to six 
days in advance as well. Both services can be set up online at www.usps
.com/pickup.
●
●
●
●
tip

Create an e-Shipping Center  65
If you primarily send packages locally, search the Yellow Pages for a local delivery service. You’ll 
often get better rates than using a national carrier.
Other Considerations
There are a few other things to consider when setting up an e-shipping center. For ex-
ample, if you’re ordering lots of plain boxes that must be purchased, consider ordering 
them online from a third-party vendor. Dozens of vendors are available and offer stan-
dard cartons, mailing boxes, tubes, mailing bags, and more online. Papermart.com, for 
example, offers nearly 800 different sizes of corrugated boxes (see Figure 6-5).
Figure 6-5 
Numerous online 
stores offer boxes and 
other shipping materi-
als at a discount and in 
bulk, including Paper 
Mart, whose web site 
is shown here.
tip
www.ebook3000.com

66  Project 6
If you do a lot of bulk mailings, be aware that the USPS requires a permit for bulk mailings. You 
can obtain the permit online. Actual bulk mailing labels require the use of a postage meter.
International Shipping
This chapter focused on domestic services but there may be occasions when you need 
to ship items internationally. Before you do, check with your carrier to be sure you 
understand its procedures. All four carriers mentioned in this chapter can handle in-
ternational shipping on various levels, but some may be more practical for you than 
others.
For example, if an international customer needs to send an item back to you, DHL 
requires that you have a separate account set up to handle the return. Other carriers, 
such as FedEx, do not. Depending upon your needs and requirements, there may be 
other international factors that determine the carrier you choose. You may find that 
you want to use one carrier for domestic shipping and a second for international 
shipping.
Every single carrier mentioned here is anxious for your business. It’s worth tak-
ing the time to look into the options they provide if you regularly mail items that 
require more than a stamp and a quick jaunt to the mailbox out front.
tip

Part II
Take It On
 The Road
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank

69
Project 7
Get and Send
 E-mail Anywhere
What You’ll Need:
Operating system: Windows XP, Windows Vista
Software: None
Hardware: Personal digital assistant
Internet or cellular connection: Yes
Cost: $0 to $40
Difficulty: Easy
I 
know, you’re addicted to e-mail. You want to check it all the time to make sure you 
haven’t missed an urgent note from a client or your boss, and you want to send 
e-mails to show you are connected and responsive. This addiction is shared by mil-
lions these days—now that cell phones let us talk and send messages from anywhere 
a cell phone signal exists, we want to go to the next level with e-mail, too.
You don’t need a twelve-step program for this addiction; you just need to know 
how to get and send e-mail no matter where you are. There are two pieces to this puz-
zle: you need a personal digital assistant (PDA) or a laptop, and you need to set up the 
PDA or laptop to send and receive e-mail. The PDA must be cell- or wireless-enabled.
With these two pieces in hand, you can be on the golf course and still working (it’s 
true; my friend Joli does this all the time!) with no one the wiser. Let’s face it, working 
from home has its benefits. One of those is freedom of movement—and if your move-
ment happens to be away from your desk, that doesn’t mean anyone else has to know.
The price of smartphones dropped drastically in 2006, making them a reasonable purchase for 
home offices. Products with reduced prices include BlackBerry Pearl, BlackJack, Nokia E62, and 
the Treo 680.
●
●
●
●
●
●
tip
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

70  Project 7
Step 1: Learn about PDAs
You’ve seen them. They are sitting around at Starbucks having coffee and typing 
furiously on a tiny device, confident and carefree. They are enjoying their work, 
and there is no reason you can’t have one of those little devices, too. Personal digital 
assistants come in all shapes and sizes these days. They are handheld devices that 
started out as simple organizers in the 1990s but have evolved into devices that boast 
color touch screens, audio, Internet access, and wireless capabilities. It’s literally com-
puting functionality on the go.
Today, the devices becoming most popular are smartphones—mobile phones that 
send and receive e-mail as well as offer computing features such as word process-
ing, spreadsheets, web browsers, and cell phone capabilities. Many people, however, 
prefer to use a separate cell phone with their PDA—they might use a BlackBerry or 
Treo, which have full keyboards as well as touchscreen input. The most current PDAs, 
such as the one shown in Figure 7-1, have an infrared port for connectivity and/or 
Bluetooth wireless capabilities. The use of PDAs is growing, with the most popular 
PDAs able to run either Windows Mobile, RIM BlackBerry, or Palm-based operating 
systems. Heck, you can even record your favorite television shows on some PDAs! 
That shows you how advanced these items have become since the early days of con-
tact and calendar management.
Figure 7-1 
T-Mobile MDA 
smartphone
If you’re doing a lot of work on large documents, you need a PDA that offers 
plenty of random access memory (RAM)—say, 64 to 128MB. If you just want to stick 
with calendars and reminders and a few e-mails, you’ll probably be okay with 32 MB 
of RAM. Oh—always keep an extra battery on hand, too. There’s nothing quite like 
running out of battery juice just before you hit Send.

Get and Send E-mail Anywhere  71
You’ll hear a lot of different terms for PDAs because a lot of different companies 
make them and want you to have their marketing phrase in your head. Pocket PC, for 
example, is a Windows Mobile PDA—but it’s not a special kind of PDA.
Many PDAs have e-mail software preloaded, but if yours doesn’t, you will need 
to add it. Typically, mobile phones and PDAs support POP3/IMAP services, methods 
that allow users to access e-mail from many different sources.
Apple’s iPhone can also be used to get and send e-mail through Internet connections.
How PDAs Receive Data and E-mail
There are two primary methods for receiving e-mail on a PDA: real-time over the air 
and direct connection. Real-time access lets you connect directly to your e-mail ac-
count from your PDA. PDAs that use Pocket PC operating systems need ActiveSync 
software, which is typically included with your PDA. Direct connections download 
your e-mail from your PC onto your PDA; any replies or new messages you create on 
the PDA will be sent the next time you sync your device back to the PC. Data synchro-
nization, or syncing as it’s more commonly known, is the transmission of data to keep 
information current in two separate places. Syncing can be done in four ways:
Through a cradle connected to a serial or USB port on your computer
By an infra-red light beam
Over a telephone modem
Through a wireless or Bluetooth connection
In this project, we’ll show you how to get your e-mail through a wireless 
connection.
Sprint announced plans to launch the largest mobile wireless network (WiMax) in the 
United States by the end of 2007.
Step 2: Create a Wireless Connection 
to the Internet for Your PDA
When you create a wireless connection to the Internet, you will likely need to pay 
for the service through your PDA provider. For example, the T-Mobile MDA smart-
phone that will be used in this project requires the addition of Internet services from 
T-Mobile for about $30 a month. That can be a bit pricey, but if you’re on the road a lot 
and require real-time access to your e-mail, it’s a useful service to have.
More than 300 U.S. cities provide free or inexpensive wireless networks that run citywide. 
If yours is one of them, you won’t need to hunt for a Wi-Fi hotspot again.
●
●
●
●
tip
tip
tip
www.ebook3000.com

72  Project 7
Contact your service provider to set up the Internet services you need for your 
PDA. This can often be done online—go to your provider’s web site and see if you can 
add it that way. T-Mobile, for example, allows you to add its Internet services package 
to your account online and then uploads the required software to your phone auto-
matically. You shouldn’t need to perform any setup or configuration tasks to get the 
Internet access, but you will need to initially enable it on your PDA using your service 
provider’s instructions.
By the way, some of these Internet service packages include hotspot access, so 
you can use your laptop computer at wireless hotspots wherever you are. This might 
also include the ability to get certain instant messaging programs on your PDA, too. 
Other service providers have very simple packages for a few dollars a month that 
only provide limited Internet access; be certain that you understand exactly what’s 
being offered before you sign up.
Different packages work with different e-mail accounts. Be certain the one you sign up for will 
handle your account (Comcast, AOL, Earthlink, Microsoft Exchange, etc.)Both Windows XP and 
Windows Vista will work easily with most provider’s Internet services packages.
Step 3: Set Up E-mail on a PDA
Mobile phone numbers often come with assigned e-mail addresses. If your PDA has 
this, you can already send and receive e-mail messages from anyone else with an 
e-mail address. This is a completely separate process from setting up your PDA to 
receive e-mail.
tip

Get and Send E-mail Anywhere  73
The process addressed in this project involves a direct connection to your regular 
e-mail inbox and outbox—the one that sits on your office computer and that you use 
every day. Different phones offer different ways to access your e-mail, so the steps 
for setting up e-mail on your particular PDA may differ from the ones provided here; 
you should check with your service provider for specific instructions involving your 
PDA.
There are literally dozens of e-mail providers just itching for your business, by the 
way. For most PDAs and home office users, you don’t need to contract with any of 
them since your service provider already offers the same services.
It’s helpful to see how simple the process can be on a PDA, so the steps to set up 
a T-Mobile My E-mail Mailbox on a T-Mobile MDA smartphone are given next as an 
example. Different e-mail providers have different setup instructions. Yahoo! Mail, 
for example, requires a subscription to a premium service to obtain remote or POP-3 
access to mail accounts. Check with your e-mail provider if you run into any difficul-
ties setting up e-mail on your PDA to be sure you have the proper account.
Turn on your smartphone.
At the Today screen, tap Set Up My E-Mail.
1.
2.
www.ebook3000.com

74  Project 7
Tap Add A New My E-Mail Account.
Tap Next.
Type in your e-mail address and the password you use for your e-mail ac-
count. The e-mail account you choose to use should be accessible using the 
POP-3 protocol, which is used to communicate between various mail servers 
like those from Earthlink or other Internet service providers (ISPs). Choose 
a time zone as well.
3.
4.
5.

Get and Send E-mail Anywhere  75
Tap Next. It may take several minutes while your account is set up, so be 
patient.
When the account has been created, tap Start.
Tap Messaging to access your account.
Microsoft offers Direct Push wireless e-mail through Cingular. It is incorporated into Service 
Pack 2 for Exchange Server 2003 and used on some Windows Mobile 5.0 devices and above.
Step 4: Set Up Your Laptop to Get Wireless E-mail
If your e-mail is on an Exchange Server (common for corporate users) or you have the 
ability to get voicemail through your e-mail, you’ll need to configure your laptop a 
little bit. This process isn’t hard, but there are a few things you need to do before you 
can start typing away. First, your laptop must have a wireless card installed. Newer 
laptops come with these; older laptops require the purchase of one.
If you have a web-based e-mail account such as Hotmail, Yahoo!, AOL, or Gmail, you don’t 
need anything beyond a web browser and an Internet connection to access your e-mail.
Power on your laptop.
Check to see whether you’re getting a network signal. This might be indi-
cated by a green light on your wireless card or an icon on your screen.
6.
7.
8.
1.
2.
tip
tip
www.ebook3000.com

76  Project 7
Some locations configure the wireless networking card automatically. You 
will see a login screen, and required information (e-mail address, password, 
method of payment) will be required. Enter that information to obtain access 
to the wireless network you want to work on.
Click Start and click Programs.
Click Outlook Express.
Go to the Tools menu and click Accounts to open the Internet Accounts 
dialog box.
Click Add and then click Mail.
Type in a display name—this name will show on e-mails that recipients re-
ceive from you. Click Next.
Type in your e-mail address. Click Next.
Type in the name of the mail server that you use. (You might need to get this 
information from your ISP.) Click Next.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

Get and Send E-mail Anywhere  77
Type in the username and password you use to access the account. Click 
Next.
Click Finish.
You’ll be back at the Internet Accounts window. Click the Mail tab; the account 
you just created should be there.
Learn how to set up your own wireless network in Project 23.
This setup process might take as much as an hour or so, depending upon how 
explicit the instructions from your service provider are. My experience shows some 
of the providers assume you know an awful lot about technology; don’t be afraid to 
give them a call and make them walk you through the process if you get stuck at any 
point. The ability to access your e-mail from anywhere will help you stay in touch as 
much as you want to—that’s a big plus for anyone who works from home and wants 
to take advantage of the freedom that work environment can provide.
11.
12.
note
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank

79
Project 8
Set Up 
a Mobile GPS
What You’ll Need
Cell phone, smart phone, or personal travel assistant
Cost: $10–$799
Difficulty: Easy
I
f you have ever become lost on the way to a client meeting, then you’re a candidate 
for a mobile GPS. GPS stands for “Global Positioning System,” a system that uses 
satellites to tell where a specific item is located on planet Earth. In most cases, the 
item is a person—you. GPS can instantly decipher your exact location on the planet 
and provide you with spoken and visual turn-by-turn directions to help you get to the 
next location you’re heading to.
GPS navigation has been used for years in the marine industry and in the U.S. Armed 
Forces, but it’s only been in, say, the last ten years that mobile GPS has become an af-
fordable option for the rest of us. In the 1990s, for example, GPS maker Garmin offered 
handheld GPS devices for around $500 that the masses could place on the car dashboard. 
Car rental companies started offering cars with GPS a few years ago, which has given 
millions of drivers the opportunity to try GPS without buying their own device.
The options just keep getting better, however. Today, Garmin offers mobile GPS for 
your cell phone, smartphone, laptop, and PDA plus it has new products that it calls 
personal travel assistants. Other companies offer similar options and some products 
can even find you a hotel or a place to have lunch. Heck, even your dog can have his 
own GPS attached to his collar so you always know where he is.
The point to all this is that you, too, can have a mobile GPS. It doesn’t have to cost 
a lot of money—although you can spend big bucks if you want—and it doesn’t have to 
be difficult to set up. If you drive much at all, GPS navigation is a great option to add 
to your road warrior arsenal. For this project, we’ll focus on GPS capabilities in cell 
phones, smartphones, and personal travel assistants.
Cell phone navigation options link GPS satellites to phone company network coverage systems, 
so if you lose network signals, you lose your GPS capabilities, too. Choose a cell phone provider in 
your area with the lowest rate of dropped signals to get the best GPS coverage.
●
●
●
tip
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

80  Project 8
Step 1: Understand the Options Available
There are dozens of providers and options available today for GPS navigation sys-
tems. GPS receivers rely on radio waves from satellites orbiting the Earth and use a 
combination of three satellites above you plus where you are in relation to those satel-
lites to determine your exact location.
If your GPS receiver has a clear line of vision to the satellites, it works great. If it 
doesn’t—if trees or tall buildings block it from any of the three required satellites—
then it can’t accurately locate your position or provide you with directions.
Cell phones and other devices work with GPS satellites through direct use or by 
downloading software that requires updates with the satellites.
Using Your Cell Phone for GPS Navigation
Cell phones operate similarly to landline telephones—you make and receive tele-
phone calls on both. The difference is that cell phones work like stylish two-way 
radios—they send and receive radio signals from towers and base stations that are 
arranged into networks of cells. As you move around, you move from one cell to 
another with your signal strength increasing or decreasing depending upon your dis-
tance from a given base station. The towers transfer your signal from one base station 
to the next, as shown in Figure 8-1.
Figure 8-1 
Cell phone signals are 
transferred between 
towers and base 
stations as you travel. 
Almost every cell phone sold today has some sort of GPS receiving capability 
built into it, but not all phones have a full GPS receiver. Some cell phones understand 
programming languages and can subsequently offer turn-by-turn directions and 
information about businesses and attractions. A few even offer walking directions in 
addition to driving directions. Others don’t understand programming languages and 
can only work like a tracking device. If you’re not sure what your cell phone can do, 
contact your cell phone service provider and ask.
There are two basic ways to get GPS navigation coverage with your cell phone: by 
subscription, or by using specific software for your phone. Here are some examples of 
cell phone GPS subscription services at the time of writing:
Person
with Cell
Person
with Cell
Person
with Cell
Base Station
Base Station

Set Up a Mobile GPS  81
Nextel/Sprint Offers MapQuest Find Me with subscriptions starting at 
$3.99/month A sample cell phone with GPS is shown in Figure 8-2.
Verizon Wireless Offers VZ Navigator through a download process and 
charges by airtime minutes used for navigation activities
T-Mobile Offers GPS-enabled Google Maps through downloads and 
a combination of Internet services that start at $29.99/month
Cingular Offers TeleNav GPS Navigator starting at $5.99/month
●
●
●
●
Figure 8-2 
A wide variety of cell 
phones offer GPS 
navigation capabilities.
You can also download or purchase GPS software for your cell phone. TeleNav, 
for example, offers GPS software that can be used with each of the major cell phone 
carriers starting at $9.99/month. The type of phone you own makes a difference in 
whether a service like TeleNav can work for you, but it might be worth taking a look 
at. Go to www.telenav.com for more details.
www.ebook3000.com

82  Project 8
The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) now requires that precise location information 
be provided for any cell phone used to make a 911 call. This means that cell phone manufactur-
ers must incorporate a GPS receiver into every cell phone they offer. Cell phones manufactured 
prior to 2005 were not required to have this function.
Using a Smartphone for GPS Navigation
If you haven’t seen or used a smartphone, you’re probably wondering what the big 
deal is. Essentially, smartphones combine the functions of a normal cell phone with a 
handheld computer. It has an operating system, local storage, and e-mail functions, 
and can make and receive phone calls—plus, it’s programmable. These devices also 
typically feature a touch screen.
Carrying a single device that can handle all of these functions is appealing; more 
and more people are taking a look at these phones as they consider purchase options. 
They are offered by a variety of manufacturers, and a vast majority of new cell phones 
on the market today are actually smartphones, especially the more expensive prod-
ucts. Nokia, for example, ships more than 10 million smartphones annually.
Smartphones can integrate with GPS receivers or can be connected to existing 
portable GPS receivers. Because of its operating system capabilities and program-
ming options, you can even create your own GPS software to use on your smart-
phone. It’s much easier, however, to just use the GPS options already on the market 
unless you’re a pretty skilled developer.
Here are some smartphones with GPS options available on the market:
Palm GPS Navigator Smartphone Edition for Treo phones Preloaded 
with TomTom Navigator 6 software and costs $299.
BlackBerry 7100i GPS Smartphone The addition of a GPS chip lets you 
download very detailed map imagery on-the-fly. It typically sells for $199 
with a two-year service agreement.
●
●
tip

Set Up a Mobile GPS  83
Mio A701 GPS smartphone An internal GPS receiver combines with 
MioMap 2.0 mapping software for a smartphone that retails for about $500.
Motorola Q Smartphone You can download CoPilot Live 6 GPS software 
to avoid cell phone service fees. Retails from $199 to $419.
If you prefer to integrate your smartphone with a GPS receiver, it’s pretty easy 
to do. Garmin, for example, offers the Garmin Mobile 20 (see Figure 8-3). This uses a 
phone mount that has a built-in GPS receiver and Bluetooth technology to work with 
Nokia, Windows Mobile, and Treo 650 smartphones. The phone mount attaches to 
your automobile windshield with a suction-cup; when you’re in the car, you just drop 
your phone into the mount for navigation capabilities to begin. The phone mount also 
acts as a phone charger.
●
●
Figure 8-3 
The Garmin Mobile 
20, a sophisticated 
phone mount with 
a GPS receiver built-in, 
is shown here with 
a Treo smartphone.
Using a Personal Travel Assistant for GPS Navigation
Personal travel assistants are handheld GPS receivers that can be mounted in your 
car or carried easily in your purse or briefcase. Don’t confuse them with the standard 
GPS receivers that simply mount on a dashboard and are not designed to be used 
out of the car. Personal travel assistants double as portable digital assistants in some 
ways, too—some offer MP3 player options, for example, and other features such as 
language guides or currency converters.
www.ebook3000.com

84  Project 8
These products are completely separate from any cell phone service providers—
you buy the personal travel assistant directly from a manufacturer like Garmin. How-
ever, some of these products do work with Bluetooth-enabled cell phones—Garmin’s 
Nuvi 360, for example, can be used as a hands-free speaker for cell phones with wire-
less capabilities. It can also be used to make and receive phone calls but only when 
paired with your Bluetooth cell phone.
Personal travel assistants also work with your personal computer. For instance, 
you can typically download music and image files directly onto your personal travel 
assistant. Don’t confuse these with fully loaded portable digital assistants, though. Per-
sonal travel assistants don’t come with keyboards or other computer-like functions.
Because these items are relatively new on the market, they are also relatively ex-
pensive choices. By comparison, smartphones are a good choice if you need phone 
and GPS capabilities, but personal travel assistants offer much more than standard 
GPS navigation options. If you travel often and throughout the world, it might be a 
good idea to take a personal travel assistant with you.
Here are three examples of personal travel assistants:
Garmin Nuvi 360 Offers preloaded maps, alerts for speed zones, language 
guides, travel guides for restaurants and hotels, an MP3 player, and hands-
free calling when integrated with a Bluetooth cell phone. Retails for about 
$800. See Figure 8-4 for a look at its interface.
Magellan RoadMate 860T Offers a built-in MP3 player and photo view-
er, and options include the TrafficKit, which provides live traffic incident 
reports and road work updates. Retails for about $800.
TomTom GO 910 Offers a built-in MP3 player, traffic updates, and text-to-
speech options. Retails for about $550.
●
●
●
Figure 8-4 
The Nuvi 360 from 
Garmin can be mount-
ed on the dashboard 
of a car or carried in 
a purse, pocket, or 
briefcase.

Set Up a Mobile GPS  85
Step 2: Map Your Next Trip
For this project, the steps really consist of determining whether you want a cell phone 
with GPS, a smartphone with GPS, or a personal travel assistant. Once you make that 
determination, you will work through your cell phone service provider (if using a cell 
phone or smartphone) to obtain the GPS software and services you need. Personal 
travel assistants require little set up, if any at all—you just buy the product and turn 
it on in most cases.
I wish it were harder so I had more to write about, but the process is truly that 
simple. That makes sense, however, since GPS is all about simplifying your life. If you 
are on the road much at all, why not take the time to explore these different options?
GPS navigation products typically locate you initially by ZIP code. Entering your ZIP code 
also helps the system find the local restaurants, hotels, and other travel items you might be 
looking for.
tip
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank

87
Project 9
Use Office 
Applications 
from Anywhere
What You’ll Need
Operating system: Any
Software: None
Hardware: None
Internet connection: Yes
Cost: $0
Difficulty: Challenging
H
as this ever happened to you? You’re out of the office and realize you need to 
make a simple change to a document and mail it. So you get in the car, drive 
home, make the 30-second change, and send the document to whoever needs 
it. Then you get in the car and drive back to wherever you were—or you ditch the off-
site excursion completely because it’s now ruined.
Maybe it didn’t happen quite like that, but I’m betting there have been times when 
you wished desperately that you could just access your documents quickly and easily 
from anywhere without a lot of hassle. If so, then you need to know about web-based 
applications.
There are ways to access your own computer remotely (see Project 10) but web-
based applications are a very different concept. As long as you have an Internet connec-
tion, you can work—create and review documents online, collaborate with colleagues 
in real-time, and secure and back up your data. I know, it sounds too good to be true. 
But keep reading, and you’ll see why web-based applications are poised to compete 
with Microsoft Office in a big way.
●
●
●
●
●
●
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

88  Project 9
Every Major Desktop Function 
Is Online, Waiting for You
Most people today use Microsoft Office, and it’s a great suite of office applications. 
Word, Excel, PowerPoint—these are all terrific programs that are easy to use. Ex-
pensive, but good stuff nonetheless. These types of desktop office applications are 
installed onto your computer, which means you can only use the application on that 
computer.
In contrast, web-based office applications are typically free and are not installed 
onto your computer. Instead, you access them by going to a web site on the Internet 
and working directly from that web site. The applications and your documents are 
stored on that site, which means they are instantly retrievable as long as you have an 
Internet connection, a keyboard, a screen, and a web browser.
Web-based applications are changing the way we think about data because the 
concept of owning a computer and its related applications and data is being replaced 
with the concept of simply owning the data. And if you access it through the Web, 
your data is never stuck somewhere that you aren’t.
For every desktop application you now have, there is probably a web-based coun-
terpart. There are five primary reasons to consider using these applications:
No installation of software is necessary. You subscribe to the service to obtain 
access to the application. And no installation means there are no incompat-
ibilities between the software and your operating system. Remember, the 
software doesn’t run on your operating system, it runs on the Internet.
The cost is substantially less than traditional software, and free in many cas-
es. In fact, nearly every provider offers at least a free “test drive” to give you 
a taste of how the application works before you commit to anything.
Storage and server space is provided.
Sharing, editing, and collaborating in real time are standard features. Mul-
tiple people can access the same file at the same time through individual web 
browsers.
Data is often more secure than on the average desktop computer because 
web-based application companies use highly reliable, redundant data stor-
age farms to store your files and offer extensive data backup services.
It’s only mentioned briefly, but the online collaboration aspects of web-based ap-
plications offer you the ability to work with multiple people at the same time, cre-
ating and exchanging in a real-time environment where ideas can be immediately 
exchanged and revisions instantly made. Working from home sometimes makes 
it difficult to work collaboratively if everyone doesn’t have the same software—
web-based applications typically provide you with a URL that you send to others. As 
long as they can access the Internet, anyone can collaborate with you.
The benefits make it hard to ignore these applications, especially if your home of-
fice is more of a base for you than a place where you spend your entire day.
●
●
●
●
●

Use Office Applications from Anywhere  89
So if everything’s free, how do these companies make money? Simple—by offering you extended 
services and options that require ongoing subscriptions. The basics pull you in, and the ease of use 
keeps you coming back for more. At least, that’s the bet these companies have placed.
Step 1: Determine Your Needs
Once you decide to try a web-based application, you need to determine what you will 
use it for. For example, if you want to write documents that others can review online, 
you need a word processing program. But if you work on spreadsheets, you need a 
spreadsheet program. Maybe you give a lot of presentations, or you collaborate with 
people on documents and could use a space for online collaboration. There are two ways 
to go about finding the right approach for you: use applications on an individual basis 
from multiple providers or use a suite of applications offered by a single provider.
Either method is fine. Some people prefer the individual approach because they 
like the way a spreadsheet works from one place but don’t care for the corresponding 
applications in the office suite. Others don’t want to be bothered with finding a vari-
ety of different applications for the perfect item so they stick with the suite.
Either way, you will want to test drive applications to see which ones you prefer. 
At this writing, none has the complete power and agility of Microsoft Office, but 
several try to emulate the look and ease of those applications and include at least the 
best parts of them. If you can be flexible on certain features and functions, you’ll have 
better luck finding a web-based application that suits you.
Step 2: Research and Choose Applications
Since even Microsoft is jumping into the web-based applications game with Windows 
Live, the level of competition is increasing in this space for your business. At this 
writing, however, Windows Live is a set of online services, not actual web-based ap-
plications. It won’t be on the list for you to review as a result, but don’t be surprised 
if Microsoft suddenly comes out of the woodwork with a web-based version of Office 
2007 somewhere down the road.
Several of these applications are compatible with a variety of other office appli-
cations or allow you to save documents in industry standards such as DOC, XLS, or 
PPT. If you plan to distribute the documents you create on a wide basis, look for ap-
plications that offer strong compatibility features.
Here is the list of web-based applications for you to review; there are probably 
others you will find on the Internet. The idea is to take a look at each of these so you 
get the feeling for which applications offer the features and functions you need.
Web-Based Office Suites
When a group of applications works together and is offered by a single source, it 
is called a “suite” of applications. When the suite is typically used by office work-
ers, it is called an office application suite. Three of these suites are worth reviewing: 
OpenOffice.org, ThinkFree and WebAsyst.
note
www.ebook3000.com

90  Project 9
OpenOffice.org (www.openoffice.org)
This suite is free to download and includes five applications: word processing, draw-
ing, presentation, database, and spreadsheet. It’s a good choice for users with basic 
needs and limited budgets. One important feature is its compatibility with almost all 
other major office suites.
There are two different office application products with very similar names: OpenOffice
.org and Open Office Suite. OpenOffice.org is the free application mentioned here; don’t 
confuse it with other information you may see on the Internet about Open Office Suite. It may 
sound strange to call an application by a dot org name, but trademark issues require the differ-
entiation between the two similarly named products.
ThinkFree (www.thinkfree.com)
With this suite, you get three Microsoft Office–compatible applications: word pro-
cessing (shown in Figure 9-1), spreadsheet, and presentation. Like OpenOffice.org, 
this suite is also free, plus it comes with 1 GB of free online file storage. ThinkFree’s 
web site is user-friendly and offers a publishing feature that makes it easy to publish 
documents to web pages, blogs, and elsewhere.
Figure 9-1 
ThinkFree’s word 
processing interface 
looks very similar to 
Microsoft Word.
note

Use Office Applications from Anywhere  91
WebAsyst (www.webasyst.net)
Seven applications are offered by WebAsyst: a contact manager, e-mail, project man-
ager, issue tracker, web publishing, online document management, and notes. Offers 
a free account that never expires although you will need to upgrade your account to 
a paid version in order to take full advantage of all the applications.
Individual Web-Based Office Application Providers
It’s easy to try individual applications and mix or match them for your needs. If you 
go this route, you might find yourself using a couple of different providers, so weigh 
that fact against the ease of going to one place for everything. The following are list-
ed in alphabetical order; this is by no means a complete list, as new providers are 
appearing regularly.
Google Docs & Spreadsheets (docs.google.com)
Google Docs & Spreadsheets lets you create basic word documents and spreadsheets. 
You can create documents from scratch or upload existing files (your formatting and 
formulas should come across intact). Google also offers Gmail—web-based e-mail 
with plenty of free storage and a good search engine (of course!) to help you find 
messages quickly.
Kiko Calendar (www.kiko.com)
Besides online calendar sharing, Kiko Calendar offers an integrated contacts list, iCal and 
vCard support (calendar file formats), appointment reminders, and instant messaging.
Num Sum (www.numsum.com)
If you need a simple, sharable web spreadsheet, check out this one. You can create the 
spreadsheet, designate others who can edit it, and even set it up as an RSS feed that 
publishes changing content automatically for you.
Plaxo (www.plaxo.com)
Try Plaxo if you create e-cards, want to search contacts and your calendar from your 
phone, or manage large numbers of contacts. Basic content is free but advanced 
features will cost you.
Remember the Milk (www.rememberthemilk.com)
To manage your life a little better, Remember the Milk is a decent task management 
program for setting due dates and reminders, generating maps to see where tasks are 
located, creating lists, and more.
Ta-da List (www.tadalist.com)
For simpler task management, try Ta-da List. It’s not fancy but it lets you create 
simple lists to help remember tasks.
www.ebook3000.com

92  Project 9
Thumbstacks.com (www.thumbstacks.com)
If you work with presentations very much, take a look at Thumbstacks.com. With it, 
you can create presentations and show them in Firefox or Internet Explorer browsers. 
It’s a basic presentation program without frills such as slide transition, animation and 
actions, sounds, or video, but it gets the job done.
Writeboard (www.writeboard.com)
This is a minimalist writing application but it’s so easy to use that many people don’t 
care about all the features it doesn’t offer. This is especially useful in collaborative en-
vironments, but caution: Writeboard is not compatible with other file formats except 
to export as a text file and can only be used with Internet Explorer 6.x, Safari, and 
Firefox browsers.
Yahoo! Mail (mail.yahoo.com)
Yahoo! offers a detailed address book, calendar, and notepad along with its e-mail 
services—it’s free, and it’s compatible with mobile devices.
Zoho Show (www.zohoshow.com)
Need more than Thumbstacks.com provides? Try Zoho Show. It lets you import exist-
ing PowerPoint and OpenOffice.org presentations, insert shapes, export to HTML for 
offline viewing, and use several other nice features.
Step 3: Try Out a Web-Based Application
Now that you know what web-based applications are and have had a chance to think 
about the type of application you might want to work with, it’s time to try one out. 
Because it’s so simple to use, we chose Writeboard for this exercise.
Create a Writeboard
To create a Writeboard, follow these steps: 
Open your Internet browser (be sure you’re connected to the Internet!) and 
go to www.writeboard.com.
In the Create A Writeboard box, shown in Figure 9-2, name your write-
board.
Assign your writeboard a password.
Enter your e-mail address.
Check the I Agree To The Terms check box. (Read the terms first.)
Click Create The Writeboard.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Use Office Applications from Anywhere  93
Your writeboard will appear on the screen and an e-mail will arrive in your inbox 
with the URL for your writeboard as well as the password you designated. Any time 
you need to locate the writeboard, you simply use the URL and password indicated 
in the e-mail.
Place Content on Your Writeboard
To place content on your new writeboard, place your cursor in the large empty text 
box and start writing (see Figure 9-3). If you want to format your text, use the format-
ting guide to help you make bulleted or numbered lists, headers, and bold or italic 
font. I told you this was minimalist—those are your only formatting options, and 
you’ll get the hang of them very quickly.
When your content is entered, click Save This Writeboard.
If you want to keep the writeboard easily accessible, you can save it to your browser’s Favorites.
Access an Existing Writeboard
There are two ways to access an existing writeboard. The first is to click the URL in 
the automatically generated e-mail you were sent. Enter your password at the prompt 
and the writeboard will open.
The second method is to open it through your browser’s Favorites if you saved 
it there.
Figure 9-2 
Creating a writeboard 
takes just seconds.
note
www.ebook3000.com

94  Project 9
Collaborate with Your Writeboard
On the home page for your writeboard, notice that there are several links and a cou-
ple of buttons, as shown in Figure 9-4. Some of these links and buttons are described 
next.
Figure 9-3 
You can start entering 
content as soon as the 
writeboard is created.
Figure 9-4 
Writeboards are easy 
to edit and use for 
collaboration 
purposes.
Invite People to Collaborate
Once you have added content to the writeboard and have saved it, others can add 
comments to it. But they can’t do it until you let them know where your writeboard 
is, which do as follows:

Use Office Applications from Anywhere  95
Click Invite People.
Enter their e-mail addresses where indicated.
Click Send Invitation.
Recipients will receive an e-mail with the writeboard URL and password.
Edit this Page
Anyone who accesses your writeboard can make edits by clicking the Edit This Page 
button. They enter the new text or make changes as desired, and then click Save As 
The Newest Version.
If the edit was very minor, the editor can select Minor Edit, Don’t Save A New 
Version. If this is selected, the Save As The Newest Version button changes to Save 
Over The Current Version and changes will not be logged as a new version in the 
version control pane. Try both options so you can see how version control appears on 
the screen.
Add a Comment
If readers don’t want to edit the content, they can still make comments for everyone 
to see:
Click Add A Comment.
Add the comment in the text box provided.
Click Add This Comment.
The comment will now appear immediately below the original text.
Step 4: Start Using Web-Based Applications
It’s not easy to change your mindset when you’ve been using desktop applications 
since you brought home your first personal computer. But if you work outside your 
home office very much—or want to!—then you owe it to yourself to give a couple 
of these applications an honest try. Start with one that you know you need onsite or 
offsite—a calendar, maybe, or a word processing application. Use it for a few weeks 
and gauge how often you were onsite and offsite, but still getting your work done 
from any location. If you’re satisfied with that first application, build your web-based 
applications portfolio and get serious about working from anywhere.
Today’s home office doesn’t have to be located in the home, you know. No one 
really has to know that you’re at Starbucks with your laptop or at an Internet café on 
a Greek island, do they?
1.
2.
3.
1.
2.
3.
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank

97
Project 10
Remote Control: 
Remotely 
Connect to Your 
PC or Get Help
What You’ll Need
Operating system: Windows 2000, Windows XP, or Windows Vista
Software: None
Hardware: None
Cost: $0
Difficulty: Advanced
S
o you’re out of the office and you need a file on your computer because you 
don’t use web-based applications. The file needs to be revised immediately and 
e-mailed to a client or boss, but you won’t be back in the office for hours. Don’t 
panic—I have a fix for you. It’s Remote Desktop Connection, standard in more recent 
Windows operating systems.
If you have never used this type of connection, you’re going to be surprised at how 
simple it is to set up. If you have used one of these before, you’re going to be grateful 
I reminded you of it. It’s a technology that allows you to sit at a computer in one place 
and connect to a second computer in a different physical location. You can see and use 
all the programs available on the second computer, just the same way you would if 
you were actually sitting in front of it. While you are connected remotely, the remote 
computer screen on the computer you are accessing will appear blank—so if you’re at 
home working remotely on a computer at a downtown office, no one will be able to 
spy on you.
People use Remote Desktop Connection for a variety of reasons: working remotely, 
collaborating with others (try accessing your computer from a colleague’s office, for 
example, so you can work together on projects), and console sharing, which is done 
when multiple users work on the same computer.
●
●
●
●
●
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

98  Project 10
Cool, huh? Yeah, I like it too. There are a few prerequisites, though, so be sure to 
check those before you begin the actual connection steps.
The Remote Desktop Connection software is installed with Windows XP and Windows Vista. 
If you have a different Windows operating system (Windows 95—Windows 2000), go to www.
microsoft.com/windowsxp/downloads/tools/rdclientdl.mspx to download the software needed 
(it’s free).
Step 1: Check that the Prerequisites Are Satisfied
Connecting to a remote computer is very easy as long as the following items are in 
place:
The remote computer must be turned on.
The remote computer must have a network or Internet connection.
Remote Desktop Connection must be enabled on the remote computer. We’ll 
cover this in the next section.
You must be working on a computer that has access to the remote computer, 
via either the Internet or an actual network connection.
You must have permission to connect to the computer. This means you must 
be on the list of users for the remote computer. If it’s your computer, you are 
probably on the list.
Remote Desktop Connection has some limitations between operating systems. If you are 
using Windows Vista, for example, you cannot use Remote Desktop Connection to connect to 
computers running Windows XP Home Edition, Windows Vista Starter, Windows Vista Home 
Basic, Home Basic N, or Home Vista Premium. You can create connections from those editions, 
however.
Step 2: Set Up the Remote Computer for Connection
Once your prerequisites are complete, you’re ready to set up the remote computer for 
access. I’ll give you two sets of instructions here: one for Windows Vista and one for 
Windows XP.
Using Windows Vista
Click the Start button.
Click Control Panel.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1.
2.
note
caution

Remote Control: Remotely Connect to Your PC or Get Help  99
Click System And Maintenance. Careful here—it’s easy to click one of the 
lines below (Get Started or Back Up) and think you clicked System And 
Maintenance, but you’ll go to the wrong spot.
Depending upon how you have set up Windows Vista, you may be taken directly to Step 4 and 
be able to bypass Step 3 altogether.
Click System.
In the left Tasks pane, click Remote Settings. This opens the System Proper-
ties dialog box.
3.
4.
5.
note
www.ebook3000.com

100  Project 10
Under Remote Desktop, select one of the following:
Allow connections from computers running any version of Remote 
Desktop (less secure) Choose this option if you don’t know which ver-
sion of Remote Desktop Connection other people are using.
Allow connections only from computers running Remote Desktop 
with Network Level Authentication (more secure) Choose this op-
tion if you know that connections to your computer will be made using 
Windows Vista.
Click Select Users. In the Remote Desktop Users dialog box, click Add. This 
opens the Select Users dialog box, where there are two actions to complete.
6.
●
●
7.

Remote Control: Remotely Connect to Your PC or Get Help  101
If the location shown is not the one you want, click Locations and browse for 
the location you want to use to search for users.
In the Enter The Object Names To Select section, type the name of the user 
you want to add. Click OK. If the name is not recognized by your computer, 
you may need to set up a separate user account for that person before they 
can be added. If it is recognized, it will be displayed in the Remote Desktop 
Users dialog box.
Remote Desktop Connection in Windows Vista uses Network Level Authentication (NLA). 
You can download NLA as a service pack for computers that run some of the earlier versions of 
Windows. Go to www.microsoft.com for more details.
Using Windows XP
Click the Start button.
Click Control Panel.
In the Control Panel, double-click System. 
In the System Properties dialog box, click the Remote tab.
Click Select Remote Users.
In the Remote Desktop Users dialog box, click Add. This opens the Select 
Users dialog box, where there are two actions to complete.
If the location shown is not the one you want, click Locations and choose the 
location you want to use to search for users.
8.
9.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
note
www.ebook3000.com

102  Project 10
In the Enter The Object Names To Select section, type the name of the user you 
want to add. Click OK. If the name is not recognized by your computer, you may 
need to set up a separate user account for that person before they can be added. 
If it is recognized, it will be displayed in the Remote Desktop Users dialog box.
Remote Desktop Connection automatically locks the computer being accessed so that it can’t be 
used in your absence. You can unlock the computer by pressing CTRL-ALT-DEL.
Step 3: Access a Computer by Using Remote 
Desktop Connection
Once you’ve set up the computer for Remote Desktop Connection use, you’re ready 
to go somewhere and use it. Just make sure the system you are using is compatible 
with the system you’re accessing and then follow the directions here.
Using Windows Vista
Click the Start button.
In the Start Search box, type Remote Desktop Connection.
8.
1.
2.
note

Remote Control: Remotely Connect to Your PC or Get Help  103
When the program appears, click it.
When the Remote Desktop Connection dialog box appears, type the name of 
the computer you will be connecting to. You can also type in an IP address 
here instead of a computer name.
Click Connect.
Add Users to Windows Vista
Click the Start button.
Click Control Panel.
Double-click User Accounts.
Click Manage User Accounts.
Click Add and follow the prompts.
Don’t know your computer’s name? Click the Start button and then click Welcome Center. The 
computer name will be at the top of the window.
Using Windows XP
Click the Start button.
Click All Programs | Accessories | Remote Desktop Connection.
3.
4.
5.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1.
2.
tip
www.ebook3000.com

104  Project 10
When the Remote Desktop Connection dialog box appears, type the name of 
the computer you will be connecting to. You can also type in an IP address 
here instead of a computer name.
Click Connect.
The remote computer’s desktop will appear on your screen as shown in 
Figure 10-1. 
3.
4.

Remote Control: Remotely Connect to Your PC or Get Help  105
Add Users to Windows XP
Click the Start button.
Click Settings.
Click Control Panel.
Double-click Users And Groups.
Click Add Users and follow the prompts.
Depending upon the user account requirements for your computer, users may be required to use 
a password for Remote Desktop connections.
There’s nothing special involved once you have opened the connection—just start 
working and remember to save your files. One word of caution: the connection is a 
separate window on your desktop, so be careful when you’re closing program win-
dows if you’re working on both desktops at the same time. It’s easy to close the wrong 
window and discover you have closed out your remote connection.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Figure 10-1 
The remote com-
puter’s desktop as 
it appears on your 
desktop—you can 
enlarge or reduce it as 
needed as well as open 
and use any programs 
or documents on the 
remote computer.
note
www.ebook3000.com

106  Project 10
Another Remote Control Option: Remote Assistance
There is another Windows feature that can come in handy when you need help with 
your computer or if you need to ask someone for help on a document or project 
you’re working on. It’s Remote Assistance, another built-in feature on more recent 
Windows operating systems.
This feature is perfect when you need help on your computer but are miles away 
from co-workers or anyone who can help. You just send an e-mail request for help and 
then both you and the other person can see your computer screen at the same time. You 
can even share control of the computer with the person you’ve asked for help, and both 
of you can control the mouse pointer. It works by connecting the two computers so that 
two people in different locations can work on the same computer at the same time.
For example, let’s say that you are having trouble with a formula in Excel. You can 
send a request for assistance to a buddy who is an Excel expert and he can hop onto 
your computer, fix the problem for you, and then go on his merry way. Or maybe you 
want to work on a document with a friend but don’t have collaborative software—this 
is a great collaborative tool because both of you can work on your computer at the same 
time. Friends or colleagues can also send requests to you for help, by the way—so if you 
start using this, be prepared for your buddies to catch on and ask for help in return. You 
can also offer to help others if you know they are having trouble with something. For 
purposes of this project, we’ll assume you are asking someone else for help.
Both you and your helper must have Internet connections.
Using Windows Vista
Click the Start button.
In the Start Search box, type Remote Assistance.
When the program appears, click it.
1.
2.
3.
note

Remote Control: Remotely Connect to Your PC or Get Help  107
Click Invite Someone You Trust To Help You.
Click Use E-mail To Send An Invitation, unless you use web-based e-mail—
then click Save This Invitation As A File.
Type in a password of at least six characters. Retype it for confirmation.
Click Next. Remote Assistance will open an e-mail for you with an attach-
ment for the recipient to open to access your computer—it could take a 
minute or two if your e-mail program is not open.
4.
5.
6.
7.
www.ebook3000.com

108  Project 10
In the To box, type the e-mail address of the person you are sending the 
request to.
You must add the password you specified to this e-mail. The automated process does not do 
that for you.
Click Send. You’ll see a Windows Remote Assistance window appear on 
your screen advising that you are waiting for an incoming connection.
8.
9.
note

Remote Control: Remotely Connect to Your PC or Get Help  109
You must remain connected to Remote Assistance while waiting for the other person to respond. 
If you cancel the request or close the Remote Assistance window, the invitation becomes invalid.
If the other person receives your request for help, you’ll be asked whether or not 
they can connect to your computer. Click Yes. To disconnect from the session, click 
Disconnect in the Connected To Your Helper dialog box.
Using Windows XP
Click the Start button.
Click All Programs.
Click Remote Assistance. The Help and Support Center window will 
appear.
Click Invite Someone To Help You under Remote Assistance.
1.
2.
3.
4.
tip
www.ebook3000.com

110  Project 10
Choose a contact using Windows Messenger or e-mail.
Click Invite This Person.
You’ll be prompted to enter contact information again, as well as type in a 
personal message. You do not need to enter this information if you don’t 
want to.
Set a time limit for the expiration of the invitation.
Be sure Require The Recipient To Use A Password is selected. Then type 
in a password and confirm it. Don’t forget to add the password to the 
invitation!
Click Send Invitation.
Your invitation will be sent to the recipient. They will receive an invitation as 
shown in Figure 10-2. After they accept, you will receive a notice on your computer 
as shown in Figure 10-3. 
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
Figure 10-2 
When someone 
accepts your request 
for help, they will be 
prompted to enter the 
password before being 
granted access.
Figure 10-3 
When your request 
for help is accepted, 
you will have one last 
chance to change your 
mind about allowing 
someone else access 
to your computer.

Remote Control: Remotely Connect to Your PC or Get Help  111
You may receive warnings that a program is attempting to access Microsoft Office Outlook if you 
chose the e-mail option. This is okay—it’s just your system using Outlook to send the invitation.
Other Options You Can Use
In both operating systems, Remote Assistance provides the ability to chat, pause, and 
send files. While it’s not the most effective method for instant messaging, these op-
tions in Remote Assistance can be extremely helpful when you want to say something 
to the other person or perform another task. This feature is so under-used and un-
known that most people won’t have a clue what you’re doing the first time you use 
Remote Assistance. It might be a good idea to give someone a quick heads-up before 
asking them to help you for the first time.
Don’t be afraid to use this feature, or to try out Remote Desktop Connection. Both 
are great tools for working remotely and very easy to use. It may seem like a lot of 
steps to follow, but after the first time through, you’ll be able to do either one very 
quickly. Now get to work!
Your helper can ask to take control of your computer. If this happens, a message will appear 
asking for approval before control transfers over. While he or she has control, you will see 
everything being done on your computer but you will also be able to work on your screen. 
When you want to stop sharing control, just click Stop Sharing.
note
note
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank

Part III
Communicate with 
Clients and Employers
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank

115
Project 11
Turn Your PC 
into a Virtual 
Conference 
Room
What You’ll Need:
Operating system: Any
Software: Yes
Hardware: None
Internet or cellular connection: Yes
Cost: $49/month or by per-minute basis (varies)
Difficulty: Easy
G
ot a meeting? Gotta talk face-to-face but you’re in Aspen and the rest of the 
group is scattered throughout the country or world? No problem. Get your 
team together in an online video conference. These types of calls used to be 
quite complicated—video conferences needed special equipment that was very expen-
sive, and the equipment had to be set up by specialists. Today, though, conference 
calling is as easy as setting up a webcam (see Project 3) and using powerful web solu-
tions that make it easy to take care of business and launch meetings directly from your 
calendar or even instant messaging program.
Using simple software that pulls everyone into the same conference with simul-
taneous phone and web access, you can deliver presentations, share control of your 
desktop (and remotely control others), view attendees, and get the job done without 
spending thousands on travel.
Typically, not all attendees are shown at the same time in the conference call, but 
the presenter and anyone else who is speaking is typically shown. This type of face-to-
face call is helpful because participants can see who is speaking and feel more comfort-
able speaking up themselves.
●
●
●
●
●
●
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

116  Project 11
Now, let’s be honest: Not everyone you work with will feel comfortable with 
a video conference call. That’s probably because they don’t realize just how simple 
these conferences can be to set up or just participate in—and they may not have a 
webcam yet. It’s worth taking the time to hold some hands as you walk potential 
participants through webcam setup and an initial web conference. Plan for extra time 
(especially at the beginning of your conference) to allow for connection problems or 
people who might simply be resistive to learning a new process. But once you guide a 
group through one of these calls and participants see how painless the process really 
is, you’ll have a gaggle of converts on your hands.
A web conference uses the Internet as a meeting room to share documents and collaborate 
online by allowing others to see your computer screen. Video web conferencing is the use of 
video during a web conference.
Step 1: Research Providers
There are a lot of providers out there that can help you with online conferencing, 
although not all of them offer video. Some charge a flat monthly or annual fee, while 
others allow you to pay-per-use at a per-minute rate. The software that you’ll down-
load shouldn’t take much time; each provider will supply any software required.
Take some time to look through several providers to determine which interfaces 
look the easiest to use, as well as to compare costs and features. Here are a few you 
can take a look at:
WebEx (www.webex.com) Offers web conferencing, video web conferenc-
ing, and online meeting services. Offers long- and short-term purchasing op-
tions, including instant pay-per-use with options between $0.02 and $0.33 
per minute per person in the conference. Ten attendees are allowed for un-
limited time; additional attendees can be added for a fee.
Windows NetMeeting (www.microsoft.com/windows/netmeeting/) Avail-
able as part of Windows XP and earlier versions of Windows only; offers web 
conferencing and video web conferencing. There is no cost to use this feature 
if you have it with your operating system. It can hold 30 or more attendees.
Microsoft 
Office 
Live 
Meeting 
(www.office.microsoft.com/en-us/
livemeeting) Offers web conferencing and online meeting services includ-
ing Internet Audio Broadcast but does not offer video at this writing. Can 
handle up to 1000 attendees. Charges a $3000 one-time fee, plus additional 
fees depending upon the licensing option chosen.
●
●
●
tip

Turn Your PC into a Virtual Conference Room  117
Raindance (www.raindance.com) Offers web conferencing, video web 
conferencing, and online meeting services. You must call them for individual 
pricing and attendee information.
GoToMeeting (www.gotomeeting.com) Offers web conferencing and online 
meeting services but does not offer video. Monthly and annual plans are avail-
able starting at $39/month. The flat fee allows up to ten attendees per meeting.
Many programs also provide a transcript of the conference to all participants. The transcripts 
will include public meeting notes taken, as well as the agenda, starting and end times, a list of 
participants, and other details of the meeting.
Step 2: Set Up a Meeting with WebEx
For this example, we’ll use WebEx Meeting Center. You can try it out free for 14 days; 
a valid e-mail address is required to activate the account. When you’ve entered that 
information, you’ll receive an e-mail from WebEx with your username and password 
information, along with a Start Meeting button. For the record, I set up this first meet-
ing in less than five minutes.
Click the Start Meeting button.
Click Install when the WebEx Client dialog box appears.
●
●
1.
2.
tip
www.ebook3000.com

118  Project 11
The Meeting In Progress window will appear. Do not close it. Continue to 
wait for the Meeting Manager to open. When it does, a Join Teleconference 
dialog box will also appear—note the call-in phone number, meeting num-
ber, and attendee ID number. You’ll give these numbers to others to join the 
audio portion of your conference.
Click OK in the Join Teleconference dialog box.
The meeting is ready for others to join. Since this is a trial meeting, calendar invi-
tations were not set up. If they were, others could simply join your meeting from that 
calendar invitation. In this case, however, participants will be invited by going to the 
Participants menu on the toolbar.
Click Invite.
Select By Email | Use Your Local Email Program. An e-mail invitation will 
automatically be generated with all meeting information included in it.
Enter the e-mail addresses of participants in the To line. Click Send.
3.
4.
1.
2.
3.

Turn Your PC into a Virtual Conference Room  119
When participants select the link in the e-mail, they will be taken to a web page 
that shows all relevant meeting information and allows participants to join the meet-
ing by clicking a Join Now button. As each participant joins, their name will appear 
in the host’s list of participants.
Including Video in Your WebEx Conference Call
With WebEx and other video conferencing software, you can turn video options on 
or off. In addition, there are two types of video that can be used in a meeting: single-
point video or multipoint video.
Single-point video allows just one participant to send video images. The present-
er or another person selected by the presenter are the only ones who can send live 
video in this case. Multipoint video allows several participants to send video images. 
This number is usually limited; WebEx, for example, allows up to four people to send 
video at one time. If this option is chosen, any participant up to the specified limit can 
send video.
www.ebook3000.com

120  Project 11
To include video in a WebEx conference call, you must first be designated as 
a presenter:
Go to the Meeting menu on the toolbar. Click Options.
Select the General tab.
Select the Video box.
Select Single-point or Multipoint Video.
Click OK.
Your webcam needs to be set up before you can use video conferencing features. 
But once it’s set up and you’ve selected the video options you want in your conference, 
there shouldn’t be anything else you need to do—your computer and the web confer-
encing program should take care of launching the video during your conference.
In the Video pane, select the Options button and increase the video frame rate if your video 
seems jerky. Changing video resolution to High will also give you a larger video picture in WebEx.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
tip

Turn Your PC into a Virtual Conference Room  121
Sharing Documents and Using the Whiteboard
If you want to show certain documents to all participants or even your desktop and 
applications on your computer, you can easily do it with the Share menu on the tool-
bar. Just click Share, then select the item you want to share. The Share feature also lets 
you open a whiteboard for collaborative conferencing—type or draw what you want, 
then let others in on the action too. The WebEx whiteboard can be displayed at vari-
ous magnifications and can be saved or printed, too.
Chatting During the Conference Call
WebEx and other programs come with instant chat features that usually allow you to 
have private chats with other people in the conference. This feature is helpful because 
someone may have a quick comment or need to ask something that doesn’t need to be 
shared with the entire group. You can also use this feature to send brief information to 
everyone in the conference or perhaps a certain group of participants in the call.
During a meeting, the presenter simply has to specify chat privileges for all par-
ticipants; these privileges determine to whom participants can send messages. So, for 
example, as a participant, you might be able to send messages only to the host or to 
another participant on a private basis—settings can be established to cover a variety 
of situations.
www.ebook3000.com

122  Project 11
To send a chat message, you simply type a message in the Chat panel, select the 
recipient, and click Send.
Web conferencing is truly so easy to use that once you participate in one of these 
conference calls, you’ll never want to travel again. It may take a little pushing to get 
clients or colleagues on board with you, but be persistent. Sometimes all people need 
is the opportunity to try something new so they can discover the geek within.

123
Project 12
Talk for Free on 
Your PC
What You’ll Need:
Operating system: Windows 2000, Windows XP, or Windows Vista
Software: VoIP service software
Hardware: Speakers and a microphone, webcam is optional
Cost: $0–$50/month
Difficulty: Easy
I
f you are tired of paying the phone company for all your calls, listen up: You don’t 
necessarily have to any more. It’s called Internet-based telephony—Voice-over-IP 
(VoIP)—and it allows you to use the Internet connection you are already paying 
for to use your PC to make calls to other PCs or to landline telephones (a standard 
telephone). Best of all, this technology is now quickly becoming available for use on 
Wi-Fi and landline telephones—call a PC, have a PC call you, use your PC to call your 
grandma’s house, whatever. You can make calls from your home office or down at the 
neighborhood Starbucks with the Wi-Fi phones; all you need is a wireless Internet con-
nection (called a Wi-Fi hotspot).
Plus, you can use your PC or the phones for free conference calls and even send 
files through them as you chat. All of this is typically free, as long as you are calling 
PC-to-PC. Otherwise, services charge for PC calls to landlines. But if your business as-
sociates in, say, England or Mexico, have a PC, get ready to start taking business calls 
with your PC instead of a phone to save big bucks. As long as your business partners 
or clients are using the same VoIP service you are, you can call them free of charge.
Most of these services automatically encrypt your calls so that they can’t be inter-
cepted, by the way, and they typically offer video services, too. If you have a webcam 
(see Project 3), you can take advantage of the video options during your calls. Even if 
the other party doesn’t have a webcam, they can still see you—which may or may not 
be a feature you like! Other service features typically include:
Contact lists
Basic or group chat
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

124  Project 12
Customized profile settings
Conference calling
Address book import options
Additional features (voice mail, call forwarding, etc.) are available depending 
upon the provider you choose. Interfaces (what you see on the screen) vary but, for 
the most part, are simple to use. Let’s get started—it’s never too early to start saving 
a little money!
VoIP establishes connections between users by using IP (Internet Protocol) “addresses.” 
Every Internet connection has its own address—VoIP services track and log usernames and 
IP addresses so that all you have to do is click on a contact name and your computer handles 
the dialing process.
Step 1: Choose a Service
When you choose a VoIP service, there are a few things to consider besides cost. For 
example, fax capabilities aren’t standard with most of these services (some do have 
them, however, but typically charge for the convenience). Do you often make confer-
ence calls? If so, your service needs to be able to handle that. Do you need voicemail? 
Phone numbers to give out? Call blocking or forwarding? Different services offer 
different options but none seems to offer everything that a business could possibly 
need. It may be that you still need a dedicated fax line, for example, in combination 
with a VoIP service.
My recommendation is to take a look at the services you currently receive from 
your telephone provider, determine which ones you actually use regularly, and then 
search for a VoIP provider based on those needs. One other comment—consider what 
your business associates and clients use. If the majority use a particular service, it may 
be worthwhile to at least install that service even if it’s not the one you primarily will 
use (calling within the same service, whether locally or internationally, is free, and 
right now some services don’t offer the option to call from one service to another).
Here are some providers to consider, but remember that new ones are popping 
up all the time, so this is by no means a complete list. Conduct an Internet search for 
VoIP providers to see everything out there. Most work with any Windows operating 
system; if you have an older operating system such as Windows 95, however, you 
might need to perform some upgrades to take full advantage of the features a pro-
vider offers.
The following table lists providers that offer a minimum of PC-to-PC voice call-
ing; other features are provided as shown. Some have additional features not listed 
here—Gizmo, for example, allows calls to multiple voice programs so you can talk 
PC-to-PC with people who are not using Gizmo. Use this table as a sample to get you 
started on finding the right service for you.
●
●
●
note

Talk for Free on Your PC  125
VoIP is a highly competitive industry. Just because a provider doesn’t have a service listed here 
doesn’t mean that the service won’t be offered soon—VoIP providers are constantly upgrading 
and offering new features.
Provider
Video
Conference 
Calling
Instant 
Messages
Dial to a 
Landline
Dial from 
a Landline
Voicemail
Google Talk
X
X
Gizmo
X
X
X
X
Skype 
X
X
X
X
X
X
Sunrocket
X
X
X
X
Vonage
X
X
X
X
X
Yahoo! Voice
X
X
X
X
X
Most VoIP services do not offer emergency dialing services.
For your convenience, here are the web sites for the providers mentioned in this 
project:
Vonage (www.vonage.com)
Gizmo (www.gizmoproject.com)
Yahoo! Messenger with Voice (www.voice.yahoo.com)
SunRocket (www.sunrocket.com)
Google Talk (www.google.com/talk)
Skype (www.skype.com)
For this project, Skype (see Figure 12-1) is the VoIP provider of choice. Why? 
Many of my colleagues use Skype, which makes every call to them a free one for me 
whether they are in Europe, China, or the United States. It has pretty decent sound 
quality and a very simple interface that almost anyone can figure out without help, 
and the desktop and Wi-Fi phones available for purchase mean that I can literally use 
Skype anywhere there is an Internet connection.
Skype has partnered with companies that make both wireless and landline tele-
phones. Some of these phones even offer both options in one phone—you can make 
and accept calls from computers or landlines from the same phone.
This project can be done with Skype on a Macintosh, Linux, or Windows PC. At this writing, 
however, Skype still had video limitations for Macs, and contact lists, for example, couldn’t be 
copied from one operating system to another on the Mac OS2.
●
●
●
●
●
●
note
tip
note
www.ebook3000.com

126  Project 12
Step 2: Download the Software
Once you have selected a service, you need to download it from the Internet. Each 
service will have a Download section where you typically click a button and follow 
the prompts provided. Before you click the button, however, check the System Re-
quirements section for the software.
Most VoIP services recommend a broadband connection for the best results—if 
you don’t yet have that, you’ll want to get it.
When you’re ready, click the Download button and wait for the setup instruc-
tions. You may see a dialog box similar to Figure 12-2 that asks whether you want to 
run or save the file—click Run. When the download is complete, most programs pro-
vide a setup wizard of some sort. This is the easiest way to complete setup—follow 
the prompts to install the program, and click Finish or Close at the last prompt.
You now can open your program, either by accessing it through the Start button 
and selecting Programs or All Programs or by clicking an icon on your desktop or 
in your system tray depending on the options you selected during the installation 
process.
Figure 12-1 
Skype is one of the 
most popular VoIP 
services available right 
now.

Talk for Free on Your PC  127
Step 3: Create a Contact List
Now that your program has been installed, you need to have someone to talk to, 
right? To do that, you need to tell your program the people you want to call. Every 
program has a toolbar menu (File, View, Help, etc)—in this toolbar should be a Con-
tacts option. In Skype, the Contacts menu allows you to add, search, import, and send 
contacts. While the steps may be slightly different depending upon the software you 
have chosen, steps for adding a contact should go something like this:
Click Add A Contact.  A dialog box like the one shown in Figure 12-3 will 
appear.
Enter the name (nickname or full name) or e-mail address of the person you 
want to add.
1.
2.
Figure 12-2 
Follow the prompts 
to install your VoIP 
program properly.
Figure 12-3 
Potential contacts are 
shown according to 
the information you 
provide.
www.ebook3000.com

128  Project 12
Click Search.
Depending upon the accuracy of the information you entered—and the num-
ber of people on the service with similar information—you will see contact 
names that match the details provided. Find the name you want.
Click Add Selected Contact.
The contact will then appear in a contact list. Clicking a name lets you see infor-
mation about that contact as shown in Figure 12-4, and you can make a phone call 
directly from the contact list.
3.
4.
Figure 12-4 
With a contact list, you 
simply click a name to 
dial that person.
Importing contacts is a process that allows you to search your e-mail address 
book to find friends, family, and colleagues who already use your VoIP service (see 
Figure 12-5). The names and e-mail addresses are downloaded into your program 
and added to your contact list without much effort on your part.
Step 4: Set Up Your Profile
Every VoIP service has a Profile section. Profiles are the details that other users on your 
service see, for example, when they do a search and try to find you. In Figure 12-3, no-
tice that most users have a country or city provided—that sort of information is entered 

Talk for Free on Your PC  129
into your profile and helps others differentiate between you and your doppelganger in 
another country. Profiles only offer the details you authorize, so you can enter as much 
or as little information as you like.
In Skype, you can access your profile through File | Edit My Profile. This com-
mand brings up a My Profile window similar to that shown in Figure 12-6. Enter the 
details you are comfortable with sharing publicly and click Update.
Figure 12-5 
Skype allows you 
to import contacts 
from Microsoft Office 
Outlook.
Figure 12-6 
Entering details into 
your profile allows 
others to find and 
contact you quickly 
and easily.
www.ebook3000.com

130  Project 12
Step 5: Establish Options
Another important section to review before making calls is the Options section. In 
Skype, go to Tools | Options to open the window shown in Figure 12-7. See the left 
pane that lists a variety of options, such as Sounds and Video? When you select an op-
tion in that pane, the information on the right side of the window provides you with 
choices for customizing all kinds of things, from the sound made when someone calls 
you to whether the program should automatically start when you start Windows.
Figure 12-7 
Options are estab-
lished according to 
your preferences.
Take some time to walk through the options and make selections based on your 
preferences. When you’re done, click Save.
Step 6: Make a Call
You have contacts in your contact list, you’ve set up your personal options, and you’ve 
established a profile . . . now it’s time to make a call. First, be sure you have connected 
your speakers and a microphone to your computer and that they are turned on—and 
that the volume is up high enough to hear! Then:
Go to your contact list.
Select a name.
1.
2.

Talk for Free on Your PC  131
You have three choices to dial:
Double-click the name to automatically dial.
Right-click to bring up a menu—select Start A Call.
Click the big green button at the bottom of the window as shown in 
Figure 12-8.
3.
●
●
●
Figure 12-8 
As you wait for the 
other person to an-
swer, you will hear 
a ring just like you do 
on a landline.
Wait for the other person to answer.
Start talking.
If you wanted it to be more difficult, sorry. It’s really that easy once your program 
has been installed. If the other person isn’t available, they won’t answer or the system 
won’t put the call through. Most programs show a contact as unavailable if they are 
not online; simply pay attention to the icons next to a contact’s name to determine 
their online status.
Make a Call to a Landline
If you are calling a landline and the person is not on your contact list:
Go to the Dial tab.
Be sure you have purchased Skype credit. If you haven’t, click Buy Skype 
Credit and follow the prompts.
4.
5.
1.
2.
www.ebook3000.com

132  Project 12
Enter or select the country you are dialing to.
Enter the phone number by using the onscreen dialpad or your keyboard.
Click the Dial button.
Answer a Call
Is your computer ringing? To answer it, simply click the Answer button on the incom-
ing call window that has appeared on your screen and start talking, just as you would 
on any other phone.
Other Considerations
When you use a VoIP service like Skype, there are other aspects besides PC-to-PC call-
ing that you’ll want to consider taking advantage of.
Chat
Chat features are fairly standard across VoIP services. These are really just instant 
messaging programs that can be used whether or not you are talking with someone 
in a voice or video chat.
PC-to-Landline Calls
To call ordinary phones with Skype and other services, you typically need to buy 
credit with the service. This can usually be done with a credit card and sometimes 
even a PayPal account. Some services charge a flat annual or monthly fee to make PC-
to-landline calls, while others charge by the call and number of minutes used. Skype 
offers North American users an “unlimited” option, which allows unlimited calls to 
any phone in the United States and Canada for $29.95 a year, for example.
Once you have deposited money into the credit account, you can make all the 
calls you want using a dialpad on your screen as shown in Figure 12-9. Replenish the 
account as needed.
Add Skype to Your Existing Phones
Skype offers a lot of phone products, but Uconnect is one product you may really 
want to look into if you decide to go with Skype for your VoIP service in your home 
office. It’s a VoIP adapter that offers caller ID and connects to your existing corded 
and cordless phones.
3.
4.
5.

Talk for Free on Your PC  133
Get a Phone that Can Handle Skype and Landline Calls
The Products section of the Skype web site offers a variety of telephones that can con-
nect to your laptop, be used in Wi-Fi networks, and make both free Skype calls and 
normal landline calls.
The Small Business section of the site also offers products designed for business 
users—landline telephones that can use Skype, speakerphones, headsets, Skype 
webcams (but you don’t need a special webcam for Skype), and a Bluetooth wireless 
Internet Calling Kit.
VoIP phone services do not typically offer emergency calling (911).
Figure 12-9 
Purchase credit and 
make your call with 
an onscreen dialpad 
to any phone in the 
world.
note
www.ebook3000.com

134  Project 12
Landline-to-PC Calls
You can get your own standard phone number with Skype so that friends who don’t 
have Skype can simply call you on their landline—and you can pick up the call on 
your PC or Skype phone. You do have to pay for this service (3- and 12-month sub-
scriptions are available) but it comes with free voicemail. The best part is that you can 
choose any area code you want—give the “local” number to colleagues in another 
state and make it easy for them to call you for free.
Conference Calls
To make a conference call with Skype, go to Tools | Create A Conference Call. A dia-
log box appears with all your contacts. Select the contacts you want to include in the 
conference call, and click Start.
That’s all there is to it—download the program that’s best for you and start chat-
ting for free. What are you waiting for?

135
Project 13
Create Your 
Own Wiki 
Collaborative 
Space
What You’ll Need:
Operating system: Any
Software: None
Hardware: None
Cost: $0
Difficulty: Challenging
D
o you have a lot of ideas that you want to share with others? Are you knowl-
edgeable in topics that others usually aren’t? Do you enjoy collaborating with 
others? If you answered yes to any of these questions, creating a wiki might 
be a project for you.
A wiki is a web site you create that also allows others—strangers, people you know, 
anyone—to easily edit your pages. All these people tinkering in your wiki site are part 
of a community of volunteers who have an interest in your topic or project. Passwords 
can be applied to restrict edits to a certain group of people but most wikis allow any-
one viewing the site to make edits.
Some people refer to wikis as databases because they typically have lots of pages 
connected via hyperlinks and offer some search capabilities, but a wiki is not a database, 
at least not in the truest sense of the word. A wiki is ridiculously simple to create—and 
requires zero knowledge of HTML, that pesky programming language that is typically 
the foundation for a web site. The use of minor text-formatting instructions is usually 
required, but those instructions are quick and easy to learn as you create your wiki.
Edits are usually made in real time so they appear instantly online. Every edit made 
is stored for the life of the wiki, which lets you check edits anytime you want. Incorrect 
edits can also be removed, however, with a simple move back to the original page.
●
●
●
●
●
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

136  Project 13
There are lots of business uses for wikis—it can be a place to post project com-
munications and milestones, for example; an interactive web site for your clients or 
employees to post comments, suggestions, files, etc.; or a company intranet. Typically, 
a wiki has unrestricted access (no registration required) so that it’s easy for others to 
access. Of course, that means it’s easy for anyone to see the information you’re post-
ing, so be careful when posting sensitive information.
Most wikis are based on web servers called wiki engines, although they can be 
part of a private LAN. There is also a version of wiki called a peer-to-peer (P2P) wiki 
where the wiki site is stored directly on your computer. P2P wikis are rare at the writ-
ing of this book but are expected to gain prominence in the next few years.
Some wiki engines provide strong content control that monitors every page in a 
wiki to maintain quality. This type of system automatically sends a notification warn-
ing of changes to wiki pages so validity of new edits can be verified.
The downside of wikis is that vandalism of a site can easily occur. Protections can be established, 
though, if you are worried about abuse. If you become aware of someone trying to vandalize your 
wiki, you can arrange for your wiki engine to block the user by IP address or username.
Step 1: Choose a Wiki Engine
Once you decide to create a wiki, you need to choose a wiki engine to work with. I’m 
assuming now that you don’t have a private server to work on, so this project focuses 
on creating a wiki on a public wiki engine. Many wiki engines offer the wiki software 
free to create a wiki, although some do charge fees. There are dozens of wiki engines 
to choose from. My recommendation is to take your time and search the Internet not 
only for wiki engines, but for sites that use them. Eventually, you will find one that 
satisfies your creative juices as well as fits your business needs.
Test Drive a Wiki
A guy named Ward Cunningham is credited with the creation of wikis. He describes a 
wiki as a “body of writing that a community is willing to know and maintain.” If you 
are not sure what a wiki is, take a few minutes to browse these sites for examples. The 
chances are good you have already visited a wiki and just not realized it.
www.wikipedia.com This site uses the MediaWiki wiki engine and is a sim-
ple, text-based wiki that allows embedded images, as shown in Figure 13-1.
www.ecologee.net/pmwiki.php This site uses PmWiki as its engine, which 
offers advanced features such as “skins” to customize the look and feel of the 
pages, as shown in Figure 13-2.
●
●
note

Create Your Own Wiki Collaborative Space  137
Figure 13-1 
Wikipedia’s home page 
is a simple and effec-
tive use of text.
Figure 13-2 
Some wiki engines of-
fer “skins” to dress up 
wiki sites.
www.ebook3000.com

138  Project 13
http://losangeles.wikia.com/wiki/Main_Page This site uses the Wikia wiki 
engine, which offers image integration and many other features, as shown 
in Figure 13-3.
●
Figure 13-3 
The Los Angeles wiki 
is set up with tables, 
images, and text.
In the previous section, I suggested you take a look at a few web sites. Here are 
the wiki engine URLs for the sites mentioned earlier as well as a few more:
www.pmwiki.org
www.mediawiki.org
www.wikia.com
www.kwiki.org
If you are a computer superuser, go ahead and try any wiki engine out there. But if you’re not 
that confident, stick to one that speaks in plain English and doesn’t confuse you.
For this project, I chose to create a Wikia mini-wiki. I liked all the options and 
features it has, and it didn’t make me wait for someone to approve my wiki concept. 
Plus, it was so easy to work with—no coding language, no hard-to-follow installation 
instructions (there was nothing to install), and no strange languages to decode.
●
●
●
●
note

Create Your Own Wiki Collaborative Space  139
Considerations
When you review wiki engines, you need to think about the purpose of your wiki. 
Some engines expect your wiki to have a large potential audience; others don’t care 
about that.
Next, what’s your timeframe? A few wiki engines want to review your request 
for a new site over a period of weeks; others allow you to instantly download their 
software and get a site going within the same day.
A third consideration is the content you want to post. If you have a lot of images, 
then a text-based wiki isn’t for you.
Finally, do you want to host the wiki or do you want it hosted somewhere else? 
Some wiki engines ask you to download software that will stay housed on your com-
puter as you create and edit your site but others maintain all that on their servers. The 
more you place on your computer, the more complicated creating a wiki gets.
A mini-wiki is created with a targeted or small audience in mind. If successful, they can become 
full-fledged wiki sites at the discretion of wiki engine administrators. These are great for project 
communications and working with individual clients.
Step 2: Create Your Wiki
If you have chosen to go the long route and download software to your computer, 
you need to follow the download and installation instructions from your wiki engine. 
But if you’re like me and simply want to create a site and see where it takes you, there 
is typically nothing to download. You do, however, usually have to create a user ac-
count and log onto the wiki engine. This lets the engine track you and confirm who 
you are.
To create a mini-wiki on Wikia, I followed these steps:
Go to the Wikia home page at www.wikia.org.
Log onto my account.
Click Try Out A Mini-wiki At Scratchpad Wiki Labs.
Type the name of the project in the box provided, shown in Figure 13-4.
Click Create.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Figure 13-4 
Creating a mini-wiki 
can be done in minutes 
with Wikia.
note
www.ebook3000.com

140  Project 13
Step 3: Add Content to Your Wiki
It’s smart to read any tutorials your wiki engine provides. These usually offer tips for 
formatting text and adding things like bullets and numbered lists, as well as direc-
tions on how to link to other wikis or external sites.
Next, gather your thoughts about what you want to write. If you want to work on 
your text and come back to it later before posting, go ahead and do that in Word or 
some other word processing application. But if you’re comfortable writing on-the-fly, 
just start entering your content, as shown in Figure 13-5.
Figure 13-5 
To enter content, you 
just start typing in the 
text box.
Keep your reader in mind! Nobody likes to read a full page of nothing but text—
your eyes go cross-eyed and you get bored quickly. Separate your content into logical 
sections using headlines and horizontal lines, and bring keywords to your reader’s 
attention by making them bold or italic.
As you create your first wiki, start the tutorial and then create a new window so you can work on 
your wiki and flip over to the tutorial for reminders as you go.
Consider using images, too. Those help break up text and add visual interest to 
your page. Be careful with images, though—if you don’t own the copyright, don’t 
post them.
tip

Create Your Own Wiki Collaborative Space  141
One other item that can help your wiki: links. Both internal links to other wiki 
sites and external links to any web site are allowed. You can format the links so that 
when a reader clicks on one, the new site appears in a new browser. Each wiki engine 
has a different format for doing that, so just follow your engine’s instructions. But 
opening new browser windows helps direct readers to new information while keep-
ing your wiki open for them.
Wikis will automatically search your text when users type in search terms. For 
example, in my wiki shown in Figure 13-6, I use the term SOHO to refer to small of-
fice/home office workers. When SOHO was typed into the search box for the wiki 
engine, it instantly pulled up my wiki, highlighting SOHO in red. If you want a lot of 
people to find your wiki, be sure to use these kinds of “keywords”—words that are 
typically used by people when referring to your subject matter.
Figure 13-6 
The Digital Home 
Office wiki was 
created in about ten 
minutes, including the 
creation of a logon 
account and the initial 
wiki content.
Want to check out my wiki? Go to http://scratchpad.wikia.com/wiki/Digital_Home_Office and 
add your comments about digital home offices.
note
www.ebook3000.com

142  Project 13
Step 4: Keep Your Wiki Active
Oh, sure, creating a wiki is fun, but maintaining it may not be as exciting if you aren’t 
too interested in the topic. But if you’re going to create a wiki, make it one that you 
and others will want to visit.
If you’re creating one for colleagues, for example, set reminders for yourself to 
post regular updates to the wiki to keep colleagues coming back for more informa-
tion. Clients, too, will continue returning if they find useful information about your 
products or services.
Remember, you can get as creative as you like with a wiki. The mini-wiki shown 
here was done in minutes; the full web site examples shown in the beginning of the 
project take much more time. Still, if your business could benefit from client or col-
league interaction like this, it’s a great project to try.

143
Project 14
Set Up a Virtual 
Private Network
What You’ll Need:
Operating system: Windows Server 2003
Software: None
Hardware: Wireless access point with built-in router
Internet connection: Yes
Cost: $0
Difficulty: Advanced
I
f you work at home for a large corporation, you may already have a virtual pri-
vate network (VPN) connection to your company’s corporate network. But smaller 
companies don’t always have this kind of remote access set up—sometimes be-
cause of the lack of an internal IT department, sometimes because the concept just 
hasn’t been introduced. If you own a small company, a VPN just might be the perfect 
way for you to keep the lines of communication open between your home office and 
those of your remote employees.
VPNs use a tunnel system to send packets over a network.
Virtual private networks are private networks used to communicate confidential 
information over a public network, via the Internet or through the use of software. 
It’s a pretty reliable method for maintaining fast, secure communications regardless of 
where people are physically located. Connections are sent through the Internet from 
a private network to your location, which lets you access the corporate network from 
anywhere. With a VPN, you or others can connect directly to your network and use the 
programs and documents stored on it.
A firewall is a barrier between a private network and the Internet.
This kind of connection differs from traditional wide area network (WAN) connec-
tions because it doesn’t transmit data over phone or other physical lines. As a result, 
VPNs are typically less expensive and easier to maintain than a WAN setup. There are 
●
●
●
●
●
●
tip
tip
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

144  Project 14
multiple types of VPNs that can be set up; this project focuses on remote-access VPNs 
that permit secure, encrypted connections using Windows Server 2003.
A variety of methods are used to keep VPNs secure, including firewalls and en-
cryption. Since there are no common standards for implementing a VPN, you’ll find 
a variety of solutions on the market. In this project, we’ll take a look at those solutions 
and show you the basics of implementing one.
Encryption is a process between two computers. When one computer sends data, encryption 
takes the data and encodes it so that only the second computer can read it. Any other computer 
trying to read the data will be unable to.
Step 1: Set Up a VPN
There are a couple of things you need before setting up a VPN using Windows Server 
2003. The most critical piece is actually three pieces: three separate computers running 
Windows Server 2003. One will be configured as a domain controller, one will be con-
figured as a VPN server, and one will be configured as a RADIUS server. Throughout 
this process, the domain controller computer will be referred to as the DC, the VPN 
server will be referred to as the VPN server, and the third computer will be referred 
to as the RADIUS server.
Then, you need a dedicated DSL line—VPN technologies use the same cabling 
and routers that public networks do, so to set up a VPN, you use the same service 
provider you use to access the Internet. Ideally, this is a dedicated DSL line.
A router is a specialized computer that sends packets of information and allows information to 
flow between networks. Without routers, the Internet wouldn’t exist.
Anyone connecting to your VPN needs a VPN client—this is the software that 
allows a remote worker to connect to the VPN server. This software is included in 
Windows XP and Windows Vista.
The VPN server is what remote workers will connect to in order to obtain the information they 
need from your company network. There are a few different options for establishing a VPN 
server. For example, some routers have VPN server capabilities and can be used in place of 
a computer running Windows Server 2003. (That is not covered in this project.) Whatever you 
use, you need to ensure that the VPN server has two network interface cards (NICs). One NIC 
connects to the Internet, and the other connects to your private network. With Windows Server 
2003, the necessary software for your VPN server is included.
Step 2: Set Up Your Virtual Private Network
As you go through the steps to set up your VPN, you need items such as IP addresses 
and administrator passwords. If you are not the administrator for your network, you 
need to include them in this process or get the information you need from them.
tip
tip
note

Set Up a Virtual Private Network  145
A. Apply DHCP Services
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) is just a set of rules. It allocates IP 
addresses (your computer’s Internet address) and configuration options on your net-
work. A few simple steps are needed to implement DHCP services on the Windows 
Server 2003 computer you have designated as the DC.
Set Up DHCP
Click Start and click Control Panel.
Click Add Or Remove Programs.
In the Add or Remove Programs dialog box, click Add/Remove Windows 
Components in the left pane. The Windows Components Wizard will 
appear.
Click Networking Services.
Click Details.
Select Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP). Click OK.
In the Windows Component Wizard dialog box, click Next. Windows will 
install the DHCP services.
Click Finish.
Create an Address Scope and Authorize the DHCP Server 
to Function on Your Network
Click Start and select Administrative Tools. Click DHCP.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
1.
www.ebook3000.com

146  Project 14
In the DHCP window, right-click your server name under Contents of DHCP. 
Select Authorize.
Right-click the server name again. Select New Scope. The New Scope Wizard 
will appear. Click Next.
Enter any name for the scope that you want to create. Click Next.
Now you need to enter an IP address range. This range should be consistent 
with the IP addressing scheme you already use but should not overlap any 
existing IP addresses. Click Next.
The Length and Subnet Mask fields will be filled in for you automatically.
Click Next. You do not need to worry about the Add Exclusions window.
Click Next. You do not need to worry about Lease Duration.
Click Next. Be sure Yes, I Want To Configure These Options Now is selected 
in the Configure DHCP Options window.
Click Next. In the Router (Default Gateway) window, enter the IP address of 
your network’s default gateway. Click Add.
Click Next.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
note

Set Up a Virtual Private Network  147
In the Domain Name and DNS Servers window, type in the name of your 
parent domain. Enter the server name and IP address for the DHCP server. 
Click Next.
Click Next to bypass the WINS Servers window.
In the Activate Scope window, select Yes, I Want To Activate The Scope Now. 
Click Next.
Click Finish. Close the DHCP window.
If you receive the error message that the DHCP service is not running on the tar-
get computer, you need to recheck your DHCP setup and walk through these steps 
again. Verify that all your IP addresses are correct. If all went well, you will have 
a new folder and subfolders under your DHCP server.
B. Create a Certificate Authority
The certificate Authority is a very big deal. Let’s put it this way: If someone gets 
unauthorized access to your certificate authority, you no longer control your own 
network. This process sets up the proper protections for you on the DC:
Click Start and click Control Panel.
Select Add Or Remove Programs.
In the Add or Remove Programs dialog box, click Add/Remove Windows 
Components in the left pane. The Windows Components Wizard will 
appear.
Select Certificate Services. A warning window may appear advising you to 
ensure that the proper machine name and domain membership are config-
ured. If you are satisfied that both are configured correctly, click Yes and 
move to the next step. Otherwise, click No and reconfigure one or both and 
then return to this process.
11.
12.
13.
14.
1.
2.
3.
4.
www.ebook3000.com

148  Project 14
Click Details.
Select the CA subcomponent. (The actual name varies but it will have “CA” 
after it.) Click OK.
Click Next. Under CA Type, select Enterprise Root CA.
Click Next. Enter a common name for the certificate authority as well as 
a certificate validity period.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Set Up a Virtual Private Network  149
Click Next. Windows generates cryptographic keys and sets key 
protections.
A prompt appears asking you to enter a location for the certificate database. 
Keep the default location unless you prefer a different spot. Click Next.
Click Finish.
If you see a message indicating that Windows must restart the IIS services, click 
Yes and Windows will install the necessary components.
C. Install Internet Authentication Service (IAS)
This process will authenticate users who enter your network through the VPN con-
nection. Move to the computer you have designated as your VPN server to complete 
these instructions.
Click Start and click Control Panel.
Select Add Or Remove Programs.
In the Add or Remove Programs dialog box, click Add/Remove Windows 
Components in the left pane. The Windows Components Wizard will 
appear.
Double-click Networking Services.
Select Internet Authentication Service. Click OK.
Click Next. The wizard will install IAS for you.
Click Finish.
9.
10.
11.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
www.ebook3000.com

150  Project 14
D. Configure Internet Authentication Service
This process will completes the authentication for users who enter your network 
through the VPN connection. You will use the computer you have designated as your 
VPN server to complete these instructions.
Click Start and click Control Panel.
Select Administrative Tools and click Internet Authentication Service.
In the Internet Authentication Service window, right-click Internet Authen-
tication Service (Local).
Select Register Server In Active Directory.
Click OK when asked to confirm the authorization.
Click OK if the Service Registered window appears.
In the Internet Authentication Service window, right-click RADIUS Clients.
Select New RADIUS Client. This will be the IP address of the server that the 
VPN server will be configured on.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Set Up a Virtual Private Network  151
Enter a name in Friendly Name and enter the IP address of one of your com-
puters. Click Next.
Under Client-Vendor, be sure RADIUS Standard is selected. Enter and con-
firm a shared secret (any word or character set that you can remember, like 
a password).
Click Finish.
Do not close the Internet Authentication Service window. You need it for Step E.
E. Create a Remote Access Policy
This process sets up the conditions under which users can connect to your VPN. Prior 
to this step, if you have multiple users who will need access, be sure you have an 
Active Directory group established that includes all the users who will access the 
network through the VPN. The group creation process was covered in Project 20, 
Step 5.
In the Internet Authentication Service window, right-click Remote Access 
Policies.
Select New Remote Access Policy. The Remote Access Policy Wizard will 
appear. Click Next.
Be sure Use The Wizard To Set Up A Typical Policy For A Common Scenario 
is selected. Next to Policy Name, enter VPN Access Policy (or choose a dif-
ferent name). Click Next.
9.
10.
11.
1.
2.
3.
note
www.ebook3000.com

152  Project 14
Select VPN. Click Next.
On the User or Group Access screen, select User Or Group. Use the Add and 
Remove buttons as needed. Click Next.
In the Authentication Methods window, select Microsoft Encrypted Authen-
tication version 2 (MS-CHAPv2). Click Next.
4.
5.
6.

Set Up a Virtual Private Network  153
On the Policy Encryption Level window, be sure only Strongest Encryption 
(IPSec Triple DES or MPPE 128-bit) is selected. Deselect Basic and Strong 
options. Click Next.
Click Finish.
Close the Internet Authentication Service window.
F. Configure Your VPN Server
You need to create or check a few settings now. You will use the computer you have 
designated as your VPN server to complete these instructions.
Click Start and click Control Panel.
Click Network Connections. Rename the connections to something that is 
easy to recognize, such as Internal and External. This will help you identify 
which NIC is connected to which network.
Go back to Start and click Administrative Tools.
Click Routing And Remote Access.
Right-click your VPN server in the left pane. The Routing and Remote 
Access Server Setup Wizard will appear.
7.
8.
9.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
www.ebook3000.com

154  Project 14
If a warning window appears, follow its instructions before returning to this configuration process.
Click Next. Select Remote Access (Dial-Up or VPN).
Click Next. Select VPN.
Click Next. Select the network interface that connects the VPN server to the 
Internet. You should see the common names you entered in Step 2 of this 
process.
6.
7.
8.
note

Set Up a Virtual Private Network  155
Select Enable Security On The Selected Interface By Setting Up Static Packet 
Filters. Click Next.
In this step, you are selecting the interface that the VPN users will use to ac-
cess your internal network. Select the appropriate connection from the list 
provided. Click Next.
Select Automatically. Click Next.
Select Yes, Set Up This Server To Work With A RADIUS Server. Click Next.
Enter the primary RADIUS server IP address. This was set up in Step C. 
Enter your shared secret from Step D. Click Next.
Click Finish.
Keep the Routing and Remote Access window open. You need it for the next step.
G. Associate the DHCP Server with the VPN Server
You’re getting very close to the end! This step will complete the VPN configuration 
steps. Stay on the VPN server for these next steps.
In the Routing and Remote Access window, right-click DHCP Relay Agent 
and click Properties.
Enter the IP address of the DHCP server you configured in Step A. Click 
Add.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
1.
2.
www.ebook3000.com

156  Project 14
Click OK. Close the Routing and Remote Access window.
Congratulations! You have set up a VPN for your home office.
Step 3: Configure the Remote Client Access
In order for someone to access the private network, there must be instructions to tell 
the user’s computer how to access the VPN. This process will set up those instruc-
tions. For this process, use a computer you might use to access the VPN from another 
location. This could be a laptop computer or a desktop.
Click Start and click Control Panel.
Double-click Network Connections.
Click New Connection Wizard. Select Connect to the Network at My Work-
place. Click Next.
Select Virtual Private Network Connection. Click Next.
Type in a name for the connection. Click Next.
3.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Set Up a Virtual Private Network  157
Type in the IP address of the VPN server you set up in Step F. Click Next.
Select Do Not Use My Smart Card. Click Next.
Select Anyone’s Use. Click Next.
Select the option to place a shortcut on your desktop for the VPN server. 
Click Finish.
Step 4: Test Your Connection
You just need to test the connection now to be sure everything is set up correctly. On 
your desktop of the same computer you just configured, perform these steps:
Double-click the shortcut on your desktop.
Enter your username and password.
Click Connect.
If the connection doesn’t work, you will see an error message. You will need to go 
back through the steps of this process to determine where your error was made. Other-
wise, the connection will be automatic and you will see this message on your taskbar:
6.
7.
8.
9.
1.
2.
3.
www.ebook3000.com

158  Project 14
Step 5: Consider Managed VPN Options
If you don’t want to worry about all the details but still like the idea of having a 
VPN for your employees, consider using a managed VPN provider. Managed VPN 
services are just what the name implies: they manage the entire VPN process for you, 
taking care of all the details and providing technical support, too. You will still need 
to install software from the provider, but additional equipment shouldn’t be neces-
sary if you already have a network set up (see Project 23).
Try checking with your phone company or other Internet service provider to see 
if they offer a managed VPN option, too—you’ll be surprised at how many providers 
of Internet services are jumping on the managed VPN bandwagon. Managed VPN 
services charge subscription fees for the hosting of your VPN, plus most typically 
charge a monthly fee for each remote user on the VPN. Fees depend on the type 
of services you subscribe to, the numbers of locations involved, and the broadband 
width size used, but they can start at as little as $100 per month and go as high as 
several hundred dollars a month.
Here are a few providers; there are many more available:
Blue Ridge Networks (www.blueridgenetworks.com)
Internap Network Services (www.internap.com)
New Edge Networks (www.newedgenetworks.com)
Positive Networks (www.positivenetworks.com)
The entire process of setting up a VPN is a detailed one, but the benefits of 
providing this kind of network to employees or business colleagues can be many. 
Congratulations on completing the toughest project in this book!
●
●
●
●

Part IV
Enhance Your Sales 
and Marketing
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank

161
Project 15
Earn Advertising 
Incomes from 
Your Blog or 
Web Site
What You’ll Need:
Operating system: Any
Software: None
Hardware: None
Web site: Yes
Cost: $0
Difficulty: Easy
B
usiness web sites are critical in today’s online world. Customers and clients are 
more apt to ask for your web site address than your business card because they 
know that with it, they can get all the information they need from the comfort 
of their home or office. If your web site is set up well, it generates new and repeat busi-
ness for you. That’s all well and good but there’s another thing your web site can do 
silently for you: add a new revenue stream to your business.
Advertising income generated from web site traffic is one of the most overlooked 
revenue streams in small business. Essentially, you sell advertising space on your web 
site and earn money based on the number of times an ad is clicked. Once you have 
set up the advertising program, you don’t need to monitor it—ads are updated and 
changed routinely based on the code you have added to your web site.
A bonus to these advertising programs is that several offer additional features that can help 
improve your web site—search functions, podcasts, etc.
●
●
●
●
●
●
tip
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

162  Project 15
Most people assume that advertising is difficult to set up or that the ads will 
somehow compete with the business messaging on the web site. The truth is that it’s 
fairly simple to set up and the ads can be targeted to complement your web site’s 
content, the user’s geographical location, and other key factors. Payment will vary 
depending upon the amount of traffic your web site receives and the number of clicks 
on the ads. Readers don’t have to buy anything from the ad’s sponsor for you to make 
money but they must actually click the ad for payment to be generated. The real beau-
ty of this system is that it’s free for you—there are absolutely no fees to host ads on 
your web site because you’re the one selling the space. It does take a tiny bit of work, 
however . . . it might take you the better part of an hour to set the whole thing up.
You paid a small fortune to create that web site; why not make some of that mon-
ey back by letting the site do double duty as an online location for your business and 
an advertising space for others?
Contextual ads are ads matched to what visitors on a particular web site are looking for. The ads 
appear based on the content your web site provides and are usually triggered by keywords on the 
web site.
Step 1: Choose an Advertising Partner
There are several companies that offer advertisements for your web site. Each one has 
benefits and drawbacks; look for one that will pay a fee you are happy with and that 
updates ads as quickly as possible when your content changes.
Here are a few advertising partners for you to consider but keep in mind that 
many, many more are available:
Google AdSense (www.google.com/adsense) Provides competitive ad fil-
ters, default ads if a targeted ad can’t be provided, and ad customization to 
match your web site, and offers Google AdSense for Search, which lets you 
place a Google search box on your web site—as people use your search box, 
keyword advertisements appear. If the ad is clicked by someone from your 
search box, you get paid.
Clicksor (www.clicksor.com) Offers text or graphical banners, pop-under 
advertisements, search boxes, contextual inline links, layer ads, and XML 
feeds.
BrightAds (www.kanoodle.com) Uses a topic- and segment-based approach 
instead of keywords to target advertising and allows you to customize ads for 
your site.
Yahoo! Publisher Network (http://publisher.yahoo.com) Enables you to 
choose the color, layout, and size of the ads, get filtering of competitive ads, 
and offer your readers ads in RSS.
●
●
●
●
note

Earn Advertising Incomes from Your Blog or Web Site  163
ValueClick Media (www.valueclickmedia.com) Formerly known as Fast-
Click, provides video advertising along with text and banner ads. Requires a 
minimum of 3000 impressions (web site visitors) per month.
MSN ContentAds (www.adcenter.microsoft.com) In beta testing at the 
end of 2006; expected to heavily compete with Google AdSense.
Payments for web site ads are typically made on a cost-per-click (CPC) or cost-per-1000-
impressions (CPM) basis. If your site doesn’t have a lot of visitors, go with a CPC payment.
Step 2: Sign Up for Your Advertising Program
Every advertising program has policies it will ask you to abide by. Some programs 
may restrict you from using two different advertising programs on a single web site, 
for example, or may prohibit you from instructing readers to help you earn money 
by clicking advertiser links (this skews advertising numbers to your benefit). When 
you sign up for a program, check the program policies first to be sure you can stick 
with them.
Once you’re ready to sign up, go to the home page of your chosen program and 
follow the instructions. I decided to use Google AdSense on my writing web site, so 
I’ll use that as an example of how the process goes. Here are the steps I followed:
Go to www.google.com/adsense and click Click Here To Apply, as shown in 
Figure 15-1.
Complete the application. (Under Product Selection, I chose both AdSense 
for Content and for Search.)
Click Submit Information.
●
●
1.
2.
3.
Figure 15-1 
Google AdSense is one 
of the most popular 
online advertising 
programs for web site 
publishers.
tip
www.ebook3000.com

164  Project 15
Double-check the information on the summary page—you can’t change the 
payee name or country/territory later. Click Continue.
If you do not have an account with Google, you need to create one now. Selecting I Do Not Use 
These Other Services will automatically provide you with the option for creating your account.
Wait for the e-mail from Google. When it arrives, click the link provided to 
activate the application review by Google.
It could take 1–2 days to receive approval or declination from Google, although 
I received mine in just a couple of hours. If you receive approval, go to Step 3. If you 
don’t, try a different advertising program that allows content from your web site.
Most advertising programs will review your site and its content before allowing you to join the 
program. Sites with pornography, gambling, excessive profanity, and similar types of content are 
often not accepted—be sure to check site content restrictions before taking the time to sign up.
Step 3: Get Started with Your Program
When your application is approved, Google sends a congratulatory e-mail with in-
structions for logging in and implementing the advertising code. It also includes a 
link to a detailed video walkthrough. Other programs provide similar options; just 
follow the instructions provided for the program you choose. With any program, you 
need to determine where the ads will be placed on your web site and what they 
should look like. Carefully consider these two aspects before you generate ad code 
and place it on your web site.
For Google, the next steps are to log into the account so the AdSense code can be 
generated and added to your web site:
Upon login, you need to accept the terms and conditions of the program.
Once that’s done, the Google AdSense Overview page appears. Click the 
AdSense Setup tab.
Choose the product you want to add to your site: AdSense for Content, 
AdSense for Search, or Referrals. For this example, I chose AdSense for 
Content.
Choose the ad type you want (ad unit or link unit). Click Continue.
Choose your ad format and colors. Click Continue.
Choose ad channels (these help you monitor ad performance—take some 
time to read through the details provided by Google). Click Continue.
Get your ad code by copying the code provided.
4.
5.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
note
note

Earn Advertising Incomes from Your Blog or Web Site  165
Paste the ad code into your web site wherever you want—once the code is 
live, ads should begin appearing within 48 hours as shown in Figure 15-2. 
(Mine appeared within a minute or two.)
When you choose the ads to display, keep in mind that sometimes there might not 
be ads that exactly meet the filtering criteria for your web site. You should be prompted 
at some point to designate replacement ads in case contextual ads are not available. 
8.
Figure 15-2 
Sample ad appearing 
on the author’s web 
site immediately after 
pasting in ad code
www.ebook3000.com

166  Project 15
In Figure 15-3, you can see the public service announcement that appeared on my web 
site when a contextual ad wasn’t available—I had requested that PSAs appear when-
ever the other ads didn’t.
Figure 15-3 
Ads will change based 
on the criteria you 
assign.
Most advertising programs allow you to place your code on multiple sites as long as you own 
each site. Take advantage of this if your program allows it!
Step 4: Maximize Your Ad Revenue
If you find that you like this method of revenue generation, you’ll want to increase 
the traffic on your web site. Here are six tips for doing that:
Place valuable content on your site. Include content that attracts advertisements 
higher-paying consumers will find irresistible. Keep updating the content, 
too. Visitors will return more often to web sites that have continually chang-
ing and time-sensitive information.
Use copy on your site that encourages people to click ads. While programs like 
AdSense will prohibit the phrase “Click my AdSense Ad to help pay for this 
site” it will allow phrases such as “Sponsored Links” or “Advertisements.”
Use a tool to help improve your site’s ranking on search engines. Tools such as 
Search Engine Optimizer evaluate your web page and give you suggestions 
for improving its ranking on search engines.
Use keywords on your site that search engine users enter when looking for informa-
tion. Programs such as Wordtracker can help you determine the most used 
keywords by various target audiences.
Cross-link with other logically connected businesses in your area. For example, if 
you are an insurance broker, place a link on your site for a local mortgage 
broker—and ask them to place your link on their site.
Use a web site traffic analysis program. Know who is visiting your site—and 
what they did while they were there. Try StatCounter.com, ClickTracks, or 
similar programs.
Regardless of the program you use, you also need to be sure you have provided the proper 
financial account information so that you can be paid according to the terms of your agreement. 
Some programs pay biweekly, some monthly. Some pay only when your payment reaches a certain 
level, so if you don’t have a lot of traffic to your site, you might not see any money for a few 
months.
●
●
●
●
●
●
tip
note

167
Project 16
Establish an 
eBay Store
What You’ll Need:
Operating system: Any
Software: None
Hardware: None
Cost: $15.95 to $499.95/month
Difficulty: Challenging
W
hat exactly is your business? Do you sell products or services? Do you have 
inventory on hand? Are you interested in generating more income over the 
Internet? One more question: Do you have an eBay store?
Lots of businesses have web sites. Some are informational sites, some are com-
merce sites, and some are not worth the space they take up on the Web. If you are a 
small business, it’s not easy to build a web site with worldwide reach, yet local reach 
often doesn’t mean much in terms of product sales. If you have products to sell, how-
ever, you must be on the Web—consumers that do show up expect you to be there in 
full force, and tend to distrust businesses that don’t have a presence. As a result, more 
and more businesses are finding that eBay—with its steady stream of customers look-
ing for products to buy—is a viable addition to their web portfolio.
One reason businesses are turning to eBay is that buyers on eBay are increasingly 
coming from international locations—the strength of other currencies against the dol-
lar encourages them to buy American products. And, with an average of thousands of 
unique visitors daily, even skeptics must admit that eBay is ripe with sales opportu-
nity.
eBay offers discussion boards, an Answer Center, chat rooms, and other tools for sellers.
●
●
●
●
●
tip
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

168  Project 16
Step 1: Set Up Your Accounts
You need to have a user account to sell on eBay. It’s just like setting up an account 
anywhere else; follow the prompts and fill in the information as requested.
On the eBay home page, click Register, as shown in Figure 16-1.
On the next page, you have the option to register as a business or individual. 
Choose the option you prefer, and fill in the required fields.
Click Continue and follow all prompts until your registration is complete.
1.
2.
3.
Figure 16-1 
The registration 
process starts on the 
home page of eBay.
To make customers happy, you also need to have a PayPal account so you can ac-
cept payments with that method. A huge number of eBay buyers use PayPal; if you 
want them to buy from you, you’d better offer it.
PayPal will require that you provide them with a checking account (for deposit-
ing your payments) along with other normal registration information. Go to www
.paypal.com and click Sign Up Now! on the home page to establish your account. 
Once your account is established, you can add a PayPal logo to your eBay store, plus 
receive a variety of seller protections such as fraud prevention, dispute resolution as-
sistance, and coverage for qualified chargebacks. Another handy feature in a global 
economy: PayPal allows you to accept payments in 16 different currencies and auto-
matically converts payments to your currency.
PayPal offers fee eBay sales and marketing tools and can help you with shipping payments 
as well as tracking shipments.
Step 2: Create Your eBay Store
Once you have registered, log on to eBay and go to My eBay. In the Related Links 
section on the bottom right of the page, click Selling Resources.
tip

Establish an eBay Store  169
This will take you to the Selling-Related Links page. On the bottom right, click 
Create An eBay Store.
Even if you are already signed in to eBay, you may be prompted for your user ID 
and password again. Go ahead and enter those if necessary and click Sign In Securely. 
Then follow these steps:
Choose your subscription level. (You can always upgrade later.)
Choose a store name.
Click Continue.
Select additional products as desired. Click Continue.
Read and accept the terms of service.
Click Subscribe.
That’s it—your store has been created. Any active sales listings you might have 
had prior to creating a store will automatically flow into your new store. You will 
receive a confirmation e-mail from eBay. There is still a bit more work to be done, 
however. I’ll explain in the next section.
Be careful when naming your store—you cannot use a name that is identical to or could be 
confused with a company name protected by trademark law.
Step 3: Design Your Storefront
When you reach Subscribe to Stores: Congratulations, click Start Quick Store Setup. 
You have two options: to accept all of the recommended settings (just click Apply Set-
tings) or to customize the settings the way you want.
You can customize your store settings in five areas:
Store color and theme
Store description
Item display
Promotion boxes
Store marketing
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
●
●
●
●
●
note
www.ebook3000.com

170  Project 16
Click Edit under any area you want to customize. When you have made the 
changes you want in each area, click Save. When you are done with all changes in all 
areas, click Apply Settings.
Next, you’ll see the Manage My Store page. This shows you the URL assigned 
to your store (you can use this on your business web site to link buyers to products, 
for example) and a variety of information about your store. Take some time to read 
through this page; eBay wants its sellers to succeed and thus offers a variety of cus-
tomer support options and tips for increasing buyer traffic to your store.
You can always go back and edit your store’s appearance at any time. Play around with designs 
and colors until you find the combination that works for you.
Step 4: Start Selling Your Products
Now the real fun begins—and it can be fun. On the Manage My Store page, find 
the Start Selling Now! section. Click Sell Your Item Form. You may be prompted to 
reenter your eBay user ID and password.
Select a Selling Format
The next page asks you to determine the selling format you want to use. There are 
four formats:
Sell Item at Online Auction The standard method used by the majority 
of sellers on eBay. This allows bidding for the item but you still set an initial 
price. You can also add the Buy It Now option, which is a price you establish 
for anyone willing to forgo the auction process and simply purchase the item 
outright.
Sell at a Fixed Price Just like it says, a price is set and buyers can purchase 
the item only at that price. No bidding is accepted.
Sell in Store Inventory Items are listed at a set price and no bidding is 
allowed.
Create an Ad Format Listing Items are listed as a method to generating 
multiple leads; no transactions are completed online. This listing is good for 
services and real estate offerings.
Choose a format and then click Continue.
For this project, we will walk through selling an item at online auction. Once you 
understand that process, it’s very simple to try one of the others—the processes aren’t 
terribly different although your specific content may be different in each process.
●
●
●
●
tip

Establish an eBay Store  171
Choose a Category for the Product
Take your time with this section—choosing categories is critical to seller success. The 
best way I’ve found to select the right category for my items is to do a quick keyword 
search for the item I plan to list, then take a good look at where other sellers have 
listed similar items. As shown in Figure 16-2, entering the keyword is one of the first 
sections shown to you.
Figure 16-2 
Searching by keyword 
can help you quickly 
establish the right 
competitive category 
for your product.
In my case, I’m going to list a copy of Microsoft Office Professional Edition 2003. I 
entered that title into the keyword search and the results popped up clearly showing 
that Computers & Networking/Software was the place for my product (see Figure 16-3). 
If you choose this method, you can simply click Sell In This Category and continue.
Figure 16-3 
The results of a 
keyword search are 
clearly displayed with 
the percentages of 
similar items in 
various category 
listings.
Let’s assume, however, that you didn’t want one of the categories shown in the 
keyword results list. Click Cancel to return to the Select Category page. Under Browse 
Categories, click a category from the list in the first box on the left.
Once you choose an initial category, subcategories appear in the second box. 
Now that you can see categories in the second box—select a subcategory. Continue 
this process as long as new categories appear for your product. Some products have 
www.ebook3000.com

172  Project 16
multiple subcategories; others may have just one. When there are no more subcatego-
ries, the final box will be light gray and indicate that you should continue below.
Now you need to decide whether or not to list the item in a second category. 
While adding a second category can expand the number of buyers who see your list-
ing, it also adds to the fees eBay imposes. For your first item, try one category—you 
can always use this feature as you get more familiar with listing items.
Click Continue.
Describe Your Item
Here’s where the fun comes in: creating a description that will catch a buyer’s eye. 
If you have items that everyone else is describing identically, take a minute to find 
a new way to describe the item. “MS Office Professional Edition 2003” is the name of 
the product I’m selling; the title and description I’m entering on this page is “NEW & 
SEALED IN BOX! MS OFFICE 2003 PRO Great Gift!”
You also have an option on this page to add a subtitle for a small fee. Plus, you 
need to indicate the item’s condition—new or used.
Now, scroll down the page and you’ll see an Item Description box. This is where 
you can get really creative. If you’ve interested the buyer enough to look at your 
product, you really need to hook them in this section. Use the font, color, and other 
text buttons to make your text really pop.

Establish an eBay Store  173
Click Preview to see how your listing will look; when you’re satisfied, click 
Continue.
Add Pricing, Pictures, and Other Details
At this point, you’ll enter pricing, pictures, and additional details for your listing. Se-
lect the main store category for your item (you can choose a second category as well if 
you like) and then move to Starting Price. While a lower starting price can offer more 
bids, don’t make yours so low that you’ll never make the price you expect for the 
item. Check similar listings to see where their bids started to help you get an idea of a 
good starting point. Unless I really think bids will go crazy, I like to choose a starting 
price as well as a Buy It Now price. The starting price simply starts your bidders off; 
the Buy It Now price is the price you agree to sell the item for if someone is willing to 
buy the item for the indicated price.
Under Duration, select the time limit for your auction (between 1 and 10 days) 
and the start time for the auction.
Under Quantity, don’t forget to select how many of the items you have for sale in 
this auction.
Quantity auctions can be a little confusing. If you have 50 drills you want to sell for $5 each, list 
a quantity of 50 and a starting price of $5. Bidders will specify both the offered price and the 
number of drills they want. The highest total bid value (bid price multiplied by the number of 
items bid on) will win; other bidders get that price and whatever quantity is left.
note
www.ebook3000.com

174  Project 16
Item Location
This is important—you need to be sure the ZIP code and location of your product are 
included in your auction. These two items help bidders determine whether or not the 
shipping costs and potential mailing time for the item are worth the time and effort 
to bid.
Add Pictures
The first picture for your item is free; use the opportunity to display a photo that says 
everything. If you need to use multiple photos to get the sales point across, that’s 
fine—a small fee will be added for every picture included. eBay Basic Picture Services 
is fine for most listings although you can take advantage of an enhanced picture ser-
vice if you like.
Download any pictures to your hard disk and then click Browse to add the 
picture(s), as shown in Figure 16-4. You can add 12 pictures per listing. eBay offers 
some options like supersizing pictures and a picture show—take advantage of any 
offers that are free, and think twice about any that require a fee. The fees seem small 
but if you keep adding fee-based options to your listing, your profit will be reduced 
accordingly.
Figure 16-4 
Up to 12 pictures can 
be added to support 
your listing.
Listing Designer
The standard layout for your listing is text on top, picture on the bottom. If you want 
to change that, you need to select Listing Designer. This option offers a variety of 
backgrounds and frames for your item’s page, along with the choice of different lay-
outs. This is a totally personal choice; I typically stick with the standard layout and 
have sold plenty of items that way.

Establish an eBay Store  175
Increase Your Item’s Visibility
If you want to bundle some of the options you have chosen, the Value Pack might be 
a good choice for you. It bundles photo gallery, subtitle, and Listing Designer charges 
into one package so that you save a few pennies.
The Pro Pack is a much bigger package at a much bigger price. I don’t recommend 
it unless you have an extremely high ticket item.
In this section, eBay gives you one last chance to select options such as bold text 
in your headline or promotion and gift services. Choose them if you wish, then click 
Continue.
Choose Payment and Shipping Options
The Payment and Shipping section is pretty self-explanatory. Choose the payment 
methods you’ll accept from buyers (PayPal, money order, cashier’s check, personal 
check, etc.) and then move down the page.
Payment Address
Be sure the payment address listed for you is correct and decide if you want to offer 
any buyer financing options.
Set Shipping and Sales Tax Costs
Specifying shipping costs is a smart thing to do—these stay on your profile so you 
don’t have to continually update them with every item you list. You have three ship-
ping cost options here: Flat, Calculated, and Freight. Each has a drop-down menu 
(shown in Figure 16-5) you can use to simplify your shipping selections but you can 
also add other shipping methods.
Flat You establish the full cost for shipping and the cost is the same to all buy-
ers regardless of location. It’s easy to include handling costs with this one.
Calculated The cost is based on the buyer’s address and the type of shipping 
service they choose. You can specify the shipping services you agree to use.
Freight This is used for large items over 150 pounds.
●
●
●
www.ebook3000.com

176  Project 16
Use the shipping calculator whenever you can—this helps buyers see accurate 
shipping costs and often encourages sales.
Payment Instructions
There are other sections on this page to complete but the most important is the Pay-
ment Instructions section. This is where you can clearly state your return policy, how 
items will be shipping, what you want international buyers to do, etc. For example, 
my payment instructions read:
Payment is expected within 72 hours of purchase. If you do not submit pay-
ment within that time, items will be relisted and buyer feedback will be 
submitted accordingly. No returns. I do my best to describe items as accu-
rately as possible. ASK QUESTIONS BEFORE BIDDING! All items shipped 
at buyer's expense and risk. Please obtain shipping insurance if you are 
concerned about shipping risks. INTERNATIONAL BUYERS (Outside U.S.) 
Please email for shipping rates before sending payment.
I want buyers to be crystal clear that I do not accept returns, that shipping insur-
ance is their problem, and that shipping rates shown do not apply to buyers outside 
the United States.
Complete any other sections on the page and then click Continue.
Just one more step to complete!
Review and Submit
This section starts with personalized recommendations from eBay to help improve your 
listing’s chances of success. Take those under consideration but follow your instincts.
Below that, you can review your actual listing. You can preview how your item 
will appear to buyers, make edits where desired, and confirm pricing, shipping, du-
ration, and other details.
Figure 16-5 
Selecting shipping 
methods on eBay is 
fast and easy.

Establish an eBay Store  177
Review the Fees and Submit Your Listing
Remember all the little fees that I mentioned can really add up? This is where you 
will see the total amount of those fees. Plus, a Final Value Fee is charged if your item 
sells—you can check here for details on that fee.
Click the Button to Actually Submit the Listing
When you are confident your listing is complete, click Submit Listing. When Sell Your 
Item: Congratulations appears, your item will be listed on eBay and the indicated fees 
will be charged to your account. It might take a few minutes for your listing to appear 
on eBay, but it will, just as mine did in Figure 16-6.
Figure 16-6 
Here is my new store 
with its first product!
www.ebook3000.com

178  Project 16
If you don’t want to do everything all at once, don’t stress. You can access your store account by 
going to My eBay from the eBay home page, then clicking Seller Account.
You will receive a confirmation e-mail from eBay showing that your listing has 
been posted. Go ahead—list something else! The first one took a lot of time, but now 
the process will go much more quickly since you’re used to it and you have already 
entered several details that eBay will retain for your next listing. Good luck!
Other Considerations
Now that your eBay store has been established, there are a couple of other consider-
ations for you.
First, you can link your eBay store to a commerce web site. This is particularly 
helpful if you already have products listed on your personal web site and want to use 
eBay to supplement the sales activity. Check under Seller Account to find out how to 
link the two together.
Second, PayPal. PayPal, PayPal, PayPal! You can link a merchant account to your 
eBay store if you already have one established but keep in mind that many, many 
eBay buyers use PayPal. If you don’t have a PayPal account for them to use, you are 
losing buyers you never even dreamed of. I can’t stress enough the importance of it, 
especially in the global atmosphere of this selling site.
PayPal lets you accept credit card payments even on your own web site (U.S. only) just like you 
would with a merchant account. Your customers don’t need to have a PayPal account, either. 
Check out Website Payments Standard or Pro on the PayPal site for more details.
Third, check the Selling Manager Summary under Seller Account for reports and 
updates on your sales activity. This monitors all your listings, shows your payments, 
disputes, and shipping status, and provides details about a variety of other aspects 
of your store.
Fourth, check out all the marketing tools eBay provides. You might find some tips 
for your own brick-and-mortar store!
An eBay store is a viable option for selling products and even services online. If 
you’re nervous about setting up a full store, get your feet wet with a few individual 
listings first. Once you see how easy it is to list and sell on eBay, you’ll wonder why 
you haven’t tried this avenue before.
tip
tip

179
Project 17
Set Up 
a Commerce 
Web Site
What You’ll Need:
Software: Yes, depends upon solution chosen
Hardware: None
Web site and Internet connection: Yes
Cost: $10/month and up
Difficulty: Advanced
M
ost business owners have a simple, informative web site that offers informa-
tion about the company and general details about products and services 
provided. That’s great, but it’s a good bet your web site could be doing more 
for you by selling your products and services 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Sites that 
sell products and services are called commerce sites, or e-commerce sites.
If you don’t already have commerce capabilities on your web site, you’re poten-
tially missing out on sales to people who prefer to shop anonymously, online, and at 
all hours of the day or night. And if you don’t have a web site at all, well, you’re just 
sending potential buyers to someone who does.
Now, you might be saying that you “only” provide services to clients, or “just” one 
or two products—why bother with a commerce site? Obviously, the final decision to 
sell online is up to you but if you’re in business, the objective is to sell whatever you’re 
offering. Why bother with a commerce site? Because it can sell almost anything you offer. 
Not everything, of course, is appropriate for sale online. But many, many items are.
Services can be sold the same way products are, for instance. You might offer pack-
ages consisting of hours of your expertise. For example, a financial planner might of-
fer an introductory package that consists of a one-hour consultation and a three-page 
financial recommendation. Additional packages offered might be a full financial plan 
with a certain number of consulting hours included or a set number of consulting 
hours at a discount if purchased online. The possibilities really are endless; it’s up to 
you to decide how your services could be marketed and sold online.
●
●
●
●
●
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

180  Project 17
Consumers, by the way, are increasingly accepting e-commerce business models. 
Although there are still concerns over security, safety improvements in the last few 
years have reassured many buyers that Internet shopping is a reasonable alternative 
to hopping in the car and driving to the store.
When you add commerce capabilities to a web site, you don’t really deal with the 
credit information—the Internet merchant provider you select will house all card-
holder information and process the sale, providing you with an approval and then 
placing the money into your bank account. The assumption for this project is that you 
already have an online presence; if you do not, you’ll want to take advantage of some 
of the commerce options that offer web site setup as well as commerce capabilities. 
Both will be covered in this project. There is a lot of research and thought that will 
go into this project; you’ll have to make many decisions on your own. But ultimately, 
you’ll learn how to determine which commerce option is best for you and the process 
for setting it up on your web site.
The 2006 holiday season was good for online retailers—comScore Networks reported that 
Internet shopping increased by 26 percent over 2005. The overall year was a good one, too. 
Annual online spending in 2006 surpassed $100 billion for the first time, with Internet sales 
comprising 7 percent of all U.S. retail revenue.
Step 1: Consider All Your Options Before You Begin
Beyond determining which of the products or services you have that are appropriate 
for sale online, there are several other considerations to keep in mind before setting 
up commerce capabilities on your web site:
First, your web site must be attractive and easy to navigate. A good graphic de-
signer can help with this but there are plenty of services that offer web site design 
services along with commerce options.
Second, your ability to deliver the product or service in a timely manner is critical. 
If you can’t back up your online sales with prompt service or product delivery, you’ll 
be dealing with complaints and unhappy customers instead of counting the dollars 
in your bank account.
Third, payment options need to be as varied as those offered by traditional brick-
and-mortar retailers. That means offering options along with credit and debit card 
transactions, such as e-checks or PayPal.
Fourth, and possibly most important, your business model must be a sound one 
with strong market research and analysis to determine what buyers want from you. 
Online sales won’t improve a poor business model.
Now that you have these items to consider, also take some time to determine 
exactly what you want to sell online and how much those items will average in cost. 
Some credit card merchants charge fees based on the average product sale from your 
site (see Figure 17-1 for an application example); you need to have at least a general 
idea of that average number as you set up commerce capabilities. You also need to be 
able to anticipate what you think the credit card volume might be on a monthly ba-
sis—guessing is fine, but make it an educated guess since your fees may be tied to it.
note

Set Up a Commerce Web Site  181
Another good idea is to have photos available of your products or that some-
how illustrate your services. Most commerce options allow you to upload photos and 
business logos, so have these ready before you jump into the online retailing game.
Every e-commerce solution will differ in its merchant solution requirements. For 
example, some will require that your web site clearly list a return/refund policy and 
a customer service contact phone number. Others may require that you be in business 
for a certain amount of time before a merchant account will be approved. As you look 
at all your options, check the merchant account requirements before applying to be 
certain you qualify. Even though you might not qualify with one provider, you might 
be eagerly accepted at the next.
PayPal links to buyer bank accounts to directly transfer money from the buyer to the seller. 
Wildly popular on eBay, this payment option is now becoming used by a variety of online 
retailers who have no links to eBay at all.
Step 2: Understand the Components of Online 
Credit Card Processing
Online credit card processing differs from its brick-and-mortar counterpart in a cou-
ple of very distinct ways: the shopping cart, the Internet gateway, and the Internet 
merchant account.
When you use a credit card in a retail store such as Macy’s, you hand it directly to 
the merchant for processing. The merchant sends the card information for approval, 
approval is received, and the transaction is complete. Funds are sent to the merchant’s 
Figure 17-1 
Most applications 
require you to include 
information regarding 
anticipated average 
transaction size and 
monthly credit card 
volume.
tip
www.ebook3000.com

182  Project 17
designated account. Fraud is safeguarded against by a face-to-face check of the buyer 
and the buyer’s signature.
Customer Credit 
or Debit Card
Source of funds
for the transaction.
Merchant
Verifies
signature/identity
processes card to
receive approval
or denial.
Funds Received
Funds are placed
into merchant’s
designated
account.
When you use a credit card online, some extra steps are required to protect both 
the customer and the merchant from fraud, as well as to make the experience simple 
and easy for both. Instead of handing the credit card directly to the merchant, the 
buyer inputs the card information into a shopping cart that also holds the product 
information. An Internet gateway securely transfers the credit card information to 
the Internet merchant account by using an encryption process to foil thieves. The 
card information is verified and approved electronically and funds are placed into the 
merchant’s designated account.
Customer Credit
or Debit Card
Source of funds
for the
transaction.
Internet Merchant
Account
Electronically
verifies account for
funds, processes
card to receive 
approval or denial.
Funds Received
Funds are placed
into merchant’s
designated
account.
Shopping Cart
Collection point for
credit card,
product, shipping
and delivery
information.
Internet Gateway
Encrypts 
information and
securely transfers
it to merchant
account.
Even though there are additional steps involved in the online credit card process, 
the steps are invisible to you and your customers. The extra items are all handled 
electronically behind the scenes in real time.
What isn’t invisible is the initial setup of the extra steps. When you add commerce 
capabilities to your web site (or build a new site with those capabilities), you need to 
be sure you have a shopping cart, an Internet gateway, and an Internet merchant ac-
count. With those three items, you can sell online. As you read through the following 
sections, you’ll see how all these items are offered by providers—either individually 
or in bulk—to give you the needed processing features for completing a sale online.
If you already have a merchant account for your business, don’t assume you can accept Internet 
orders. Many banks require separate merchant accounts for brick-and-mortar transactions and 
Internet transactions.
Step 3: Add Commerce Capabilities 
to an Existing Web Site
When you add commerce capabilities to any web site, you don’t really deal with 
the credit information—the merchant provider you select houses all cardholder in-
formation and processes the sale, providing you with an approval and then placing 
note

Set Up a Commerce Web Site  183
the money into your bank account as shown in previous illustrations. However, it’s 
important that you select a solution provider that meets your needs.
Ideally, the merchant provider you select will offer the shopping cart, Internet 
gateway, and Internet merchant account capabilities you need. Some providers do this 
by placing all these items into your site; others do it by allowing you access to their 
capabilities or by linking you instantly to third-party providers. A few providers fall 
short of providing all three, however, so it’s imperative that you do your homework 
before making a final choice. For example, some providers offer an Internet merchant 
account but not a shopping cart or Internet gateway. If you select one of these provid-
ers, it’s not necessarily a setback to get to the final solution but it creates more work 
on your part since you need to find other providers for the missing pieces.
My recommendation is to work with a provider that offers all three pieces you 
need. If you find one that only offers one piece of the puzzle and doesn’t have an eas-
ily integrated process for the other pieces, keep searching.
How e-Commerce Solution Providers Work
Every e-commerce solution provider is different; some require lengthy applications 
and several days to grant approval while others can be up and running within a few 
hours. Each one, however, requires your bank account information as well as ba-
sic information about your business so that payments can be properly made to you. 
Don’t be surprised if you’re asked for the following information on any e-commerce 
solution site:
Your social security number, driver’s license number, or other identifying 
information
Bank account and routing number of your checking account
Information about your business, such as a tax identification number and 
location information
Just like the bank on the street corner, every merchant account solution provider 
offers different processing terms, too. That’s a big factor to consider when making 
your selection.
Application fees can vary from very low to very high (international accounts typi-
cally have higher fees overall), and monthly fees just to have the account open can 
range from $2 to more than $20. Other fees to be aware of are also standard in the 
industry: discount rates and per-transaction fees. Each online transaction is typically 
charged a percentage of the total dollar amount charged (this is a discount rate) as 
well as a fee for that transaction (per-transaction fee). Both can vary wildly, so shop 
around!
Whether you are a low- or high-volume seller, you’ll want the best possible com-
bination of the three fees: monthly, discount, and transaction. It’s a good idea to find 
at least three potential candidates for your business, then compare their rates on a 
line-by-line basis to see which one works best in your particular situation. The more 
you sell, the more willing banks are to offer you better rates.
●
●
●
www.ebook3000.com

184  Project 17
Other fees can be charged as part of a merchant account: a reserve fund, which covers charge-
backs, and chargeback fees, similar to the nonsufficient funds fees charged for bad checks.
Popular e-Commerce Solution Providers
There are hundreds of e-commerce solution providers available to add to your web 
site. Fees vary by provider. Here are some popular online options to consider:
Google Checkout (www.google.com/services) Offers merchant solutions 
and shopping cart functions and money back for users of its AdWords pro-
gram. Users need a Google ID and password.
PayPal (www.paypal.com) Offers gateway and merchant solutions, includ-
ing e-mail and credit card payments. Integrates with many shopping carts. 
Customers do not need a PayPal account for web site payment options.
Authorize.Net Payment Gateway (www.authorize.net) Accepts a variety 
of payments including e-checks, gift cards, signature debits, and Internet 
auctions. It also integrates with dozens of shopping cart solutions.
First Data (www.firstdata.com) Offers several solutions, including Tele-
Check acceptance and shopping cart functions.
It’s a good idea to check with your local bank to see if it offers e-commerce solutions. Banks 
sometimes have very lengthy qualification applications to complete but you can often get special 
rates if you are an existing customer.
●
●
●
●
tip
tip

Set Up a Commerce Web Site  185
Popular Shopping Cart Options
Dozens of shopping carts are available, all with varying fees. If you choose an 
e-commerce solution provider such as PayPal that integrates with shopping carts but 
doesn’t offer its own, you need to add a shopping cart to your site before you can 
use the solution provider for the merchant and gateway features. However, many 
e-commerce solutions include shopping carts, such as the one shown in Figure 17-2, so it’s 
important to decide upon the solution provider you want before worrying about whether 
or not you need a shopping cart. If you do need one with your provider, the provider will 
give you instructions for how to add the shopping cart to your web site as well as tell you 
the shopping cart solutions that the provider most easily integrates with.
Figure 17-2 
This example from 
McGraw-Hill shows 
a book added to a 
simple shopping cart.
Shopping cart solutions vary in many ways: layout, real-time shipping rates, cod-
ing required to add the cart to your site, and more. Some may integrate with Quick-
Books, for example, to help you with accounting. Others may only allow certain types 
of products to be sold, while some have no limitations. All, however, will perform the 
same basic steps and require information similar to that shown in Figure 17-3.
Each shopping cart provider charges a fee; some charge by the month, others 
charge a one-time licensing fee. Here are some places to start:
1ShoppingCart.com (www.1shoppingcart.com) $29/month. 
ClickCartPro (www.clickcartpro.com) One-time license fee of $179. 
eMartCart (www.emartcart.com) $14.95/month. 
X-Cart (www.x-cart.com) One-time license fees dependent on cart chosen; 
$199–$499. 
eCart (www.webassist.com) Offers both a one-time fee ($249.99) and 
a monthly subscription fee ($19.99). 
SecureNetShop (www.securenetshop.com) Starts at $19.99/month. 
As you search for a shopping cart, keep in mind the type of products or services 
you sell. Some cart options might work better for your particular sales needs; don’t 
just choose a shopping cart because your buddy has it.
●
●
●
●
●
●
www.ebook3000.com

186  Project 17
Step 3: Create a New Web Site 
with Commerce Capabilities
There are so many providers offering to help create a new web site with commerce 
capabilities that it might take an entire book just to go through them all. If you 
don’t have the technical know-how to create a web site from scratch and add the 
e-commerce solution you need, these all-in-one solutions are a terrific way to start 
selling on the Web quickly and easily. Some even claim you can have a commerce 
web site set up within five minutes.
These solutions offer you customizable templates—just choose a design from the 
ones offered, and fill in the blanks as you walk through the process steps. Before you 
know it, you’ll have a completely personalized web site.
Figure 17-3 
As customers move 
through the shopping 
cart process, they are 
asked for billing, 
shipping, and credit 
card information 
before the transaction 
is processed.

Set Up a Commerce Web Site  187
For some solutions, you may need to work with your Internet service provider 
(the service you use to connect to the Internet, such as your phone or cable company), 
whereas other solutions can even set you up with a domain name and anything else 
needed. Keep your ISP phone numbers handy as you go through this process so that 
you can make a quick call if necessary.
The beauty of using one of these options is that everything is integrated for you—
from choosing a domain name to adding your products, the steps are all-inclusive. 
This is particularly helpful if you just want to start selling online without worrying 
about how all the pieces fit together.
Popular All-in-One e-Commerce Solution Providers
Here are the five well-known providers; you can find hundreds more with a simple 
online search. Each of these allows you to create a web site complete with full com-
merce capabilities.
Yahoo! Small Business (http://smallbusiness.yahoo.com) Offers web 
hosting and e-commerce site solutions with 24-hour phone support.
Look for a provider that offers 24-hour telephone support.
Merchant Accounts Express  (www.merchantexpress.com/ecommerce_
website_builder.htm)  Offers a web site builder with a full e-commerce 
shopping cart and merchant account capability built-in.
GoDaddy.com (www.godaddy.com) Provides simple web site builders as 
well as a QuickBooks merchant solution and shopping carts.
MonsterCommerce (www.monstercommerce.com) Offers web site tem-
plates and graphics, shopping cart, and integration with PayPal merchant 
and gateway solutions.
MIVA (www.miva.com) Offers MIVA Merchant, which integrates with 
PayPal merchant and gateway solutions and offers 400 modules to tailor 
your online store.
●
●
●
●
●
tip
www.ebook3000.com

188  Project 17
Managing and fulfilling orders is key to online sales success. Look for a commerce provider that 
will send automated faxes or e-mails when new orders are received.
Step 4: Add the Commerce Option of Your Choice
This is where things get a bit tricky. Because of the multitude of choices available, I 
will only review the basics of this process instead of showing you detailed steps. The 
nice thing is that the most popular online options are designed with the novice in 
mind. That means the process is fairly simple and easy to understand. If you decide to 
use different providers and integrate them yourself, you might find the going a little 
more difficult. But don’t despair! You can do this. Just allow yourself extra time if you 
plan to do the integration on your own.
Research and decide upon an e-commerce solution provider.
Sign up with that provider and obtain necessary approvals, passwords, and 
account information. 
Step 2 can take 3 to 5 days depending upon the solution you have chosen.
Download and install the solution according to the provider’s instructions.
Add a separate shopping cart if necessary by signing up with a shopping 
cart provider and following its installation instructions (not required by all-
in-one solutions).
Build the web site if necessary (not necessary if you already have a web site).
Add products or services to the e-commerce solution you have selected, 
according to its directions.
Begin selling products online.
So many of these providers offer setup wizards that the actual steps involved—
while they may be lengthy—should be relatively simple to walk through. Expect to 
spend several hours of actual work on this, though. It’s better to move slowly through 
the process your provider outlines than to rush and become confused.
Use the technical support your solution provider offers if you run into any problems or don’t 
understand a step in the process. These technical teams are there to help you get things set up 
correctly; if you don’t, they lose a customer and revenue. Don’t be afraid to use them as often as 
necessary during the process.
Other Considerations
Security is a huge issue with Internet sales. No matter who you choose as an Inter-
net merchant provider, be sure that they use the Address Verification System (AVS). 
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
tip
note
tip

Set Up a Commerce Web Site  189
This system compares the home address entered by the customer to the one on file 
with the customer’s credit card company. If the two don’t match, AVS detects the 
disparity for you. This helps you avoid unsavory types who use a stolen card and 
request products be shipped to a false address.
Business licenses are typically not required to obtain an account with a commerce 
solution provider, but they can make the application process easier. Trade name reg-
istrations, dba certificates, and other identifying business documents are also helpful 
in speeding up the process.
Consider using a provider who offers Virtual Terminal (see Figure 17-4) if you sell 
your products and services away from your home office. Virtual Terminal allows you 
to manually process credit card transactions by phone and by mail, just like a physical 
Figure 17-4 
Virtual Terminal allows 
you to process credit 
cards from any Inter-
net connection.
www.ebook3000.com

190  Project 17
terminal that sits by the register in a retail store. It can be accessed using any Internet 
connection, which means you can physically be almost anywhere and conducting 
sales—at the same time your web site is conducting sales online.
If you want to create your own web site but don’t want to tie it to an e-commerce 
solution provider, try using a template service such as Web.com or Microsoft Office 
Live Basics (see Figure 17-5) to create the site. These services help you build a simple 
site with a domain name. Then just follow the instructions for adding an e-commerce 
solution to your web site.
Whatever your business, the chances are high that you could be selling your prod-
ucts online. Take the time to do some research and you just might be pleasantly surprised 
to discover how quickly you can add an online revenue stream to your bottom line.
Figure 17-5 
Simple web site tem-
plates are offered by 
a variety of providers, 
such as Microsoft.

191
Project 18
Create a 
Podcast from 
Your Home 
Office
What You’ll Need:
Operating system: Any
Software: Yes
Hardware: Microphone with noise-canceling features
Cost: $0–$100
Difficulty: Advanced
S
o your first question probably is, “What’s a podcast?” Don’t feel out of the loop 
if you don’t know what one is; most people don’t. But next to blogging (instant 
online publication of your thoughts), podcasts are quickly becoming the hottest 
way to reach audiences with your message. They are simply voice recordings published 
on the Internet as downloadable MP3 files. Think of a podcast as your own personal 
radio show—you control the content, the Internet helps distribute your show. The term 
is a combination of Apple’s iPod and the familiar term “broadcasting”—some credit 
podcast creation to an MTV VJ who was searching for a way to download recorded 
interviews to his iPod. He created a program that would meet his needs and the first 
podcast was born. As long as you have a computer, a microphone, an Internet connec-
tion, and some software, you can produce your own podcast.
Your next question might be, “So why do I need to know how to create a podcast?” 
Depending upon your reasons for working from home, you might not need to know. 
But if you’re a business owner of any kind, then you should know because podcasts 
can be used as high-tech marketing tools. You can create your own radio show, dis-
tribute it, and convert new customers—all for free. Think of the possibilities! If you 
own a construction company, you might want to create a show that tells listeners what 
●
●
●
●
●
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

192  Project 18
to do when a tree falls on a home—then add a plug, of course, for your business. 
Or perhaps you are a financial planner working from home. How about a radio show 
that targets your customers with information about retirement planning, using your 
products as examples throughout?
Podcasting does have different demographics than radio broadcasting, that’s 
true. But if you’re seeking a new audience—younger, more hip, and more technol-
ogy-oriented—then you need to start rethinking any radio or television ads you’re 
running and consider podcasts as an alternative. Or, at the very least, you should 
consider podcasts as a complement to your current advertising. Younger generations 
live on the Internet, and if they are any part of your target audience, then you need to 
live where they live. Listeners can hear your shows individually or subscribe to your 
podcast so that new shows are automatically downloaded for them.
Podcasting may sound a little difficult, but once you get through the first one 
you’ll realize it’s not as hard as it seems. You might even have a little fun with it. 
Heaven forbid! Work that’s fun?
Step 1: Get and Install the Right Tools
Since podcasts are just online broadcasts, it makes sense that you need some record-
ing tools to get the job done. You need the following items:
Headset with a noise-canceling microphone. Don’t cut corners here; if your 
sound is of poor quality, listeners won’t return. Many MP3 players actually 
have built-in microphones, by the way, which will work just fine for this 
project.
Podcasting software, such as Audacity (free), Propaganda. You can get Au-
dacity at www.audacity.sorceforge.net or Propaganda at CNET’s www.
download.com. There are lots of other choices on the Web, too. In fact, some 
podcast directories now offer podcast software (see “Step 4: Upload Your 
Podcast to the Internet”).
Computer with an Internet connection.
In some cases, a portable MP3 voice recorder is used, but for this project, you 
won’t need one. I created a podcast using free trial software (Propaganda) that I 
downloaded off the Internet and a headset I happened to have lying around; if you 
have headphones already, go ahead and use them for your first podcast test and see 
how the sound comes across.
●
●
●

Create a Podcast from Your Home Office  193
Speaking of software, I recommend choosing one that touts its simplicity. 
Podcasting does not have to be difficult; the software you choose will make the differ-
ence between a tough project and a very simple one.
Podcasts can include music, too, as a background or as the main content in your podcast.
Step 2: Create Your Content
Do yourself a favor and at least write down an outline for your first podcast. 
Unless you’re a skilled public speaker, you’re likely to lose your train of thought as 
you record your first podcast. An outline can help you keep your wits together, stay 
on track, and keep listeners connected as your podcast plays. 
Before you can write an outline, however, you need to have an idea of the topics 
that might work for your podcast. While every home office runs a different business, 
here are some general topics that might spark some ideas for you. Just plug in your 
business where it’s appropriate. You can talk about:
Your business topics
A local sports team
Current events and the latest news
Seasonal activities in your area (hunting, snowboarding, waterskiing, etc.)
The latest movies or television shows
Interesting people in your demographic (conduct interviews with them!)
Anything that applies to your target audience (cooking, shopping, automo-
tive tips, college life, animals, children, etc.)
Listen to a few podcasts to get an idea of how and why the successful ones work. Go to 
http://podcasts.yahoo.com or www.podcast.net and poke around to see what interests 
you—and others.
Also, try researching podcast directories as shown in Figure 18-1. Those can help 
you get a good idea of the podcasts already out there, and might spark some ideas for 
you. If you work for a corporation, take a look at their marketing materials for ideas, 
too. Play up an advertising campaign with a podcast of your own or come up with 
a new one. The only important thing to remember is that the podcast complements 
both your business and your own personal interests. Otherwise, you’ll get bored—
and so will your listeners. But if a topic is close to your heart, the passion will come 
across in your podcast and hook those listeners long-term. 
Give listeners a preview of the next show at the end of your podcast. This reminds people to 
tune in and gives them something to look forward to.
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
note
tip
tip
www.ebook3000.com

194  Project 18
Step 3: Record Your Podcast
The first item to consider when you begin recording is the location you’re in. You want 
to find a quiet spot for the actual recording; background noise will turn off listeners 
fast. Get comfortable, be sure your headset is plugged into your computer (and is 
situated nicely upon your head), then open your sound recording program. For this 
project, we will use Propaganda—the free trial software downloaded off the Internet.
In Propaganda, choose File | Record to open the Record dialog box, shown 
in Figure 18-2.
In the Record dialog box, select Maximize Volume and Apply Noise Filter if 
they aren’t already selected.
1.
2.
Figure 18-1 
Several web sites offer 
podcast directories to 
help listeners find the 
podcast that’s right for 
them.
Figure 18-2 
Propaganda’s Record 
dialog box shows you 
information about 
your microphone and 
recording levels.

Create a Podcast from Your Home Office  195
If your microphone is not recording sound, check all connections and try bringing the micro-
phone closer to your mouth. If that doesn’t work, check the input controls to be sure you have 
the proper levels set for your microphone. As a final step, check the instruction booklet for your 
sound card. You might need to add an auxiliary power supply to your microphone port.
Click Record when you are ready to begin speaking. Notice the recording 
level bars on the left side; those move as you speak. Also, the word “Record-
ing” appears in red letters to remind you that you are recording.
At any time during the recording, you can click Pause. This gives you time to gather your 
thoughts or just take a break. When you’re ready to begin recording again, click Record.
When you’re finished, click OK.
In the Label Recording dialog box, fill in the information requested (Title, 
Artist, Show, File Name) and click OK.
3.
4.
5.
note
tip
www.ebook3000.com

196  Project 18
Your recording will appear in the Title/Transition pane on your screen as well as 
in the Library. Now you are ready to create a playlist, which will then be exported to 
the Internet:
Choose File | New Playlist.
In the Library pane, click and drag the recordings you want to add to your 
playlist, as shown in Figure 18-3.
1.
2.
Figure 18-3 
A simple click-and-
drag action creates 
a final playlist.
As you pull the items onto the playlist, you can click and drag each recorded 
segment horizontally to place it exactly where you want in the final playlist. 
You can also extend or crop each segment, as shown in Figure 18-4. The verti-
cal lines in the figure show the number of times the segment was extended.
When you’re ready to save the playlist, choose File | Save Playlist.
Select a location on your computer to save it to, name the file, and click Save. 
This ensures you have saved the original files.
In the top-right corner of the Propaganda window, click Export.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Create a Podcast from Your Home Office  197
In the Export Options dialog box, select Export My Playlist To One Or More 
Files. Click OK.
In the Export Playlist to Files dialog box, type the filename for your file. If 
you plan to do many podcasts, it’s a good idea to date the file in the title. 
For example, “My First Podcast 6_12_2007” helps you identify the podcast 
quickly and easily.
In the Save As Type drop-down list box, select Mixed MP3 File (*.mp3) and 
click Save. This creates the actual sound file for the podcast. You’ll need this 
sound file to publish your podcast to the Web.
7.
8.
9.
Figure 18-4 
In segment 2, the 
segment has been 
extended to more 
than twice its original 
size.
www.ebook3000.com

198  Project 18
You can choose other file formats, such as WAV or WMA. These formats have a 
tendency to consume a lot more space per minute of your podcast, so MP3 is the best 
size to choose, especially if you plan on the podcast being used on an iPod, Zune, or 
other portable device.
If you have trouble converting your podcast to an MP3 file, you might need to add an 
MP3 encoder to your system. A popular free encoder is LAME MP3 Encoder, available 
at www.free-codecs.com/Lame_Encoder_download.htm.
There are plenty of things you can do with a program like Propaganda to spice up 
your podcast—you can overlay sound, increase or decrease sound at certain points, 
and take advantage of other nifty features. These are all great features, and as you 
become more comfortable using your software, you can get more creative. But essen-
tially, your podcast recording is now complete.
Step 4: Upload Your Podcast to the Internet
Propaganda offers a web syndication service and methods for publishing your pod-
cast to your own web site. However, I chose not to use Propaganda to publish my 
podcast to my web site. Instead, I placed the MP3 file created in the previous section 
into my web site folder on my hard drive. Then I simply added a link on my web site 
to the MP3 file—viewers could just click the link to hear the file.
To add a link to your web site, follow the instructions of your web publishing 
software. Essentially, however, you will create a short line of text such as “Listen to 
the podcast” and then create a hyperlink to connect listeners to the MP3 file.
If you want to offer listeners the option of subscribing to your regular podcasts, 
you need to create an RSS feed. RSS means Really Simple Syndication—it’s the format 
used by web sites and blogs to distribute regularly updated content. A bonus with 
RSS feeds it that they bypass spam filters and don’t require you to deal with subscrip-
tion management issues. Once you set up the initial RSS file, you can distribute your 
ongoing content with minimal effort.
It’s worth setting up a syndication feed for your podcast if you’re serious about at-
tracting new customers. Syndication is cost-effective and a great way to build aware-
ness of your business and brand, plus it can drive traffic to your web site and make 
it easy for existing customers to get information from you. Project 20 offers more 
detailed information to help you set up an RSS feed for your web site and podcasts.
Regardless of whether you choose syndication or just post your podcast to your 
web site, neither method ensures you will have listeners. You need to go where your 
listeners are, too. Podcast directories can help you find them; you’ll need to decide 
which one works best for your particular situation. When you choose a directory 
location for your podcast, just follow the directions for adding a podcast.
Most podcast directories expect you to have an RSS URL for your podcast.
tip
note

Create a Podcast from Your Home Office  199
Here is a sample of sites and directories that will accept your podcast.
Google Base (http://google.com/base) Accepts links to your own web site 
or hosts the podcast and provides you with a unique URL for it. 
Podcast Alley (www.podcastalley.com) Accepts podcast listings and in-
dexes them to make it easy for users to find. 
Yahoo! Podcasts (http://podcasts.yahoo.com) Accepts podcast listings and 
has good advice for creating podcasts. 
Podblaze (www.podblaze.com) Offers users podcast software with the 
ability to create a podcast station with a podcasting web site and correspond-
ing domain. 
Digital Podcast (www.digitalpodcast.com) Offers users podcast software 
and accepts podcasts for its directory. 
Podcast.net (www.podcast.net) Offers a directory that accepts podcasts. 
Step 5: Advertise Your Podcast
While podcasts are a relatively new phenomenon, they are gaining popularity, espe-
cially among college-age listeners. This means that as these listeners age, they will ex-
pect to hear your messages in the formats they prefer. Establish these potential clients 
as listeners now, and you’re looking at holding onto them as clients for a long time. 
Advertising your podcast is a good way to reach these listeners.
The podcast directories mentioned in the previous section are a great way to ad-
vertise your podcast. If you list a podcast in one of these directories, be sure to take 
some time to enter genre and content categories (such as “comedy” or “movies”) that 
will help your listeners find you easily. But there are other ways to grab attention for 
your podcast.
Podcast forums, for example, are often provided by podcast directory sites. Don’t 
be afraid to jump into a forum and plug your podcast! The directories also feature 
specific podcasts on a weekly or monthly basis. Check with the directory to which 
you belong to see how your podcast can qualify as a featured podcast.
Another way to advertise your podcast is to add it to your business cards. While it 
might be fun to have listeners all around the world, if your specialty is selling insurance 
in a particular state, then you need to be sure you’re reaching local listeners, too. Include 
the podcast in any other local advertising you do, and on any marketing materials.
Other Considerations
On the Web, attention spans are short. Keep that in mind and create your podcast accord-
ingly—if you don’t come across with your relevant business messages early and often, 
they will be lost to listeners who click in for just a few minutes. Another good rule of 
●
●
●
●
●
●
www.ebook3000.com

200  Project 18
thumb to keep listeners hanging on is to tell them what they will hear in your podcast as 
well as what they won’t. Tell them that at 2 minutes and 30 seconds, you’ll discuss XYZ, 
for example. Those who want to listen to your entire podcast will wait, while those who 
want to hear a certain section can skip forward quickly. Either way, you’ve kept all your 
listeners and given them the opportunity to find what interests them quickly.
As far as recording goes, keep at it until you have a perfect take. No one will want 
to suffer through your stops and starts, coughs, or lengthy pauses, let alone a record-
ing that squeaks or has static or background noise.
If you feel funny talking into a microphone by yourself, why not podcast with 
someone else? Having a partner can help you stay motivated and on task; plus it’s 
just more fun.
It’s okay to use background music, but keep it simple. If your podcast is about 
financial planning, listeners are tuning in to hear about that topic—not your favorite 
song. Speaking of favorite songs, be cautious when using copyrighted music. If you 
don’t have the legal rights to use the music, don’t use it.
Record in small sound bites. It’s easier for you to get it right with small bits of dialogue, and the 
end result will be a high-quality recording.
How you produce your podcast is ultimately up to you. But keep this in mind: 
which radio shows do you enjoy listening to the most? Analyze what makes those 
shows interesting. Is it guests? Banter? Detailed information? Music? Whatever it is, 
don’t be afraid to copy the format. At the same time, don’t be afraid to change your 
show until the format is exactly what you want. If you’re not happy, listeners won’t 
be happy. Keep adjusting until things feel right, then keep the format going so listen-
ers can bond with you.
Podcasts can be fun and very, very simple to produce. The question is, what are 
you going to talk about on yours?
tip

201
Project 19
Set Up an RSS 
Feed for Your 
Web Site
What You’ll Need:
Web site or blog: Yes
Software: None
Hardware: None
Cost: $0
Difficulty: Advanced
R
eally Simple Syndication—that’s what RSS stands for. It’s a syndication format 
for web content that anyone with a web site can offer free to readers, and it is 
a great way to keep visitors coming back to your web site. RSS feeds come in 
all shapes and sizes; in fact, you can probably find one for any hobby or interest you 
can think of. With more and more people today subscribing to RSS feeds, take a few 
minutes to think about your business and the information you might be able to share 
with others in this format.
For any web site, a steady stream of traffic is necessary to keep the site successful in 
terms of product and service sales. You can have an informational web site, of course, 
that doesn’t sell anything, but even those sites need visitors to make it worth shelling 
out the money to keep the site operating. That’s where the business knowledge you 
have can come in handy. It can become the source of an RSS feed that others subscribe 
to—and that keeps them thinking about you, your web site, and your business every 
time they read it.
RSS feeds help keep search engine spiders returning often to your site to index your pages because 
of continually changing information on your site.
The information doesn’t necessarily need to be in written format; podcasts, dis-
cussed in Project 18, can easily be used for RSS feeds, as you’ll see in this project. These 
feeds offer information of all kinds. As you read through this project, put a creativity 
●
●
●
●
●
tip
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

202  Project 19
hat on your head. You just might be surprised at the ideas that come to you for cre-
ating an RSS feed that offers your web site readers great information and acts as 
a consistent marketing tool for your business.
Syndication has been around for decades in the newspaper industry. Cartoons and columns 
(Dear Abby, for example) are created, then made available to any newspaper that cares to run 
the item. The newspaper pays a fee for each syndicated item it runs. RSS syndication operates 
on a similar concept, except that the content is always free.
Step 1: Understand How RSS Feeds Work 
with Your Web Site
An RSS feed is just a file that contains items. The items are the web pages that you 
want others to link to. When you publish new content to your web site (a podcast, an 
article, new products or services—anything!), your goal is to have others know about 
it, right? By listing that new item’s location on your web site as an “item” in your RSS 
file, the new item’s information appears to anyone receiving your RSS feed. Readers 
just click to follow the link to your new content.
You need three pieces of information to add your item into an RSS file: the title 
of the item, a description for it, and a link to it. These items are created using HTML 
(hypertext markup language).
HTML Introduction
To create an actual RSS feed, you do need to know a little bit about how your web 
site is coded. Typically, web sites use a language called HTML to produce the site that 
everyone sees. However, there are plenty of programs available that make it easy to 
create a web site without ever knowing any code. Microsoft FrontPage, for example, 
allows you to drop in pictures, text, and other content in a design view that never 
shows you the coding that occurs every time you drop in that picture or text (see 
Figure 19-1). Microsoft Expression is another equally simple-to-use web design tool 
that keeps coding out of the way unless you want to specifically see it. At the same 
time, these programs almost always offer you the option of switching views so you 
can see the code involved (see Figure 19-2).
All that code looks pretty frightening, I know. But you don’t need to worry about 
all that code, just a small part of it. That’s because there are tools on the Internet that 
help you out: RSS code generators. Some of them require you to enter small amounts 
of the code from the page you want to designate as an RSS feed; others don’t.
Here’s the real deal with HTML code: you need it to tell the Internet where things 
start and stop on your web page. For example, if you include a title on your web site 
(“Sally Slack’s Web Site”), you need to indicate somehow that it’s a title instead of a 
simple phrase. You do this by using code that precedes the title, and by using code at 
the end of the title. As HTML is translated to other computers, the title appears the 
way you want it to. But if you leave off the code, the title can’t appear. It’s the same 
note

Set Up an RSS Feed for Your Web Site  203
Figure 19-1 
A web page shown in 
Microsoft FrontPage 
design view.
Figure 19-2 
The same web page, 
shown in Microsoft 
FrontPage code view.
www.ebook3000.com

204  Project 19
with any other content on your web site—HTML codes appear for everything. That’s 
part of the reason seeing Figure 19-2 is frightening: you can see the code for every piece 
of text in bold, italic, or color; every image and its size and location on the page; every 
headline; every paragraph, etc. Everything on a web page has code attached to it.
Here’s how the code for the HTML title on my main web page looks:
<title>Sally Slack's Web Site</title>
As you look at the word title before Sally, notice that it is enclosed by angle brack-
ets. In the first appearance of title, there is no forward slash within the angle brackets. 
In the second instance of title, there is a forward slash within the angle brackets. The 
presence of a forward slash after the first angle bracket “closes” the coding informa-
tion, whereas the lack of one “opens” the coding information. This open and close 
feature of HTML language tells computers what information is contained within the 
angle brackets. Any HTML code placed in the angle brackets will be read correctly as 
long as the angle brackets and forward slash are used appropriately.
This is important to understand as you work with HTML code. Whenever you 
open a code, you need to close it. Codes also need to be closed in the order they were 
opened. For example, if the title for my web page included code to bold all the letters, 
the code would look like this:
<title><bold>Sally Slack's Web Site</bold></title>
Before the actual title, the coding for the title appears first, then coding for the 
bold text appears second. But after the actual title, coding for the bold text appears 
first while the title coding appears second.
For more information about HTML coding, take a look at HTML Code Tutorial, 
a web site dedicated to HTML coding, at www.htmlcodetutorial.com. It has an HTML 
Quick List and tutorials to help you wade through all the possibilities you could use 
for your feed.
These are some very basic HTML instructions; if you want more details, it might 
be useful to buy a separate book on building web sites with HTML coding. You won’t 
need it, though, to complete this project.
Step 2: Decide on the Content for Your RSS Feed
Decisions, decisions! What kind of information should you share with readers in this 
format? The first thing to consider is the time you have available for any kind of on-
going content. Since RSS feeds rely on continual updates to keep readers happy, it’s 
critical that the content you provide be something you can do on a regular basis.
Do you have 10 minutes a week to devote to this or 4 hours? Ten minutes might 
dictate that you offer a simple bulleted list of information every week or month; 
4 hours could mean you have time to write a 500-word article. If your time may vary 
depending upon workload, that’s okay—perhaps you offer that simple bulleted list 
one week, an article the next, and a podcast the next. It’s okay to change the actual form 
of the content as long as you are consistently delivering something to your readers 
(or listeners).

Set Up an RSS Feed for Your Web Site  205
Once you determine the amount of time you can devote to continuing content, it’s 
time to think about the actual information you want to share. Considering that this 
feed will likely be for your business (rather than personal reasons), think about the 
kind of questions that you receive from clients or customers. The chances are good 
that you can identify several themes that will be of interest to readers. If you are affili-
ated with a corporation, be sure to check its marketing materials for ideas, too.
Here are some examples of business-related RSS feeds already in existence (don’t 
be afraid to create a competing feed, by the way—yours could be bigger and better!). 
Some titles are self-explanatory, some are not, so I’ve included brief descriptors in 
parentheses.
Straight Talk: Small Business News
How to Save the World (environmentalist)
Arts/Crafts Business
Beauty Dish (beauty products distributor)
The Work of Photographers
Halo Babies (comic strip artist)
FreshFinance
Moreover—Automotive Industry News
These examples, which barely touch on the feed topics available, show that every 
industry and every type of business person has information to share. When you title 
your feed, keep in mind that “Mike’s News” isn’t going to attract as many readers as 
say, “Mike’s Nissan News” might. No one knows who Mike is, but they will recog-
nize a brand name such as Nissan. As you create the title for your feed, keep those 
types of details in mind.
If you are affiliated with a corporation, see whether it offers an RSS feed. You might be able to 
place the feed on your site or connect to the corporate feed and maintain your individual identity 
for feed readers.
Step 3: Create an RSS Feed for Your Content
Now it’s time to start creating your actual RSS file. There are a couple of different 
processes associated with this; we’ll take each one step by step. As mentioned earlier 
in this project, you need three pieces of information to add your item into an RSS file: 
the title of the item, a description for it, and a link to it. The item itself is a web page.
Create or Identify the Web Pages to Be Used in Your Feed
The first step is to identify or create the web pages that will hold the content for your 
RSS feed. Each web page can be a separate item in your RSS feed, but you can’t make 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
tip
www.ebook3000.com

206  Project 19
multiple RSS feeds from a single web page—the feed will only recognize one web 
page at a time, not the various elements on the web page.
As an example, I decided to create a separate web page for every new book I have 
coming out in the next six months. On my main web page, as shown in Figure 19-3, I 
have a section called “Book News” and limited information about each book.
Figure 19-3 
The author’s home 
page with the Book 
News section.
But I wanted to create a feed that updated each book’s news separately. For each 
book—there are currently three—I created a new, individual web page with more 
details about the book and when it will be available. These individual web pages (as 
shown in Figure 19-4) will become the items in my RSS feed.
There’s no need to create a special web page; just create them the way you nor-
mally would.
Create the RSS File
Once you have created or identified the web pages you will use in your RSS feed, you 
need to create the RSS file. The easiest way I’ve found to do this is to use Notepad, 
which is a simple word processing program available in any version of Windows. In 
Windows XP, follow these steps to open Notepad:
Click Start and select All Programs.
Go to Accessories and click Notepad to open it.
1.
2.

Set Up an RSS Feed for Your Web Site  207
WordPad puts in additional formatting characters that might disable your XML. If you need to 
use WordPad instead of Notepad, be sure to save the file in text-only format.
Enter the Code in Your RSS File
Next, you’ll enter the code for your feed. This is where that brief lesson on coding 
earlier in this project will help you out. I’ll show you line by line where to put the code 
using the code I have used on my own web site. Where text is in bold, you should 
change it to meet your web site and item information. Do not change the code associ-
ated with a line. Lines 1–6 are identifying information for the feed and your main web 
site; the following lines are specific items you want included in the feed. In my case, 
those were specific books and their related web pages.
If you’re working in code view, it can be difficult to find the text you want. Use the Edit/Find tool 
to locate the first word of any phrase you’re looking for.
In Notepad, enter the following code including and between the angle brackets ( < > ) 
symbols (do not include Line X or the dashes preceding the code). Line 1 shows you 
an example of the highlighted code. In other lines, change anything in bold to meet 
your personal needs. Otherwise, leave the coding the same as shown here.:
Line 1 -- <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
Line 2 -- <rss version="2.0">
Figure 19-4 
An individual web 
page from the 
author’s web site, 
which is used as an 
item in her RSS feed.
tip
tip
www.ebook3000.com

208  Project 19
Line 3 -- <channel>
Line 4 -- <title>Sally Slack's Book News</title>
Line 5 -- <description>Get the latest news on publication dates!
</description>
Line 6 -- <link>http://www.sslack.com</link>
Line 7 -- <item>
Line 8 -- <title>PC Magazine's Office 2007 Solutions</title>
Line 9 –- <description>This well-organized guide is perfect for anyone 
upgrading to Microsoft Office 2007!</description>
Line 10 -– <link>http://www.sslack.com/booknews.htm</link>
Line 11 -– </item>
Line 12 -– <item>
Line 13 -– <title>Breakthrough Windows Vista</title>
Line 14 -– <description>Find your favorite features and discover the 
possibilities!</description>
Line 15 -– <link>http://www.sslack.com/booknews2.htm</link>
Line 16 -– </item>
Line 17 -– <item>
Line 18 -– <title>CNET Do-It-Yourself Digital Home Office Projects
</title>
Line 19 -– <description>Use the latest wireless and Web technologies to 
create a digital workspace!</description>
Line 20 -- <link>http://www.sslack.com/booknews3.htm</link>
Line 21 -– </item>
Line 22 -– </channel>
Line 23 -- </rss>
See Figure 19-5 for how this exact code looks within Notepad. You can certainly 
add more items to your feed; just continue coding as shown in Figure 19-5.
Figure 19-5 
RSS code as it appears 
within Notepad

Set Up an RSS Feed for Your Web Site  209
As you look at the code in Notepad, you can easily see how each item contains a 
title, description, and link—all the requirements for an RSS feed.
Project 18 shows how to create a podcast. To add that podcast to your RSS feed, be sure the 
podcast file is located in the root folder for your web site. Create a page for it just as you would 
any other informational item you want to add to your RSS feed, providing a link somewhere on 
the page to the actual podcast file. Then simply follow the same coding steps for adding that 
podcast web page as a new item in your RSS feed.
The additional coding at the beginning and end of the RSS file is necessary for the 
Internet to recognize other aspects of the RSS feed, such as the version. Don’t sweat it, 
just copy what’s shown here and you’ll be fine.
You can purchase software such as FeedForAll (www.feedforall.com) to create your feeds if you 
don’t want to take the time to learn how to do it.
When your code is complete, you need to save the Notepad document as an XML 
file:
Choose File | Save As.
In the Save As dialog box, select the root folder for your web site.
In the File Name list box, type RSS.xml.
In the Save As Type list box, select Text Documents (*txt).
Click Save.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
note
tip
www.ebook3000.com

210  Project 19
Channels appear in a file to show how items in the feed relate to each other.
The RSS file should now be saved in the same file as all your other web pages. As 
a final check here, go to Feed Validator at www.feedvalidator.org and enter the main 
URL for your feed (the one you used in Line 6). RSS file validation is always chang-
ing, so you might see some comments or a warning suggesting you place additional 
code in the file. Don’t worry about that unless the validator also indicates that your 
code is not valid. For example, my validation request returned with a warning saying 
I needed to add a guid element—an element really only necessary for weblogs, not 
web pages.
As I scrolled down the page, the validation also said “Congratulations! This is 
a valid RSS feed.”
Take warnings with a grain of salt but do pay attention if the validator can’t find 
your feed or doesn’t see the items within it. You’ll need to go back and double-check 
every line to find the mistake, although the validator sometimes returns error infor-
mation targeting a specific line of your code.
Having trouble saving your RSS file as an XML file? Occasionally, a Windows default causes this 
problem. Choose Start | My Computer, select Tools/Folder Options, and go to the View tab. Be 
sure the box next to Hide Extensions For Known File Types is not checked. If it is, it’s probably 
the cause of your saving problem.
tip
tip

Set Up an RSS Feed for Your Web Site  211
You’re ready to move on to adding the feed to your web site.
Step 4: Add the RSS Feed to Your Web Site
Relax—you’ve made it through the toughest parts of this project. Adding the feed to 
your web site is actually very simple: you just place text or an icon on your web site 
(the home page is fine) the same way you would add any other content and then add 
a hyperlink to the RSS file you already placed in your web site’s root folder.
For mine, I found an RSS feed icon online that was free. I also decided to place text 
next to it just in case folks new to RSS didn’t recognize the icon. Once the icon and text 
were in place, I just added the hyperlink to the RSS file.
When someone clicks the link, they are taken to the RSS feed for the site, as shown 
in Figure 19-6.
Notice that the headlines on the feed are exactly the same as the ones in the code 
shown earlier. Readers can click each headline to go directly to the correlating page. 
However, by clicking Subscribe To This Feed in the box at the top of the page, readers 
can have the feed automatically added to their web browser and even some e-mail 
providers—any program that uses the Common Feed List.
www.ebook3000.com

212  Project 19
Here’s how a feed looks once it’s been placed into Internet Explorer 7 feeds:
So, there you have it. You have created an RSS feed for your web site, and you can 
update it as much or as little as you like. For maximum effectiveness, of course, you 
should update it on a routine basis—readers enjoy seeing new information and will 
return regularly to your web site if they find that information compelling enough. 
There’s one more option to consider for RSS feeds, however. Many blogs offer RSS 
feed options, so we’ll take a quick look at that before we leave this topic.
Figure 19-6 
Your RSS feed will take 
readers to a page that 
looks like this.

Set Up an RSS Feed for Your Web Site  213
Other Considerations: Blogging and RSS Feeds
You’ve probably heard about blogging by now, and the chances are good that you’ve 
read many blogs recently, perhaps without even knowing it. That’s because blogs—or 
weblogs as they are officially known—are just web sites that are ridiculously simple 
to create and update, even by those with very minimal technical knowledge. There 
is no code involved, and the content is entered directly onto a web-based application 
that updates your blog instantly.
In some ways, blogs are really just online journals—the author writes about what-
ever he or she wants with no editing involved, can add hyperlinks within the blog, 
and can accept comments from readers about the content provided. A URL is given 
to every blog, so it’s easy to link to your blogs through your web site. Blogs typi-
cally change often, but the changes are at the author’s whim. A sample blog is shown 
in Figure 19-7. If you like to write, you might really enjoy the freedom that a blog 
gives—as well as its ability to reach thousands and ultimately drive those readers to 
your web site.
Figure 19-7 
A sample blog
Because blog content changes so often, it’s a good partner for an RSS feed since 
people subscribe to feeds for access to routinely updated information. And the beauty 
of a blog is that most of the major blogging sites offer an automatic service to help you 
turn your blog into a syndicated feed. Newsreaders or aggregators—just specialized 
software on the Internet—scan the feeds that contain the blogs, and update informa-
tion often.
www.ebook3000.com

214  Project 19
The entire process involves the site feed settings on your blog. On Blogger, for 
example, some simple changes in the site feed settings will place all or just part of 
your blog content into a site feed, as shown next. Search engines like Google index 
blogs by their site feeds, which are checked frequently for new content.
You can always add your blog to your own web site’s RSS feed. Just add the blog 
as a new item in your Notepad RSS file, like this:
<item>
   <title>Girlfriend's Guide to Technology</title>
   <description>Technology tips, tricks and totally awesome features!
</description>
   <link>http://girlfriendsguidetotechnology.blogspot.com/</link>
</item>
As you can see, the URL used here is the one that links directly to my blog, not my 
web site. That’s okay—because of the coding at the front and end of the RSS file, the 
feed knows that the new item belongs with the rest of my feed. In Figure 19-8, you can 
see how the blog shows up just like all the other items in my RSS feed.
There are lots of blogging sites available if you’re interested in starting one. Most 
of them are incredibly simple to create and use, so don’t be afraid to give one a try. 
While there is blog software available, it’s worth taking a look at all the free blogging 
options before you spend a dime. Here’s a look at five blogging options:
Blogger (www.blogger.com) Basic services are free; this one is owned by 
Google. 
Blog.com (www.blog.com) Basic services are free. 
●
●

Set Up an RSS Feed for Your Web Site  215
TypePad (www.typepad.com) A free trial is offered, and basic services 
start at $4.95/month. 
Blogstream (www.blogstream.com) Basic services are free. 
Squarespace (www.squarespace.com) Basic services start at $7/month. 
You can submit your blog to various catalogs (try www.blogcatalog.com or www
.bloghop.com) and indexes, too, for maximum reach.
At Blogger, your site feed settings can also include your AdSense code. You need to get AdSense 
for Feeds, and then you can enter the code to place your ads in your blog’s feed.
If you’re still a bit doubtful about the coding involved, remember this: You are an 
intelligent, competent business person. There’s no reason you can’t copy some code 
from this book, add in your own details, and create an RSS feed for your web site. It’s 
a great marketing tool that keeps your web site in front of your audience, and takes 
very little time to set up. After that, it’s just a matter of adding content to keep the RSS 
feed updated regularly. Give it a try!
●
●
●
Figure 19-8 
Adding a blog to your 
RSS feed is fast and 
easy.
tip
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank

Part V
Work Securely
 from Home
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank

219
Project 20
Turn an Old PC 
into a Network 
Server
What You’ll Need:
Operating system: Windows XP, Windows Vista
Software: None
Hardware: Unused personal computer with hard drive
Cost: $0
Difficulty: Challenging
I
f there is one computer law to remember, it is to never discard a PC when you 
upgrade to the latest and greatest version. Another is that, eventually, you’ll have 
a hard drive that crashes. It’s a fact of life for anyone who owns a computer. Hard 
drives don’t die gracefully, either—they die without warning and usually just when 
you have a major project due.
Backing up files regularly is the only way to be certain you won’t be caught with 
your pants down at a critical moment—but if you own more than one computer, don’t 
just back up your files anywhere. Have a plan that includes a central file server so that 
when a hard drive fails you, you won’t fail your clients or company. You can easily do 
this with a network file server, which can very easily be set up using an old PC.
Another reason to set up a network server? Space. While newer computers have 
lots of storage space, newer computer programs take up more space as well—Windows 
Vista and all its media applications, for example, sucks up hard drive space quickly. 
Keep that space open on your primary computer so you’ll have a system that is more 
responsive to your business needs, and use network server space to store the monster 
files you won’t erase for years.
There are two more reasons to set up a network server: collaboration and conve-
nience. A networked server lets you share and access files and printers on a computer 
on your network if you wish. And, even though you work from home, this feature 
comes in handy if you have, say, a personal computer that’s separate from your work 
computer. If you have to watch a sick child in another room beside your office and still 
●
●
●
●
●
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

220  Project 20
get work done, why not use the family computer in the playroom to access files on 
your home office computer down the hall? You can even print to a printer attached to 
the server without dragging files from one place to another. You can do all this with 
a networked server.
Projects 23 and 24 in this book show you how to set up and secure a wireless network.
Before you get all worked up and begin thinking that creating this network server 
is beyond your capabilities, consider this: you wouldn’t have a home office if you 
weren’t extremely capable of tackling challenges on your own. Creating a network 
server from an old PC is just another one of those challenges. It may sound scary, but 
ultimately it’s just a logical process.
This project can be done with a Mac, a Windows PC, or a Linux PC. While the basic pieces of 
the project will be similar, there may be some difference in network setup, so just check your 
operating system for specific details. For this project, the assumption is made that your old 
computer is not running Windows Vista, but that your new computer might be.
Step 1: Check Out Your Personal Computer
Take a look at that old PC before you get started with this project. If the concept here 
is to ensure that you have a reliable backup system with plenty of space, you’ll want 
to verify a few things on the old system:
Hard drive size is the most critical piece of this project. You don’t need a lot 
of memory or a hypersonic processor, but you do need a hard drive that can 
store all your files. A sample hard drive is shown in Figure 20-1. You can buy 
a new hard drive with 320 GB of storage capacity for about $90 online. This 
amount of space is worth the price—you won’t need to upgrade for a long 
time. But as long as you have a hard drive with 100GB of storage capacity, 
you should be able to do anything you need to.
Hard drive warranty is the next thing to consider. How old is the hard drive 
you plan to use? If it has passed its warranty period, you’re taking a calcu-
lated risk as to how long it will last. There is no hard and fast rule on this; just 
take the hard drive’s age into consideration. The hard drive is where your 
information is stored, so you want to feel confident that your hard drive is 
going to serve you well.
A warranty doesn’t guarantee a hard drive will never fail, only that it can be repaired or replaced 
when it fails. No warranty covers the data loss, either.
Motherboards and other hardware should be similarly inspected for age and 
condition. While you’re unlikely to lose any information if a motherboard 
goes belly up, it can cause a delay in your backups.
1.
2.
3.
note
note
note

Turn an Old PC into a Network Server  221
A monitor is a “nice to have” item on this project, but really, you can use 
a monitor from another system on the network to check information on this 
used PC. If you do decide to use a monitor with this network server, check 
to be sure it’s working well enough for you to see windows and dialog boxes 
on the screen.
Systems with Windows XP and above can be accessed remotely from another machine that has 
Windows 98 and above; see Project 10 for more details.
A network connection is the final key component. Your connection can be 
wireless or wired to a router—just be sure it’s working before you start the 
project!
If you don’t want to use an old PC (or don’t have one to use), you can purchase a network-attached 
storage (NAS) drive. These drives can be attached and accessed from anywhere on your network 
and are easily configured. This option is more expensive than using an old PC, however—NAS 
drives average about $200 or more, while using your old PC should cost you nothing.
Step 2: Create the Folder
Configuring a desktop computer as a network server sounds daunting, but in reality, 
this configuration consists of creating a new folder on your old computer, sharing it 
with other computers, and giving users access to the folder and any files within it. 
4.
5.
Figure 20-1 
Hard drive size is the 
most important aspect 
of this project.
note
note
www.ebook3000.com

222  Project 20
That doesn’t sound too hard, does it? It’s not—it will take a little bit of time, however, 
so grab some chips and caffeine before you get started.
Start your old computer.
Click Start | My Computer. This is where you can see all the drives on the 
computer. Decide which drive to put the network folder on. If you have more 
than one drive or partition on a drive, look for the drive with the most free 
space.
To find the free space available on a hard drive, right-click the name of the hard drive. Click 
Properties. Used and free space will be shown under the General tab.
Double-click the hard drive you want to use.
Click File | New. Select Folder.
Give the folder a meaningful name but keep it concise so it’s easy to remember.
That’s it! Now you’re ready to share the folder.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
tip

Turn an Old PC into a Network Server  223
When naming a folder, you can use up to 256 characters. Spaces can be included in the name 
but underscores are easier to use when trying to map from a desktop. Keep the name under 
eight characters if you, or anyone in your workgroup, are using Windows 95 or earlier or 
MS-DOS. Those operating systems cannot connect to a share that has a filename greater 
than eight characters or has spaces in the share name.
Step 3: Share the Folder
Now that the folder has been created, you can use it to share files. You must have 
a network installed before you can share folders. Got to Project 23 for information on 
setting up a network. 
See “Step 5: Give Access to Other Users” if you need more information on the permissions that 
can be provided to users.
Here’s how to set up sharing functions for the folder:
Right-click the folder you just created.
Click Sharing And Security. This action launches the Properties dialog box 
for the folder.
Click the Sharing tab.
Select Share This Folder.
In the Share Name field, type the name you want to call the share. Windows 
normally shows a suggested name and you can use that if you wish.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
tip
note
www.ebook3000.com

224  Project 20
Click Permissions. In the Group Or User Names list, select those users that 
you will ultimately allow to access this network server.
In the Permissions box, select the permissions for each of those users you 
want to have access to the shared folder. These are the sharing permissions 
for the folder that will allow designated users to map to the shared drive; 
you will set up actual access for these users in the next section.
Click Apply.
Click OK.
In the folder’s Properties dialog box, click OK.
Step 4: Create a Printer Share
When you work off a network, it’s helpful if a printer is shared so that every com-
puter on the network can use the printer. If one isn’t shared, you’ll spend precious 
time opening and accessing files from other computers just to print out a page or two. 
Creating a printer share on a network is really simple—just follow these steps:
On the computer you have designated for the network server, click Start.
Go to the Control Panel and double-click Printers And Faxes.
Right-click the name of the printer you want to share and click Sharing.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
1.
2.
3.

Turn an Old PC into a Network Server  225
In the printer’s Properties dialog box, click the Sharing tab.
Click Share This Printer.
Click OK.
Repeat this process for every printer you want to share.
This section assumes you have all the proper printer drivers installed for all computers accessing 
the printer.
4.
5.
6.
note
www.ebook3000.com

226  Project 20
Step 5: Give Access to Other Users
You’re making good progress! You have created the folder and printer shares, and ap-
plied permissions so that others can access the network server. Next, you need to set 
up access so that others can use the folders, files, and printer on the network server. 
This is done by adding individual users or groups.
Giving access to users through the group method is the easiest approach because 
it lets you manage everyone from a single viewpoint. If you have lots of users and 
multiple directories to maintain, it’s a particularly helpful approach. However, most 
home office users don’t have extensive user lists; you may only want to give access 
to individual users.
Before we begin, take some time to review the varying permissions so you clearly 
understand the access you are providing to others. Permissions may seem harmless 
but accidental deletion of a file or folder can have dire consequences even if you have 
a great backup system in place. Table 20-1 lists and describes permissions that can be 
applied to files and folders, and Table 20-2 lists and describes permissions that can be 
applied to printers.
Full Control
User can make changes to, copy, delete, change permissions on, 
and do pretty much anything else to a file or folder. Only admin-
istrators or managers should have this access and only if they 
understand the consequences of what their actions can do.
Modify
Users can make changes to a file or folder, but cannot delete or 
move a file or folder.
Read and Execute
Users can start a program within a folder and read files. They 
cannot make changes to, delete, or even rename a file.
List Folder Contents
Users can see what is in the folder but cannot open or modify 
a file.
Read
Users can only read or open a file; they cannot run programs or 
make changes and save them to a file. (This is good for templates 
that you’ve created and do not want changed and for sensitive 
files.) When a user modifies a file and tries to save it, they will be 
prompted for a new filename or location.
Write
Users can write information to a file or create folders in the di-
rectory. Write permission is not normally used alone but it can 
be if you want to keep changes to a certain document in a sepa-
rate location. Users can write to that directory but will be unable 
to modify or even read or see a file.
Special
Special is beyond the scope of this book.
Table 20-1 Permissions that Can Be Applied to Files and Folders
If you grant the Read permission and don’t grant List Folder Contents permission, users won’t be 
able to browse for the file. They will have to know the exact path and name to get to the file.
caution

Turn an Old PC into a Network Server  227
Create a User
To create a group, follow these steps:
Click Start.
Right-click My Computer and click Manage. 
In the left navigation pane of the Computer Management window, expand 
Local Users And Groups by clicking the + next to it.
Click Users. The names of all users currently residing on your network will 
appear in the right pane.
Choose Action | New User.
In the New User dialog box, enter a name for the user in the User Name field. 
Add the full name and a description if you wish. If you want a password 
used for access, enter and confirm the password. Select password instruc-
tions by checking the appropriate check box.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Print
Users can print to the printer.
Manage Printers
Users can mange printer setting and control configurations on 
the printer as well as pause, move, remove, or delete print jobs.
Manage Documents
Users can pause, move, remove, or delete print jobs.
Special
Special is beyond the scope of this book.
Table 20-2 Permissions that Can Be Applied to Printers.
www.ebook3000.com

228  Project 20
Be judicious when asking users to change their password at the next logon. If you do, when the 
user attempts to map a drive, it will fail with either an Access Denied message or no message at 
all, and this can be confusing for a user.
Click Create. Continue adding names as needed.
Click Close when you have finished adding names. The names of the new 
users should now appear in the right pane of the Computer Management 
window.
Create a Group
Before you can create a group permission, you need to create a group. This group will 
consist of anyone you want to have access to the network files and folders; you have 
already set up the permissions to access the actual network. There are a lot of steps in 
this part of the process but don’t let that intimidate you.
To create a group, follow these steps:
Click Start.
Right-click My Computer and click Manage. The Computer Management 
windows should appear.
In the left navigation pane, expand Local Users And Groups by clicking 
the + next to it.
Click Groups. All the groups currently residing on your network will appear 
in the right pane.
7.
8.
1.
2.
3.
4.
tip

Turn an Old PC into a Network Server  229
Choose Action | New Group.
In the New Group dialog box, enter a name for the group in the Group Name 
field. Add a description if you wish.
You might eventually need to use this security group for more than access to just one file or 
folder share, so do not give your group the same name as your network or printer share.
Click Add. This launches the Select Users, Computers, or Groups dialog 
box.
Under Enter The Object Names To Select (Examples), add the usernames you 
are approving for access.
Click Check Names. The user’s name and identifying information will ap-
pear unless one of the following occurs:
Multiple instances of a name launches the Multiple Names Found win-
dow; select the name you want and click OK.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
●
note
www.ebook3000.com

230  Project 20
If the username is underlined in the Select Users, Computers, or Groups 
dialog box after you click Check Names and have added a user, click OK 
and the user will be added. If the username is not underlined, there is a 
problem with that user. Either the name is incorrect or that user doesn’t 
exist on your network.
If a name is not found, the Name Not Found dialog box appears to give 
you the opportunity to correct username details or remove that user from 
your selection.
Click OK to return to the New Group dialog box.
Click Create.
Click Close. Your new user group should now appear in the right pane of the 
Computer Management window.
●
●
10.
11.
12.

Turn an Old PC into a Network Server  231
Give the Group or Individual User Permissions 
to Access the Shared Folder
At this point, you have created the folder and printer shares, applied permissions so 
that others can access the network server, and set up management access so that indi-
viduals or groups can use the folders, files, and printer on the network server. Now 
you need to go back to the shared folder that you created in Step 2 to add individual 
user and group access to that folder. Don’t get confused, here—you’re very close to 
completing this project. In the preceding steps, you created the users and groups and 
applied permission rules to them; this step takes those users and groups and actually 
provides them with specific access to the network folder.
To give the individuals or groups actual permission to access the shared network 
folder, follow these steps:
Click Start.
Click My Computer.
Open the hard drive where the network folder is located.
Click the network folder you created in Step 2.
Choose File | Properties. The folder’s Properties dialog box will open.
Click the Security tab.
Below Group Or User Names, click Add. The Select Users or Groups dialog 
box will appear.
Under Enter The Object Names To Select (Examples), enter a group or indi-
vidual name.
Click Check Names. The name of your user or group should change to under-
lined; if not, you will be prompted to make corrections or cancel the request.
Click OK. The Properties dialog box for your folder will still be open.
In the Properties dialog box, take a look at the permissions assigned to the 
group. Double-check them and change them as needed.
When satisfied that the group has the correct permissions, click OK.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
www.ebook3000.com

232  Project 20
If you have trouble finding a group or user you created, double-check the location in the Select 
Users or Groups dialog box.
Step 6: Access the Network Server 
from Other Computers
Now that you have set up the network folder and established the users and appropri-
ate permissions for access, it’s time to test your work. For this step, you need to go to 
another computer on your network.
To Open the Network Server from a Windows XP Computer
Click Start.
Select My Network Places or My Network Neighborhood.
Double-click Entire Network.
Double-click Microsoft Windows Network.
Double-click the network name where your folder is located.
Double-click the computer on the network where the folder is shared.
Double-click the folder to open it.
To Open the Network Server from a Windows Vista Computer
Click Start.
Click Network.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
1.
2.
tip

Turn an Old PC into a Network Server  233
Double-click the computer where the network folder is located.
Double-click the folder to open it.
To avoid searching for the folder all the time, right-click the folder instead of opening it and click 
Map Network Drive. Either accept the default drive letter or choose one you want to use, then 
place a check mark in Reconnect At Logon, and click Finish. Each time you start the computer 
you are using, it will remap the network drive automatically and make the folder easier for you 
to find and use. You need to map a network drive on every computer in the network that you 
want to have access to the shared folder.
Can you believe it? Now you have set up a network file server and can access 
those files from any computer on your network, plus you can print them from any 
file on the network, too. This project was a bit tougher than others in this book, but 
it’s really just a series of logical steps.
3.
4.
tip
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank

235
Project 21
Automate Your 
File Backups
What You’ll Need:
Operating system: Windows XP, Windows Vista
Software: None
Hardware: At least two hard drives, an external drive, or a network 
connection to another computer
Cost: $0
Difficulty: Challenging
S
ave early, save often!” That should be the battle cry for anyone who uses a com-
puter. You just never know when a hard drive will fail, or a power failure will 
reduce your hard work on a business document to a pile of electronic ashes. 
Think about it: What would you really do if you lost your entire e-mail contacts list? Or 
all of your work documents?
After a data disaster is not the best time to think about backing up your data regu-
larly. Sure, there are data recovery services that can scrape the tiniest bits of informa-
tion off of a failed hard disk but it can cost tens of thousands of dollars to enlist aid 
from such services. The far easier method—and therefore my chosen method—is to 
back up files regularly using an operating system application that lets you schedule the 
timing and documents involved in the backup.
Windows XP Professional and Vista make the entire process simple and painless 
by including basic backup programs that allow you to automate the backup process. 
You can schedule backups to run daily, weekly, monthly, or at other times. Plus, there 
is software on the market that you can purchase or even download free if you prefer. 
This particular project is a must for anyone with a home office—your system isn’t nec-
essarily protected by corporate safety devices and IT support isn’t always handy. With 
automated backups, you can rest a little easier at night knowing that your hard work 
isn’t disappearing down an electronic black hole.
This project focuses on setting up automated backups for your computer through 
the basic programs provided by Windows XP Professional and Windows Vista. We’ll 
also take a brief look at how to restore a file.
●
●
●
●
●
“
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

236  Project 21
You need to have at least two hard drives on your computer or a network con-
nection to another computer with enough space to hold all your backed up files. The 
whole point of backing up your files in case of hard drive failure is moot if you use 
the same hard drive to both create and back up your files! Easy-to-install external 
hard drives are sold at local computer stores if you need to add a hard drive to your 
computer; some even provide their own backup software.
Windows XP Home Edition requires the manual installation of the Backup program separately.
Step 1: Get Your Files Organized
If you’re the type of person who places files all over the place with no real rhyme or 
reason to structure, you’ve got a lot of work to do before you can get started with 
the automated file backup process. The idea is to be sure your files are all stored in a 
single, easy-to-find spot. For example, on my hard drive, I have “Sally’s Documents” 
as a main documents folder, and all other documents are located in subfolders. When 
it’s time to back up files, my computer just looks for Sally’s Documents instead of try-
ing to find every possible document in every possible folder.
If you don’t have a similarly simple setup, take the time right now to create one. 
The hour or two you spend now will be well worth it in the long run. Windows XP 
and Vista help with this task by allowing you to set up individual profiles for every 
user. Each profile holds a set of subfolders under Documents And Settings, and in-
cludes the My Documents folder. Probably the easiest way to get organized is to place 
all documents in the My Documents folder; you can set up as many separate subfold-
ers as you wish under that folder.
You have lots of options when you automate a backup, and one of those is to se-
lect individual files and folders to back up. While this may seem like a great option, 
it’s a little dangerous. That’s because it’s easy to miss a file or folder as you schedule 
the backup, and everyone knows that if you forget to include a file or folder in your 
backup, that’s the item that will fail. Play it safe and keep all your documents in a 
central location (okay, maybe two) that is easy for you to remember and locate.
AutoSave and AutoRecover are features in Microsoft Office products that automatically save and 
recover your work when most catastrophes strike. Check Help for the program you’re using to 
learn how to turn one or both of these features on.
Step 2: Configure Your Backup Settings 
with Windows XP
Configuring backup settings might sound difficult, but it’s really just a matter of tell-
ing your computer how and when to perform the backup. ‘When you’re ready to start 
automating your file backups with Windows XP, follow the steps on the next page:
note
tip

Automate Your File Backups  237
Click Start | All Programs | Accessories | System Tools | Backup. 
On the first page of the Backup and Restore Wizard, keep the check mark under Always Start In 
Wizard Mode for future forays you may make into this area of your computer.
When the Backup or Restore Wizard launches, click Next. Under Backup Or 
Restore, select Back Up Files And Settings.
Click Next. Under What To Back Up, select My Documents And Settings 
unless you have other users you are concerned with. In that case, select 
Everyone’s Documents And Settings.
Selecting All Information On This Computer backs up every single item on your computer and 
can take a lot of time, not to mention suck up space on the destination drive. Selecting Let Me 
Choose What To Back Up requires you to specifically select individual files for backup, which can 
take a lot of time and can result in missed files.
1.
2.
3.
note
note
www.ebook3000.com

238  Project 21
Click Next. Select the location for your backup and give it a name.
Click Browse next to Choose A Place To Save Your Backup to bring up the Save As window if your 
specified location is not shown. From there you can select any location on your computer or 
network. Click Save when done with the Save As window.
Click Next. You have the option of finishing the process now but the backup 
will not be automated to run later or at a specific time. Click Advanced to 
move to the automated portion of this process.
Select the type of backup you want performed. There are five options (Nor-
mal, Copy, Incremental, Differential, and Daily); use the drop-down menu to 
see the differences between each type. This project uses the Normal type.
4.
5.
6.
tip

Automate Your File Backups  239
Click Next. Select Verify Data After Backup. Leave Disable Volume Shadow 
Copy blank.
The Disable Shadow Volume Copy option disables the ability of Windows XP to back up file 
that reopen. If should be used only if you discover corruption in the backed up data and need to 
perform troubleshooting activities.
Click Next. Select Replace The Existing Backups. If you are backing up sensi-
tive data, consider placing a check mark in Allow Only The Owner And The 
Administrator Access To The Backup Data And To Any Backups Appended 
To This Medium. It is not required, but it is a good security measure.
Click Next. Select Later under When To Back Up. Under Schedule Entry, give 
the backup a Job Name.
Click Set Schedule. The Schedule Job window appears.
On the Schedule tab, select how often you want to run the backup and a start 
time. For most people, the best time to run a backup is during the middle of 
the night. Remember, though, your computer must be on to take advantage 
of the automated backup process!
On the Settings tab, select how long you are willing to let the backup run. 
This is useful if the backup gets hung up; there is no set amount of time that 
you should or should not allow. You can also select whether to start or stop 
the backup after a certain amount of idle time and choose Power Manage-
ment options (these are used for laptops). Click OK.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
tip
www.ebook3000.com

240  Project 21
In the Set Account Information window, enter a username that has read/
write access to all the documents and settings you are backing up. Enter and 
confirm a password as well.
Click OK.
Click Next.
Click Finish.
That’s it—your automated backup is now scheduled. To check up on your au-
tomated backups, choose Start, | Administrative Tools | Event Viewer. Look for an 
NTBACKUP event in the application log and double-click it to see details. Caution! 
This will only appear after a backup has run.
Configure Your Backup Settings with Windows Vista
When you’re ready to start automating your file backups with Windows Vista, follow 
these steps:
Chose Start | Control Panel. This launches the Backup And Restore Center 
window.
Under System And Maintenance, click Back Up Your Computer.
13.
14.
15.
16.
1.
2.

Automate Your File Backups  241
Under Back Up Files Or Your Entire Computer, click Back Up Files.
Choose a network or hard disk location to back up your files to. Click Next.
Choose the file types you want backed up. Click Next.
Select the timing for your scheduled backup. Click Save Settings And Start 
Backup. The first time you do this, a full backup will start immediately and 
then begin the scheduled backups.
That’s it—you’re done! In the Backup And Restore Center main page, the Change 
Settings option allows you to change settings and see the automated backup status at 
any time. Click this now to see the Backup Status and Configuration window, shown 
in Figure 21-1.
Appending data means that the file or tape you are writing to will keep growing every time a file 
is changed. This is a good choice if you need to recover previous versions of a file, but it takes 
up a lot of space, so most people replace existing backups instead. If you are concerned about 
version control or need access to early versions of a document, consider saving the new versions 
of the document with new version numbers (i.e., “v 3” or “v 4”) to help you track documents as 
well as keep your backup drive space contained.
3.
4.
5.
6.
tip
www.ebook3000.com

242  Project 21
Restore Files with Windows XP
Backing up files won’t help you if your system crashes before a backup has occurred. 
If you need to restore a file, you can do that through the Backup or Restore Wizard by 
following the steps here. This process is a bit more advanced than automating back-
ups, but you’ve come this far, so why not go the distance?
Choose Start | All Programs | Accessories | System Tools | Backup. This 
launches the Backup or Restore Wizard.
Click Advanced Mode. This launches the Backup Utility.
1.
2.
Figure 21-1 
A single click in 
Windows Vista Backup 
And Restore Center 
will show you details 
about your automatic 
file backup.

Automate Your File Backups  243
Click the Restore And Manage Media tab. To restore from a backup file, ex-
pand File in the left pane. To restore from a tape backup, expand the tape 
device you want and then expand the item you want.
At the bottom left of the Backup Utility, use the drop-down menu in Restore 
Files To  for location selections. To select Original location if you want the file 
placed back to its original location; select Alternate Location to move the file 
somewhere else, or select Single Folder to place the file in a separate location 
from all other files.
Choosing Alternate Location prevents the restoration from overwriting existing files.
Choose Tools | Options.
On the Restore tab, select the method you want used when Backup restores 
a file already on the computer. Click OK.
Click Start Restore.
Click OK when the Confirm Restore prompt appears. The Restore Progress 
dialog box will launch when the restoration begins.
Click Close when the restoration is completed. If prompted to restart your 
computer, click Yes. Be sure all other applications are closed!
Restore Files with Windows Vista
Windows Vista makes it incredibly easy to restore files. Here’s how to do it:
Click Start and click Control Panel. This launches the Backup And Restore 
Center window.
Under System And Maintenance, click Back Up Your Computer. This opens 
the Backup And Restore Center.
Under Restore Files Or Your Entire Computer, click Restore Files.
Select the type of files you want to restore. Click Next.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
1.
2.
3.
4.
tip
www.ebook3000.com

244  Project 21
To select the actual files you want to restore, click Add Files or Add Folders 
or conduct a search. Click Add until the proper file is selected; Vista will 
return you to the Restore Files window when the file is properly added.
Click Next. Choose a location to save the restored files to. If an error window 
occurs because there is already a file with the same name in that location, 
click the file you want to keep. The restoration process will commence.
Click Finish.
Other Considerations
If you don’t have Windows XP or Vista, run a search on your operating system for 
Backups to see if your system has the proper software. You can also check on Micro-
soft’s web site (www.microsoft.com) for add-on programs that perform this task.
Freeware and shareware is available that can help you back up your files, too. Al-
ways exercise caution when downloading anything off the Internet. Here is a sample 
of automatic file backup freeware found online through the Free Downloads Center 
at www.freedownloadscenter.com:
SimpleBackup Uses drag-and-drop features to back up groups of files and 
folders; can be used to back up files on a hard disk, over a network, or via 
FTP servers.
AKG Backup A multiplatform-compatible backup program that offers 
compression options, and can be used on any media.
Adept for Oracle Backs up most Oracle databases to local storage but must 
be used on a Windows-based PC. The data can be hosted on any server.
It’s smart to take advantage of the automated file backup process. It lets you do 
what you do best and leaves the annoying computer details to the computer. After 
all, weren’t personal computers supposed to make our lives easier? This is one simple 
way your computer can help you out, so take a few minutes to set this up. The next 
time your system crashes, your heart won’t.
5.
6.
7.
●
●
●

245
Project 22
Teach Your PC 
to Recognize 
Your Voice
What You’ll Need:
Operating system: Windows XP, Windows Vista
Software: Yes, depends upon solution chosen
Hardware: Headphones
Cost: $0–$199
D
o you type on your keyboard using just index fingers? Perhaps you type beau-
tifully but the thought of sitting in front of the computer for hours at a time to 
get things done makes you stir crazy. You’re not alone. An entire industry is 
coming to life to specifically address your needs: the speech recognition industry.
Speech recognition—or voice recognition as it is sometimes called—allows you to 
use your own voice to input text and commands on the computer. The patterns of your 
speech are remembered by the computer with a bit of training, plus the grammatical 
context and frequency of the words you use are placed into memory and retrieved 
as you begin speaking, which means that before you even speak the next word, your 
computer is anticipating what that word will be.
A decade ago, speech recognition was a great idea but it didn’t consistently de-
liver on its promises to understand your voice easily and help create documents more 
quickly. Today, advances in technology have created products that are actually worth 
using on a regular basis. Accuracy has improved, and the software involved typically 
offers easy-to-follow tutorials. Since most software also works with Bluetooth wireless 
technology, you don’t need to be tethered to your computer to use these programs, 
either. Run on the treadmill, cook dinner, chase your child—all while working. Sure, 
background noise is still somewhat of an issue, but the latest microphones offer noise 
reduction features that improve on this problem.
It may sound like a commercial in some respects, but as you read through the op-
tions outlined in this project, you should find that the hype is finally worth listening to 
with speech recognition products. You can spend a lot of money on these programs, but 
●
●
●
●
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

246  Project 22
this project will also cover the speech recognition program most people don’t realize 
they already have. If you like to gab instead of type, then this is the project for you.
Did you know that some speech recognition programs can recognize, translate, and type 
the spoken word at up to 160 words per minute? Most typists can enter just 40–60 words 
per minute.
Step 1: Review Your Options
You probably already know that you can buy speech recognition software at the local 
computer store, but I bet you didn’t know that you could add speech recognition to 
your Windows XP operating system for about $30 or possibly even free, or that Office 
2003 and Windows Vista have speech recognition built in. Most people don’t know 
about the last three options, so you’re not alone.
These Microsoft programs are incredibly simple to use, and the newest (Windows 
Vista Speech Recognition) is as robust as some of the more expensive software from 
other vendors. Since these programs are primarily free and just languishing on your 
computer, it’s worth giving them a try before you go spending a lot of money. You’ll 
get used to how speech recognition works and can begin to identify whether or not 
you need a more complex solution.
Beyond Microsoft, here are two programs to consider:
Dragon NaturallySpeaking 9 (www.nuance.com/naturallyspeaking)  Come
s in a variety of versions and claims to be up to 99 percent accurate. Compat-
ible with almost all Windows applications.
ViaVoice (www.nuance.com/viavoice) Offers versions for Windows and 
Mac; ViaVoice Standard v10 works well with older computers. Although 
ViaVoice is not as accurate as Dragon NaturallySpeaking 9, it is much less 
expensive.
Other solutions do exist, but many are built upon Dragon’s technology or are de-
signed for large enterprise use. Still others were created for niche use—mathematics, 
for example, or call centers.
Dragon NaturallySpeaking 9 is almost universally rated as the best voice recognition package on 
the market today.
A Few Words about Training 
Your Speech Recognition Program
Training your speech recognition program to recognize your voice and speech pat-
terns is critical to obtaining accuracy. Most programs recognize about 85–90 percent 
of the words you dictate; accuracy improves every time you use speech recognition 
because the program has more time to learn how you speak. Additional training 
usually helps to improve recognition and accuracy in any program.
●
●
note
tip

Teach Your PC to Recognize Your Voice  247
Speech recognition programs don’t understand what the words mean when you 
say them; your computer can’t use common sense the way you do. To compensate, 
the program tracks how frequently words occur by themselves and in the context of 
other words. When it hears you speak, it chooses the most likely word or phrase from 
several possibilities.
If you have ever been fortunate enough to have a secretary who took dictation, 
you know that you need to help fill in the blanks with punctuation (although you 
won’t need to do this during actual training sessions). Your computer won’t know 
when you expect a sentence to stop, for example, or when you want to add a dash or 
colon to your sentence. As you speak, think of the way newscasters speak, too. They 
enunciate well, and speak clearly so that you can understand every word that is said. 
That’s exactly how you should speak into your microphone—you don’t need to speak 
extra slowly, just clearly.
Training typically works by showing you text on a screen and requiring you to 
read the text into your microphone. As the program hears you speak the words it 
already knows, it applies your speech and recognition patterns to the words spoken, 
as well as to other words in the program’s vocabulary.
Think logically as you use a speech recognition program. For example, if you want to close 
a program in Office, you might normally use your mouse to click the Close button. But speech 
recognition typically understands menu and navigation commands, so instead say “file” and, 
when the File menu opens, say “exit.”
Step 2: Activate Speech Recognition 
Through Office 2003
When you activate the speech recognition features in Office 2003, you actually ac-
complish it in Word 2003. Once you’ve completed the activation steps in Word 2003, 
speech recognition becomes available on the Tools menu in all Office 2003 programs. 
If you will be using Windows XP or Vista or a third-party program for speech recognition, you can 
move to Step 3, 4, or 5 as applicable. In this project, the major steps do not need to be followed 
in order; each is a separate process dependent upon your needs.
To complete the activation:
Open Word 2003.
Choose Tools | Speech.
Click Yes when asked if you want to install the feature.
You’ll see a speech recognition Language bar appear at the top of your screen 
above your main toolbar, with options such as Microphone, Dictation, Voice Com-
mand, etc. The Welcome To Office Speech Recognition window will appear; go to 
Train Speech Recognition Through Word 2003 for further instructions. You won’t be 
able to use the feature until you have completed at least the initial training.
1.
2.
3.
tip
note
www.ebook3000.com

248  Project 22
Train Speech Recognition Through Word 2003
Once the speech recognition program is activated, you need to train the program to 
understand and recognize your voice. Without this step, you won’t have high ac-
curacy and reliability when speaking to your computer. The steps involved here are 
twofold: adjust your microphone for the best sound, and actually train Office 2003 
for speech recognition. The process takes about 15 minutes and you must complete at 
least one training session before you can use the speech recognition function.
Before you begin, be sure you are in a quiet environment. Then follow the steps 
provided next. The tutorial is very simple and offers a lot of explanation about the 
speech recognition function.
If you have closed Word 2003 and are returning to complete the voice training, choose Tools | 
Training on the Language bar. If you don’t see the Language bar, choose Tools | Speech on the 
standard toolbar.
In the Welcome To Office Speech Recognition window, click Next to open the 
Microphone Wizard. After reading the Welcome screen, click Next.
When the Voice Training window opens, follow the wizard instructions.
Click Finish when the training is complete.
1.
2.
3.
note

Teach Your PC to Recognize Your Voice  249
For additional training, choose Tools | Training on the Language bar. Select a 
passage to be read aloud and click Next each time you complete a passage until that 
training is complete.
If your microphone and headset do not appear to be working, you may need to reinstall the 
drivers on your computer.
Use Speech Recognition Through Word 2003
To use speech recognition in Word 2003 and other Office 2003 programs, go to the 
Language bar and click Dictation or say “dictation.” Use your mouse to place the 
cursor wherever you want the text to begin on the page and begin speaking slowly 
and clearly. As you use the function more, you’ll find you can speed up your rate of 
speech. The trick is to not get discouraged in the beginning if the program doesn’t un-
derstand you. Either you aren’t giving the correct command (I ran into that a lot in the 
beginning) or you might be in the wrong mode (I would use voice commands while 
in the dictation mode, for example). Patience is key to making this work for you.
If you make a mistake or want to change something, click Voice Command on 
the Language bar or say “voice command.” Voice commands allow you to control the 
computer and program you’re in by opening dialog boxes and other commands. For 
example, if you were to say “format,” Word 2003 would open the Format menu. Say 
“font” and the Font dialog box opens. To change the font, say the name of the new 
font you want, such as “Arial.” To change font style, say “italic,” for example, and to 
change font size, say the new size you want, such as “ten.” As the program moves 
through the commands, it highlights the new item you want just as it highlighted text 
during the training session.
You can navigate through mouse and keyboard commands with your voice, 
too—for example, “backspace” can help you correct minor mistakes, “right-click” 
will open a context menu, “up” or “down” will move the cursor up or down a line, 
and “delete” plus the word to delete will delete any word in your text.
There are dozens of commands; you need to take some time to experiment and 
use the Help feature to learn them all.
Step 3: Activate Speech Recognition 
Through Windows XP
Setting up speech recognition with Windows XP requires a bit more technical skill. 
You need the following items:
Windows XP Service Pack 1 (or higher)
Microsoft Speech Recognition Engine (SRE) v5.0
Windows XP Office applications and other applications that accept speech 
(Word 2002, Excel 2002, Outlook Express, Notepad)
●
●
●
tip
www.ebook3000.com

250  Project 22
Speech recognition in Windows XP will work with Office 2007 applications.
To determine the Service Pack and SRE that you have:
Right-click My Computer.
Click Properties.
The information you need is shown in the Properties dialog box. Service Packs 
are downloaded from Microsoft.com. If you don’t have the Microsoft SRE, you may 
need to download and install it, too. However, it is usually available with Office XP 
applications. If you need to install the SRE component, find your Office XP CD-ROM 
and place it into the CD-ROM drive and follow these instructions:
Click Start.
Click Control Panel.
Click Add/Remove Programs and select Microsoft Office XP.
Click the Change button.
Click Add Or Remove Features.
Click Next. The Installation Options dialog box appears.
Expand Alternative User Input and click Speech.
Click Update.
Another option to installing the SRE is to purchase the Windows XP Plus! Pack available online 
from Microsoft.
Next, you need to enable speech recognition. You do this through Microsoft Word. 
Open Word 2002 and choose Tools | Speech. You might be prompted for the Office XP 
CD-ROM to finish loading the SRE. If so, Word will handle the rest of the installation 
for you. Once the installation is complete, reboot your computer.
Train the Speech Recognition Engine
Once the speech recognition engine is installed, you need to train the program to un-
derstand your voice. The process takes about 15 minutes and you must complete at 
least one training session before you can use the speech recognition function.
Click Start.
Click Control Panel.
Click Sound, Speech And Audio Devices, and the click the Speech icon. This 
opens the Speech Properties dialog box.
1.
2.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
1.
2.
3.
tip
tip

Teach Your PC to Recognize Your Voice  251
Click Configure Microphone and follow the steps to ensure that your micro-
phone is working properly.
Click Train Profile to open the Speech Recognition Training Wizard.
Click Next when the wizard opens, and follow the wizard’s instructions.
4.
5.
6.
www.ebook3000.com

252  Project 22
Check Settings in Windows XP
You’re almost ready to begin using speech recognition in Windows XP applications, 
but there are a couple more things to do first:
Open the Control Panel.
Click Regional And Language Options. Click the Languages tab.
Click Details.
In the Text Services and Input Languages dialog box, click the Advanced 
tab.
Select the Extend Support Of Advanced Text Services To All Programs check 
box. This option allows Windows XP to accept dictation anywhere there is 
a box that can be filled in with text, including Notepad, Internet Explorer’s 
Address bar, and Outlook Express.
You can’t use speech recognition for operating system commands in Windows XP. The operating 
system itself does not respond to Voice Command mode, although the individual applications 
within it do. The only exception is in the Tablet PC Edition of Windows XP.
Use Speech Recognition in Windows XP
Speech recognition is ready for you to use Windows XP. When you open any program 
using Windows XP that accepts speech recognition, you’ll see the Language bar as 
shown in Figure 22-1. Click Microphone and then say “dictate” or “voice command.” 
Speech recognition commands in Windows XP work almost identically to the ones in 
Office 2003 programs; see “Use Speech Recognition Commands in Office 2003” for 
more details about voice and dictation commands.
To close the Language bar, right-click Microphone and click Close Language bar.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Figure 22-1 
The Windows XP 
Language bar
Step 3: Enable Speech Recognition in Windows Vista
This section is the shortest of all due to the complete simplicity of the Windows Vista 
Speech Recognition program. The tutorial is breathtakingly easy and the commands 
(“go to,” “open Excel,” “close that,” “show desktop”) are easy to remember.
To open speech recognition in Windows Vista, click the Start button and enter 
“speech” in the Start Search box. Windows Speech Recognition appears under the 
Programs section of the results.
note

Teach Your PC to Recognize Your Voice  253
Open the program. The Welcome to Speech Recognition window appears.
Click Next. Select the type of microphone you want to use.
Click Next. Follow the instructions for setting up the microphone, clicking 
Next as prompted.
When the Improve Speech Recognition Accuracy window appears, select 
Enable Document Review. This allows Windows Vista to check through your 
documents and e-mail to learn how you write. Click Next.
By reviewing the e-mails you’ve sent and documents you’ve created, a speech recognition 
program gains a good understanding of your writing style and uses that along with your speech 
patterns to translate your spoken words into written ones.
Print out the commands sheet. Click Next.
Select Run Speech Recognition At Startup. Click Next.
You can now control the computer by voice, but taking the tutorial is highly 
recommended.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
note
www.ebook3000.com

254  Project 22
Run the Tutorial
The Windows Vista tutorial is completely different from all the other speech recogni-
tion tutorials mentioned in this project; it walks you through the actual opening and 
closing of programs, dictation of text, and use of various commands. As you work 
in the tutorial, the program uses the words you say to build its profile for you. It’s 
a nice way to learn how the program works as you teach the program your speech 
patterns.
Click Start Tutorial.
Say “next” as you work your way through each tutorial screen.
Use Windows Vista Speech Recognition
When the tutorial is complete, you will know a variety of simple commands and can 
begin dictating to your computer. It took me about 15 minutes total to get started with 
this particular program. Say “start listening” to turn on the microphone and “stop 
listening” when you need to take a break.
You can use both dictation and voice commands in the same mode; the program 
knows the difference based on the words you use. In Windows Vista, say “What can 
I say?” when you’ve forgotten a command. A Speech Reference card window with 
commands will appear as shown in Figure 22-2.
You can start and use both computer applications (Control Panel, for example) 
and Office applications (Word, Excel, etc.) with the same basic commands. When I 
tried out the Windows Vista Speech Recognition program, it easily moved between 
programs and was very fast at understanding my voice and patterns, so I didn’t have 
to correct very often. For overall ease of use and very simple training, this program 
is very effective.
A nice feature with Windows Vista Speech Recognition is the option to “show 
numbers” for the commands on the screen. This is helpful because sometimes you 
don’t always know what a particular command is called—when you tell the com-
puter to show you the numbers, it numbers every single command on the screen. You 
choose the number that corresponds to the command you want, and say “okay.”
1.
2.

Teach Your PC to Recognize Your Voice  255
Always use your natural inflections when speaking. The computer has been trained to listen to 
your speech patterns; using a monotone voice won’t improve recognizability for the program.
Step 5: Use a Third-Party Speech Recognition Program
As explained earlier, there are dozens of speech recognition software providers. Each 
one touts its ability to do more, and understand more, than any other program. Most, 
however, are not designed for the average home office user. Dragon NaturallySpeak-
ing 9 is an exception. It comes in many different versions, so you can find one to meet 
your needs and your budget. For this example, I’ll show you how to use Dragon 
NaturallySpeaking 9 Professional.
If you have this program, follow the instructions to install the program. You will 
also be asked to activate the program the first time you use it.
Figure 22-2 
The Speech Reference 
card is activated with a 
simple voice com-
mand.
tip
www.ebook3000.com

256  Project 22
New User Training
The New User training is self-explanatory and very simple to use. It launches auto-
matically and you’ll be asked to create a user profile. Then, a wizard will launch to 
help you with a few simple tests to be certain your microphone and sound are work-
ing correctly.
After that, you will begin speaking directly to your computer so that Dragon 
NaturallySpeaking 9 can learn your speech patterns and voice characteristics. The 
voice training is similar to the way Microsoft speech recognition works, except that it 
doesn’t highlight the words you speak as you train; it grays out the words.
One part of Dragon’s process, however, is very similar to Windows Vista Speech 
Recognition. The program doesn’t just listen to how you speak, it also analyzes how 
you write. It does this by accessing your e-mail program, plus Microsoft Word, Corel 
WordPerfect, Text, and Rich Text files, as shown in Figure 22-3.
All other programs should be closed during this step, which can take as long as 
30 minutes, depending upon the amount of documents and e-mails on your computer. 
When this step is complete, you’re ready to begin dictation but you also have the 
option of taking a tutorial. It’s worth taking the time to complete the tutorial.
NaturallySpeaking has an autopunctuation tool. When turned on, it automatically inserts 
periods and commas as it detects the need for them.
Using Dragon NaturallySpeaking 9
This program places a toolbar (called a DragonBar) at the top of your desktop when 
the program is open. When you’re ready to begin dictating, choose NaturallySpeak-
ing | Turn Microphone On on the DragonBar. You can’t turn the microphone on by 
voice, but you can turn it off by saying “microphone off.”
tip

Teach Your PC to Recognize Your Voice  257
As you dictate, you’ll find that NaturallySpeaking offers many more commands 
than other programs. They are typically in “natural” language, such as “scratch that” 
(which removes the last word) and “cut this paragraph.” The text displays in a small 
yellow window as you speak, just before the text is inserted into the document you’re 
working on.
Another helpful feature in this program is its ability to correct recognition errors. 
When you see that the program has incorrectly entered a word for you—noon instead 
of one, for example—you say “select noon” and a correction menu will appear with 
logical correction choices.
Instead of continuing to say the word and having the program ignore you or 
continue to incorrectly interpret your words, the correction menu gives you several 
numbered choices to select from. You select the numbered choice you want, and the 
program inserts it for you. If the correct word is not on the correction menu, you can 
elect to spell out the word with a simple “spell that” command.
Another nice bonus with NaturallySpeaking is that you do not have to switch 
between dictation and voice command modes. The program recognizes a voice com-
mand as you dictate, which reduces the amount of time needed to format or make 
corrections. Figure 22-4 shows how a dictated letter looks.
Figure 22-3 
Dragon Naturally-
Speaking 9 analyzes 
your written docu-
ments as well as your 
spoken words.
www.ebook3000.com

258  Project 22
Figure 22-4 
An example of 
a dictated letter with 
Dragon Naturally-
Speaking 9.
If you find that you are frequently correcting small common words, try correcting the entire 
phrase containing the small word. For example, if the program doesn’t understand “on” in the 
phrase “going on a journey,” use the correction features of your program and say “going on” 
instead of yelling at the computer or talking slowly.
Other Considerations
Patience is really critical if you decide to use these speech recognition programs. The 
initial documents you work on might seem a little painful and discourage you from 
continuing to use speech recognition. Don’t let it stop you—the programs quickly 
learn your style and patterns, and you will learn the commands and corrections need-
ed to make the program more responsive and intuitive.
I did find that only Windows Vista Speech Recognition and Dragon Naturally-
Speaking 9 seemed to move quickly or understand commands well when jumping 
from one program to another. It’s probably a good idea to stay within one program 
when initially using a speech recognition program unless you have a lot of patience 
to help the program follow you around the computer.
My recommendation is to use these programs in short bursts the first several 
times you try them out. This will help train the program and give you time to get used 
to how it works, as well as help you avoid frustration. But overall, if you don’t enjoy 
typing and/or like to stand and move while you work, you should try one of these 
options to see if it’s the right solution for your home office.
tip

259
Project 23
Set Up a 
Wireless 
Network
What You’ll Need:
Operating system: Windows XP, Windows Vista
Internet access: Yes
Software: None
Hardware: Wireless access point with built-in router, network inter-
face card, RJ45 cable
Cost: $150
Difficulty: Advanced
W
hen even McDonald’s offers wireless access at more than 7000 locations 
worldwide, you know that the wireless revolution has taken hold and isn’t 
going anywhere. That revolution can work to your advantage, you know. 
It allows you to take your laptop and work from all over town—or all over the world, 
really.
It also means that wireless networks have evolved to the point that even non-geeks 
can set one up without a lot of hassle. The primary reasons to set up your own wireless 
network in your home office are productivity and mobility.
With a traditional wired network, you’re pretty much stuck at your desk in your of-
fice. If something is happening elsewhere in your home, you must leave your desk and 
your work to handle the situation. With a wireless network, you can head to the other 
part of the house and tote your laptop with you so that you can continue to work.
For example, my toddler is rarely content to sit and play in my office. She’s very 
good about playing by herself, but that doesn’t mean she will play for hours beside 
my desk. Instead, she wants to explore and play with things all over the house or even 
outside. With my wireless network, I can follow her with my laptop—to the backyard, 
upstairs to her room, over to the family room. She’s happy, we’re both mobile, and 
I stay productive because my work goes with me wherever I wander.
●
●
●
●
●
●
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

260  Project 23
Other benefits include cost and ease of installation—wireless networks are in-
creasingly cost-effective over traditional wired networks, and they are relatively ef-
fortless to install. Finally, scalability is excellent with a wireless network. By scalability, 
I mean the ability of the system to expand as your needs expand.
This project explains wireless network basics and shows you how to set one up 
in your home.
Step 1: Learn about Wireless Technology
Wireless networks work the same way wired network do, just without any wires. In-
stead of using cables to send out information, radio signals are transmitted between 
computers. Access points connect the computers to the network.
There are a variety of wireless network technology standards and terms that you 
should be familiar with before you begin your setup.
Wireless Standards
Wireless technology standards have been established to ensure that the various man-
ufacturers of wireless products meet certain guidelines, including minimum speeds 
and signal rates. Here is a look at the standards:
802.11 This is the original standard that wireless networks used. Connec-
tions occur at just 2 megabits per second (Mbps), which isn’t really very fast. 
This standard is rarely used.
802.11a This standard offers increased connection speed over the original 
standard (54 Mbps) and operates at a high 5 gigahertz (GHz) frequency. This 
frequency is a regulated frequency so it offers less interference from other de-
vices as you work with your wireless network. At the same time, the higher 
frequency causes trouble as the signals attempt to go through objects (like 
walls). These problems tend to limit the distance of your wireless network—
you might not be able to go outside, for example, and work.
Frequencies are the radio signals that the wireless network uses to transmit information. A 
frequency is the number of times that an electrical signal repeats itself in a specific amount of 
time. It is usually expressed in cycles per second, or hertz (Hz), with one hertz representing one 
cycle per second.
802.11b This is the first wireless standard that was widely adopted by 
the general users. It offers connection speeds of 11 Mbps at a frequency of 
2.4 GHz. While relatively slow compared to the wired networks of the time, 
it still handles basic web browsing and e-mail without any problems. The 
frequency is at just the right rate to allow signals to pass through walls and 
●
●
●
note

Set Up a Wireless Network  261
other objects easily. However, it doesn’t handle high-bandwidth items such 
as streamed video very well and there is a minor chance of interference from 
other frequencies, such as the next-door neighbor’s wireless telephone.
802.11g This is the most commonly used standard today. It operates at 
54 Mbps, which is a very fast connection speed, and 2.4 GHz, so signals travel 
well. It’s fast enough to stream music and video, so you can do pretty much 
anything you need to with this standard.
802.11n This standard is not yet approved at this writing but is expected 
to replace both 802.11g and 802.11b networks and be available sometime 
in 2008. It will operate at 600 Mbps by using multiple-input multiple-out-
put (MIMO) technology to allow the increased speed. Signals will travel at 
2.4 GHz. This standard will support any existing wireless connections and 
should offer better range and performance than the 802.11g standard. Be 
careful! Some manufacturers are already selling wireless equipment based 
on the draft for this standard. If you purchase 802.11n standard equipment 
before it has been fully approved, your network might not work with the 
approved standard when it becomes available. Instead, go with 802.11g or 
802.11b—the new standard will be “backward compatible” with both, mean-
ing that you will be able to easily upgrade to 802.11n in the future.
Some manufacturers offer custom wireless equipment that exceeds the defined 
connection speeds. On closer look, these custom devices aren’t necessarily as fabu-
lous as the manufacturers might have you believe. For example, some claim connec-
tion speeds of more than 100 Mbps. Although that may show as the connected speed 
in your taskbar, it’s accomplished simply by compressing the information so that it 
takes less time to send the information. It’s not the actual connection speed—that 
comes in slightly better than that of the 802.11g standard.
Another drawback? These custom devices are almost always proprietary, too. 
That means that any device connecting to your custom access point must be of the 
same brand—you can’t mix and match brands. This typically leads to higher costs.
Wireless standards are approved by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. 
Check its web site (www.ieee.org) for information on the 802.11n standard and to learn when 
the standard has been approved.
Wireless Products
There are dozens, if not hundreds, of wireless products on the market. This is actu-
ally good for you because increased competition means lower prices. On the other 
hand, it can make finding the wireless product you need a bit of a challenge since 
●
●
note
www.ebook3000.com

262  Project 23
there are so many to choose from. Here’s a look at the basic wireless components 
most people work with:
Access points Access points connect wireless communication devices to-
gether to form a wireless network. These usually connect to a wired network 
and relay data between wired and wireless devices. Some access points have 
routing capabilities.
Client devices Client adapters and other items are used to connect your desk-
top and mobile computing devices (laptop, PDA, etc.) to the wireless network.
Network controllers/integrated switches and routers These items inte-
grate into existing enterprise networks for advanced management capabili-
ties and increased performance. They communicate with access points. These 
are not typically needed in a home office environment but are mentioned 
here in case you hear them discussed at a store.
Network management tools These tools help with wireless network plan-
ning, configuration, and management. These are not typically needed in a 
home office environment.
Mobility tools These tools help add support for things like wireless Voice over 
IP (VoIP), network security, and other technologies useful for mobile workers.
Encryption Methods
You should know the basics of encryption before you set up your wireless network. 
Encryption is a security method that keeps others from snooping around to find and 
use the information exchanged by your wireless system.
One popular method is Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP). It is the standard secu-
rity protocol for wireless networks. Even though it’s the standard, it’s not very secure 
and the key to unlocking it can be found pretty easily by anyone who knows what 
they are doing.
A second method is Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA). This security protocol is more 
difficult to break than WEP but it can be done if someone has lots of time and a desire to 
find your security key. Ultimately, however, this method is far more secure than WEP.
A third method, Temporal Key Integrity Protocol (TKIP), works in conjunction 
with WEP and offers stronger security than just WEP alone. TKIP uses new encryp-
tion algorithms that constantly change the encryption keys so hackers have a tough 
time cracking them. Even if a hacker cracks an encryption key, by the time he does, it 
will have changed on your computer and the hacker will have to start all over again.
●
●
●
●
●

Set Up a Wireless Network  263
Access Point
Modem
PDA
Desktop
PC
Laptop
Internet
LAN
WAN
WEP
WPA
TKIP
Step 2: Set Up the Wireless Access Point
Access points are required to actually form a wireless network. Without them, signals 
can’t be sent and received between various computers and a wired network. For this 
project, you need a wireless access point (WAP) with a built-in router. If you don’t 
have a built-in router, you’re just making extra work for yourself. The end result—a 
wireless network as shown in Figure 23-1—is the same with both kinds of routers, 
however.
The following are some examples of brands that offer access point products that 
work well in home office environments:
Cisco
D-Link
Linksys
Hawking
●
●
●
●
www.ebook3000.com

264  Project 23
As an example, Figure 23-2 shows a Linksys broadband router access point.
When you are ready to begin setting up your WAP, remember that different 
brands may have slightly different instructions. These instructions are for attaching 
the WAP to your desktop computer:
Take the WAP from the box and check the instructions to be sure you have all 
the required parts. If an antenna is included, attach it to the WAP now.
Plug power into the WAP.
Plug the RJ45 cable into an open port on the WAP and to your computer. 
You’ll recognize this Ethernet cable by its similarity to an oversized phone 
jack plug-in.
Turn on the power for your computer.
If a CD-ROM was included with your WAP, insert and run the CD-ROM. 
Follow the instructions on your screen. You don’t need to follow the remain-
ing steps here, but it might be helpful to read through them to understand 
why you are entering certain information with your CD-ROM. If you did not 
receive a CD-ROM with your product, go to Step 6.
Open your web browser on your desktop computer. It should go straight to 
the configuration page for your access point product. If it does not, refer to 
your instructions in the box.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Access Point
Modem
PDA
Desktop
PC
Laptop
Internet
LAN
WAN
Figure 23-1 
The setup of a basic 
wireless network 
looks like this.

Set Up a Wireless Network  265
Select and set your Service Set Identifier (SSID). This is the name you will 
give your wireless network—you will use this name to connect to your wire-
less network. You can call it anything you like; just keep it short, simple, and 
easy to remember and don’t use punctuation marks or spaces.
Don’t use the default name or your own name for your wireless access point. If you and your 
neighbor both use the default name for the same brand of wireless access point, for example, 
you will have trouble connecting. Also, hackers can get into your wireless network easily if a 
certain brand has security holes—they just look for the default name to find the available 
networks to break into. Finally, using your last name lets everyone know who the wireless 
network belongs to; use something different to maintain your privacy.
Set the SSID to hidden or not broadcast. Not all WAPs have this feature but 
if yours does, it makes it much more difficult to detect and use your network 
because outsiders can’t see it.
Set up your security for WPA-PSK and TKIP (if it’s available). Enter and 
confirm your key. Make it at least eight characters and remember what it is 
or write it down (this will be discussed more in Project 24.)
7.
8.
9.
Figure 23-2 
Wireless access points 
come in a variety of 
brands.
tip
www.ebook3000.com

266  Project 23
Select the channel you want to use. This step may take some time and de-
pends upon the WAP product you have. Some products support six chan-
nels, some support more. Most wireless networks use channel 6 by default, 
but this is a little dangerous since many of your neighbors will likely be 
using that channel as well. Try other channels until you find one that works 
well for you.
If you start noticing lost connections or that it takes longer than usual to access the Internet, 
the chances are that your selected channel is receiving interference from other sources. For 
example, my WAP was set to channel 4 and worked great…until the phone rang and all my 
wireless connections stopped for a few minutes. I changed the channel, restarted my system, 
and everything works fine now—even when the phone rings.
Plug your WAP into your DSL router.
Restart your WAP.
Now you’re ready to move on to setting up your computer.
Step 3: Set Up Your Computer for Wireless Access
Now that you have the WAP all set up, it’s time to set up your computer so that you 
can use the wireless network. For this project, we’ll use a laptop computer. However, 
you can set up any or all computers in your home on the wireless network. This is a 
great bonus because you can put your desktop computer wherever you want without 
worrying about Internet access, for instance.
The first thing you need to do is install a network interface card if you don’t have 
one installed yet. These are sometimes referred to as NIC cards or wireless Ethernet 
adapter cards. Newer laptops come with built-in wireless cards, but older ones will 
require the installation of the card before you can take advantage of your wireless 
network. Some examples of companies that sell network interface cards are listed 
here but any card should work:
D-Link
Intel
Linksys
Smart Link
3Com
USRobotics
Once you have a network interface card, you can move through this section pretty 
easily.
10.
11.
12.
●
●
●
●
●
●
tip

Set Up a Wireless Network  267
Install a Network Interface Card
This process involves inserting the network interface card into your computer and 
installing related drivers and a client utility program, although the client utility pro-
gram won’t be needed for what we are doing.
You need to follow your manufacturer’s instructions to install these items on your 
laptop. If you have a Windows operating system, it should recognize that you’ve 
inserted your card and launch a Setup Wizard to help guide you through the instal-
lation process. After that is completed, you can just take the card in and out of your 
computer when you need it, as shown in Figure 23-3; you won’t need to do anything 
else. Once the card is installed, move to the next section.
Figure 23-3 
Network interface 
cards are necessary 
to help your laptop 
communicate with 
your wireless access 
point and are easy 
to use.
You can link several wireless access points together to form a larger network. This kind of larger 
network is called a “roaming” network; it’s sort of like roaming cell phone coverage that allows 
you to use your cell phone in a variety of areas far from your original location.
Configure Your Laptop Computer with Windows XP
As you move through this part of the process, be sure to carefully enter information. 
If you make a mistake, your wireless access won’t work and you’ll have to go through 
the process again. When you’re ready, follow these steps:
On your laptop, choose Start | Control Panel.
Double-click Network Connections.
1.
2.
tip
www.ebook3000.com

268  Project 23
In the Network Connections window, right-click Wireless Network Connec-
tion and click View Available Wireless Networks.
This launches the Wireless Network Connection window. Don’t be surprised 
if you see neighborhood networks on the list in the right pane.
3.
4.

Set Up a Wireless Network  269
In the left pane, click Change The Order Of Preferred Networks. This launch-
es the Wireless Network Connection Properties dialog box.
Under Preferred Networks, click Add. A second Properties dialog box will 
launch called Wireless Network Properties.
In the Network Name (SSID) field, enter the SSID for your wireless 
network.
5.
6.
7.
www.ebook3000.com

270  Project 23
In the Network Authentication drop-down list box, select WPA-PSK.
In the Data Encryption drop-down list box, select TKIP.
In both the Network Key and Confirm Network Key fields, enter the net-
work key you created earlier in Steps 2–9.
Click OK.
Click OK.
Verify Your Wireless Connections in Windows XP
Perform this step to confirm that your wireless connections were set up properly in 
the previous section:
On your laptop, choose Start | Control Panel.
Double-click Network Connections.
In the Network Connections window, right-click Wireless Network 
Connection.
Select the Wireless Networks tab.
Click View Available Wireless Networks. This launches the Wireless Net-
work Connection window, where your wireless network should now be 
listed (along with your neighbors’ wireless networks).
That’s it—if your wireless network appears on the list, you’re ready to connect 
and begin working. If it doesn’t, you need to go back through the configuration steps 
of the previous section and reenter the information.
Configure Your Laptop Computer with Windows Vista
Windows Vista makes it incredibly easy to configure your computer for wireless 
access. When you’re ready, follow these steps:
On your laptop computer, choose Start | Connect To. This launches the 
Connect to a Network window.
Enter the name or your wireless network (SSID).
Click Connect.
Enter the network security key. Click OK. You will see a confirmation mes-
sage that you have connected to the network.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1.
2.
3.
4.

Set Up a Wireless Network  271
Verify Your Wireless Connections in Windows Vista
Perform this step to confirm that your wireless connections were set up properly in 
the previous section:
On your laptop, choose Start | Network.
Look for your wireless network; you should see it in the list in the right 
pane.
With either operating system, if you see your wireless network in the list, you 
have set things up correctly. If you don’t, double-check your steps.
Other Considerations
If you have to balance corporate network considerations with your home office 
wireless network, it’s a very simple process to switch between the two networks. If 
you need to configure settings for the corporate wireless network for the first time, 
just follow the same instructions outlined for your home office wireless network. 
1.
2.
www.ebook3000.com

272  Project 23
After that, you will be able to just open the Network Connections folder, as shown 
earlier in this project, and select the network you need to use.
The wireless connection will launch automatically on your laptop every time you 
start it. You will need to give your computer a couple of minutes to get started and find 
the wireless network, so exercise a little patience when starting up your computer.
I can’t recommend wireless networks highly enough for home offices. Part of the 
beauty of working from home is flexibility, and that includes the flexibility to move 
around. Listen to a conference call and keep your instant messaging program open 
and accessible on your laptop as you fix breakfast. Or get some sun in the backyard 
while you work on a client’s proposal. The possibilities are endless when you install 
a wireless network in your office! Be sure to complete Project 24 so that your wireless 
network is well secured.

273
Project 24
Secure Your 
Wireless 
Network and 
Computers
What You’ll Need:
Operating system: Windows XP, Windows Vista
Software: None
Hardware: None
Cost: $0
Difficulty: Challenging
H
ave you heard those horror stories about how personal computers have been 
used for evil reasons, such as launching worldwide cyber-attacks? Or for the 
storage of illegal files, like child pornography? Innocent people have found 
themselves staring at federal agents on the doorstep as investigations lead officials to 
suburban homes where wireless networks are in use. These people quickly learned 
that wireless network security is nothing to take lightly.
One study showed that as many as 70 percent of wireless networks were not 
secured properly, leaving owners wide open to attacks and hijackings. I understand 
why—there is probably little else in this world as boring as network security. Most 
people feel the same way, and rush through the process as quickly as possible. In fact, 
most people would finish Project 23 from this book and then unfortunately consider 
themselves well armed against attack. That’s a risky approach to take, especially when 
you have sensitive business documents on your network.
The basic setup of a wireless network is fraught with security pitfalls that are well 
known to hackers. You are at risk, even if you live in a gated community with security 
guards. That’s because hackers take every shape and form, and come in all ages and 
from all locations. All you need is one bored teenager looking for something to do, and 
you’ve got a potential security issue.
●
●
●
●
●
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

274  Project 24
In this project, you’ll learn as many tips and tricks as I can share with you about 
securing your wireless network, plus I’ll toss in a few more computer security details, 
too. Each security detail in and of itself might not be powerful, but the combination of 
security approaches can be an effective deterrent to malicious attacks.
Step 1: Change Administrator Passwords
Passwords are strings of characters that are used to log onto a computer and access 
its contents. The entire point of a password is to ensure that unauthorized people 
do not access the computer. Passwords should never be given to other people; once 
a password is out of your hands, so is your computer!
Let me also make this clear: never, ever use a default password or identification 
provided by a manufacturer. Any given piece of equipment is already known to hack-
ers, and so are the associated default passwords and IDs. If you need to use a default 
password to set up a piece of equipment or installed software, go back and immedi-
ately change it as soon as the equipment or software has been installed.
There are two schools of thought on this topic of administrator passwords. The 
first is to use a password so complicated that the average hacker (which is what most 
hackers are—average) will lose interest in trying to crack it. This isn’t a bad idea as 
long as you can remember the password!
The second is to regularly change your administrator passwords. This isn’t a bad 
idea, either. It just requires that you set up a routine for yourself that reminds you to 
regularly change the password.
Either way, a strong password includes the following:
It should be at least six characters long.
Those characters should consist of at least three of these categories: uppercase 
characters, lowercase characters, numbers, and symbols (such as &, #, and !).
It should never contain all or even part of your account name or personal 
name.
Passwords are typically not maintained by the network administrator, nor can the administrator 
retrieve your password if you forget it. If you forget your password, the administrator will reset 
your password to something and then, when you log on with the new password, you’ll most likely 
be required to change it again. This prevents the administrator from using your account without 
your knowledge.
Change Your Password in Windows XP
This process may seem a little lengthy but it will go quickly:
Choose Start | Control Panel.
Click User Accounts.
●
●
●
1.
2.
tip

Secure Your Wireless Network and Computers  275
In the User Accounts dialog box, select an account to change. You may need 
to place a check mark in the Users Must Enter A User Name And Password 
To Use This Computer check box before you can select an account.
Click Reset Password.
Enter the new password you want to use. Re-enter it to confirm it.
Click OK.
Click OK.
A different process is used in Windows XP if your computer is on a domain. Go to Windows XP 
Help and Support for further instructions.
Next, you’ll need to determine whether you are in a domain or a workgroup. Fol-
low the steps for either Windows Vista or XP depending upon the operating system 
you have.
To Find Out Whether You Are in a Domain 
or a Workgroup in Windows Vista
Click Start.
Right-click Computer.
Click Properties.
Click Advanced System Settings.
Click the Computer Name tab in the System Properties dialog box.
Look for “domain” or “workgroup” to determine which one you are in, as 
shown in Figure 24-1.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
note
www.ebook3000.com

276  Project 24
To Find Out Whether You Are in a Domain 
or a Workgroup in Windows XP
On your desktop, right-click My Computer.
Click Properties.
Click the Computer Name tab in the System Properties dialog box.
Look for “domain” or “workgroup” under Full Computer Name to deter-
mine which one you are in.
Change Your Password in Windows Vista
Administrators can create a password for any account in Windows Vista. To change 
your password in Windows Vista, follow these steps:
Press CTRL-ALT-DEL.
Click Change A Password.
Enter your old password.
Type in your new password. You need to type it in again to confirm it.
Press ENTER.
1.
2.
3.
4.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Figure 24-1 
Domains and 
workgroups are 
clearly listed system 
properties for both 
Windows Vista and XP.

Secure Your Wireless Network and Computers  277
If you change a password for another user in Windows XP or Windows Vista, encrypted files and 
e-mail messages for that account will no longer be accessible to that user.
Step 2: Turn On Encryption for Your Wireless Devices
If you set up your wireless network using this book’s Project 23, you turned on WPA/
WEP encryption and can skip this particular step. If you already have a wireless network 
set up, you need to be sure that you have encryption technology enabled. This technology 
scrambles information so that it can’t be easily read as it is sent over a wireless network.
Lower-end wireless access points limit security options to the WPA and WEP 
encryption methods discussed in Project 23. However, there are higher-end newer 
products that offer Temporal Key Integrity Protocol (TKIP). TKIP works in conjunc-
tion with WEP, offering stronger security than just WEP alone.
TKIP uses new encryption algorithms that constantly change the encryption keys 
so that hackers have a tough time cracking them. Even if a hacker cracks an encryp-
tion key, by the time he does, it will have changed on your computer and the hacker 
will have to start all over again.
It’s important to choose the strongest form of encryption you possibly can for 
your wireless network. Keep in mind, however, that all the wireless devices on your 
network must have the same encryption settings. If just one device won’t accept TKIP, 
then you can’t use it on any of them.
To turn on encryption for a wireless access point, see Project 23.
Step 3: Enable MAC Address Filtering
In every network-accessible device, including wireless devices, there is a unique iden-
tifier called a MAC address. It is sometimes referred to as a physical address. Wireless 
access points and routers track all the MAC addresses that connect to them. One way 
to keep your wireless network secure is to manually enter these MAC addresses into 
your wireless access point or router instead of letting those devices accept all MAC 
addresses. This ensures that other mobile devices (neighbors or hackers) can’t con-
nect to your wireless access points or routers.
This feature is typically turned off by manufacturers to make the wireless device 
installation process easier for consumers. Once the feature is enabled, though, the 
wireless access point or router compares the MAC address of all access requests. If the 
MAC address doesn’t match the one you have entered, access is denied.
Obtain the MAC Address of Your Computer
Follow these steps to enable the MAC address filtering feature.
tip
www.ebook3000.com

278  Project 24
In Windows XP:
Choose Start | Run to open the Run dialog box.
Type cmd in the Open box. Click OK.
A command prompt window appears. At the end of the string of text, type 
ipconfig/all and press ENTER.
The command prompt window shows you the details of all your computer’s 
network adapters.
1.
2.
3.
4.

Secure Your Wireless Network and Computers  279
The Physical Address is your MAC address. Write it down; you need to enter it 
into your wireless access point next.
In Windows Vista:
Click Start and type Run in the Search box to open the Run dialog box.
Type cmd in the Open box. Click OK.
A command prompt window appears. At the end of the string of text, type 
ipconfig/all and press ENTER.
The command prompt window shows you the details of all your computer’s 
network adapters.
The Physical Address is your MAC address. Write it down; you need to enter it 
into your wireless access point next.
Enter and Filter the MAC Address 
into Your Wireless Access Point
Every wireless access point brand will have slightly different instructions for entering 
the MAC address.
Use a wired connection to perform this process. If anything is entered incorrectly and 
the settings are saved, you’ll lose connectivity to your wireless access point and need to 
set it up again.
Here are the basic instructions:
Open your web browser.
Type in the IP address of your wireless router as shown here. Press ENTER.
Enter your username and password to log into your wireless access point. 
Click OK. This brings up your wireless access point management screen.
1.
2.
3.
4.
1.
2.
3.
caution
www.ebook3000.com

280  Project 24
Locate the Wireless section of the screen. Click it.
Click Wireless MAC Filter.
Click Enable.  
On some wireless access points, you have the ability to filter MAC addresses 
by either permitting or preventing wireless network card access. In this ex-
ample, Permit Only PCs Listed To Access The Wireless Network was select-
ed. This will only allow MAC addresses with MAC address recognized by 
your network to enter the wireless network.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Secure Your Wireless Network and Computers  281
The Prevent PCs Listed From Accessing The Wireless Network option is typically used by larger 
corporations that have hundreds or thousands of users.
Click Edit MAC Filter List to open the MAC Address Filter List.
Enter the MAC address you obtained in Step 3 (in the section “Obtain the 
MAC Address of Your Computer”).
Click Save Settings.
8.
9.
10.
note
www.ebook3000.com

282  Project 24
Step 4: Turn Off SSID Broadcast
Remember the Service Set Identifier (SSID) you created in Project 23? It’s the name 
of your wireless network, and by default wireless access points and routers broad-
cast the SSID over the air at regular intervals. The SSID isn’t scrambled or otherwise 
protected. This is great if you own a mobile hotspot where people come and go con-
stantly. In your home office, broadcasting the SSID just isn’t necessary.
The regular broadcast is like a beacon to hackers—“Hello! Here I am!” which 
isn’t great news for your home office wireless network. Luckily, this feature can be 
disabled. Here’s how to do it:
Open your web browser.
Type in the IP address of your wireless router Press ENTER.
Enter your username and password to log into your wireless access point. 
Click OK. This brings up your wireless access point management screen.
Click the Wireless tab.
Select Disable.
Click Save Settings.
That’s it—pretty quick, wasn’t it?
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Secure Your Wireless Network and Computers  283
Step 5: Stop Auto-Connect to Open 
Wireless Networks
When you go to a Starbucks for coffee and a bit of work, too, you can be exposing 
your computer to hackers. Most computers have a setting that allows these wireless 
hotspot connections to happen automatically, but the smart thing to do is turn off that 
setting. It will take you a little longer to connect if the setting is disabled, but the peace 
of mind you’ll have knowing that you are foiling hackers should make up for that.
To turn off the Auto-Connect feature on your computer using Windows XP, fol-
low these steps:
Choose Start | Control Panel.
Double-click Network Connections.
Right-click Wireless Network Connection.
Click Properties.
Go to the Wireless Networks tab and click Advanced.
Remove the check mark from Automatically Connect To Non-preferred 
Networks.
Click Close.
Click OK.
To turn off the Auto-Connect feature on your computer using Windows Vista, 
follow these steps:
Choose Start | Connect To.
Right-click the network name or icon.
Click Properties to open the Local Wireless Network Properties dialog box. 
Select the Connection tab.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
1.
2.
3.
www.ebook3000.com

284  Project 24
Remove the check mark from Connect To A More Preferred Network If 
Available.
Click OK.
Step 6: Assign Static IP Addresses 
to Your Wireless Devices
An Internet Protocol (IP) address uniquely identifies computers on a network. There 
are two kinds of IP addresses available: dynamic and static. Dynamic IP addressing 
allows you to move conveniently between different networks, which makes it easy to 
travel with your computer. Each dynamic IP address is assigned by wireless devices 
on the network on demand.
In contrast, static IP addressing uses a fixed IP address that is assigned to a com-
puter by the system administrator. This makes it a bit more difficult to travel with 
your computer but static IP addressing does give better protection to your computer. 
Static IP addresses are also used as an alternative to dynamic DHCP when a network 
device does not support DHCP.
4.
5.

Secure Your Wireless Network and Computers  285
In the wireless network you set up using this book, you set up a DHCP server that 
used dynamic IP addresses. Using a static IP address on your wireless devices means 
that you will not connect directly to the Internet—and that computers outside your 
network can’t connect directly to any of your wireless devices. That’s because access 
to the IP address is hidden.
To use static IP addressing on your wireless network instead, you need to select 
one from within these approved private IP address ranges:
10.0.0.0 through 10.255.255.255
172.16.0.0 through 172.31.255.255
192.168.0.0 through 192.168.255.255
You may choose any address ranges you wish from within these approved ranges. 
However, avoid addresses that end with 0 or 255, and don’t choose addresses that 
start a private IP address range, such as 192.168.0.0—these are the first addresses 
hackers will try when trying to break into your wireless network.
IP addresses are also known as network addresses.
Find Your Network’s IP Addresses
To find the IP addresses your computer is using in Windows XP, follow these steps:
Choose Start | Run to open the Run dialog box.
Type cmd in the Open box. Click OK.
A command prompt window appears. At the end of the string of text, type 
ipconfig/all and press ENTER.
The command prompt window shows you the details of all your computer’s 
network adapters.
The IP Address shown is the one related to the computer you are on—it is the cur-
rent IP address for that wireless device.
To find the IP addresses your computer is using in Windows Vista, follow these 
steps:
Click Start and type Network in the Start Search box.
●
●
●
1.
2.
3.
4.
1.
tip
www.ebook3000.com

286  Project 24
Click Network And Sharing Center under Programs.
In the Network and Sharing Center, look for Connection. To the right of that, 
click View Status.
2.
3.

Secure Your Wireless Network and Computers  287
In the status dialog box that appears, click Details. The Network Connection 
Details dialog box will appear. Your computer’s IP address appears in the 
Value column next to IPv4 IP Address.
Change Your Network’s IP Addresses
This is where you need the new static IP address you have chosen. To change the IP 
settings in Windows XP, do the following:
Choose Start | Control Panel.
Click Network Connections.
Right-click the device you want to configure and select Properties.
Under This Connection Uses The Following Items, select Internet Protocol 
(TCP/IP). Click Properties.
4.
1.
2.
3.
4.
www.ebook3000.com

288  Project 24
Select Use The Following IP Address. Enter the static IP address information.
Click OK.
Click Close.
To change the IP settings in Windows Vista, follow these steps:
Choose Start | Control Panel.
Click View Network Status And Tasks.
Click Manage Network Connections.
Right-click the connection you want to change. Click Properties. You may 
be prompted for an administrator password or confirmation. Note whether 
your computer is using Internet Protocol Version 4 or 6 (also shown as TCP/
IPv4 or TCP/IPv6).
Click the version that is selected. Click Properties.
To specify a TCP/IPv4 address setting, click Use The Following IP Address. 
Type in the IP address settings.
5.
6.
7.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Secure Your Wireless Network and Computers  289
To specify a TCP/IPv6 address setting, click Use The Following IPv6 
Address. Type in the IP address settings.
Click OK.
Click Close.
Step 7: Enable Firewalls
While most modern wireless access points and routers have built-in firewall capa-
bility, the option does exist to disable that capability. In addition, there is firewall 
software available for your computer. If you don’t have firewalls on your computer, 
you’re just asking for trouble.
To check your wireless devices for firewall settings, you need to refer to each 
product’s manufacturer instructions. However, lots of inexpensive firewall prod-
ucts are available on the market, such as McAfee Personal Firewall Plus and Syman-
tec Norton Personal Firewall 2006 for Windows. Windows XP (Service Pack 2) and 
Windows Vista even come with built-in firewalls.
To turn on the firewall in Windows XP, do the following:
Choose Start | Control Panel.
Double-click Network Connections.
Right-click Wireless Network Connections and click Properties.
Click the Advanced tab.
Under Windows Firewall, click Settings.
Select On (Recommended). Click OK.
Click OK.
To turn on the firewall in Windows Vista, follow these steps:
Click Start and type Firewall in the Start Search box.
Under Programs, click Windows Firewall.
Click Turn Windows Firewall On Or Off. You may be prompted for an ad-
ministrator password or confirmation.
7.
8.
9.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
1.
2.
3.
www.ebook3000.com

290  Project 24
Select On (Recommended). Click OK.
If you will be gone from your home office for an extended length of time (for a vacation or 
business trip, for example), power down your network before you leave.
Step 8: Combat Signal Leakage
Every wireless network has a small amount of “leakage”—wireless signals that reach 
outside the home. This is okay; in fact, it’s preferable if you want to work outside. 
However, the further the signal leaks, the more vulnerable you are to attack.
If you can, position the wireless access point or router near the center of your 
home. Locations far from windows do a better job of minimizing leakage.
When you move your wireless access point or router, test it by going outside to the spot where 
you normally prefer to work. Turn on your computer and see whether or not you can access your 
network. Then, go down the street a block—if you can still access your wireless network, you 
still have a lot of leakage. Keep repositioning your wireless devices until you find the spot that 
lets you work outside but keeps predators at bay.
Setting up a secure wireless network isn’t as hard as it seems; it just takes time 
and diligence. It’s worth it, however, because your office computer is filled with 
a lot of sensitive information that shouldn’t fall into the wrong hands. That’s it for this 
book; I hope you found these projects useful. Guess what? Those 24 cool things you 
didn’t know you could do? You can do them, and have a little fun along the way.
4.
tip
tip

Index
291
1ShoppingCart.com, 185
802.11 wireless standard, 260–261
A
access points, wireless network, 262–266, 279–281
access policies, virtual private network, 151–153
accounts, shipping carrier, 59
AC power, docking station, 41
Active Directory groups, 151
ActiveSync software, 71
address books
in PC messaging centers, 11
shipping carrier, 54, 60–63
Address Verification System (AVS), 188–189
Adept for Oracle, 244
ad format listings, eBay, 170
adjustability features, monitor, 17
adjustable screen geometry, 18
administrator passwords, wireless network, 
274–277
administrators, virtual private network, 144
AdSense for Feeds, 215
advertising
podcasts, 199
programs, 161–166
aggregators, 213
AGP interface video cards, 19
AKG Backup, 244
all-in-one e-commerce solution providers, 187–188
analog modems, 4
analog tuners, 48
analog video cards, 19
angle brackets in HTML code, 204
answering calls on Skype, 132
antitheft devices, docking station, 41
appending data, 241
Apple’s iPhone, 71
assigned e-mail addresses, 72
auctions, online. See eBay stores
Audacity, 192
authorization, Dynamic Host Configuration 
Protocol, 145–147
Authorize.Net Payment Gateway, 184
auto-connect function, wireless network, 283–284
automated file backups, 235–244
file organization, 236
other software, 244
overview, 235–236
restoring files, 242–244
Windows Vista, 240–242
Windows XP, 236–240
autopunctuation, Dragon NaturallySpeaking 
9, 256
AutoRecover, Microsoft Office, 236
AutoSave, Microsoft Office, 236
AVS (Address Verification System), 188–189
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Click here for terms of use. 
www.ebook3000.com

292  Index
B
background music, podcast, 200
backing up files. See also automated file backups; 
network servers
bank-based e-commerce solutions, 184
base stations. See docking stations
base stations, cellular signal, 80
battery power, laptop, 41
billing, shipping carrier, 57
BlackBerry 7100i GPS Smartphone, 82
Blog.com, 214
Blogger, 214–215
blogs, 161–166, 213–215
Blogstream, 215
Blue Ridge Networks, 158
boxes, shipping, 56, 63, 65
BrightAds, 162
brightness, monitor, 18
broadband Internet, 25
broadcasts, SSID, 282
built-in webcam microphones, 26
bulk mailings, 66
business cards and podcasts, 199
business licenses, 189
business models, 180
business web sites, 161–166. See also commerce 
web sites
Buy It Now prices, eBay, 173
C
cable modems, 4
calculated shipping rate, eBay, 175–176
calendar applications, 91
calendar invitations, online conference, 118
cameras, digital video, 28
Carrier Pickup, U.S. Post Office, 64
carriers, shipping. See e-shipping
cathode ray tube (CRT) monitors, 16–18, 51–52
cell phones, 79–82
central file servers. See network servers
certificate authorities, 147–149
channels, 210, 266
chargeback fees, 184
chat programs
and online conferences, 121–122
Remote Assistance, 111
and VoIP services, 132
and webcams, 25, 32
Cingular, 75, 81
ClickCartPro, 185
Clicksor, 162
client devices, wireless, 262
clients, virtual private network, 144
closing HTML code, 204
code
ad, 164–165
HTML, 202–204
Really Simple Syndication file, 207–211
collaboration
See also wikis
and network servers, 219
with Remote Assistance, 106
in web-based office applications, 88, 94–95
commands
numbered, in Windows Vista speech 
recognition, 254
voice, 249, 252, 257
comments, writeboard, 95
commerce web sites, 179–190
adding commerce capabilities to existing 
sites, 182–186
adding commerce options, 188
creation of new, 186–188
important considerations, 180–181, 188–190
linking to eBay stores, 178
online credit card processing, 181–182
overview, 179–180
compatibility
docking station, 39
web-based office applications, 89
composite input, 46
composite VGA interface video cards, 19
Computer Management window, Windows, 
227–230
computers. See desktop computers; laptop 
computers; monitors
comScore Networks, 180

Index  293
conference calls, Skype, 134
conferences. See online conferences
contacts
management applications, 91
PC messaging center setup, 11
shipping carrier, 54
for VoIP services, 127–128
content
RSS feeds, 204–205
web site, and advertising programs, 164, 166
wiki, 140–141
contextual ads, 162, 165–166
convergence, monitor, 18
corporate Really Simple Synchronization 
feeds, 205
corporate wireless networks, 271–272
correction menu, Dragon NaturallySpeaking 
9, 257–258
cost-per-1000-impressions (CPM) advertising, 163
cost-per-click (CPC) advertising, 162–163
CPC (cost-per-click) advertising, 162–163
CPM (cost-per-1000-impressions) advertising, 163
Create an Ad Format Listing, eBay, 170
credit, VoIP service, 132
credit card processing, online, 180–182
cross-linking, 166
CRT (cathode ray tube) monitors, 16–18, 51–52
Cunningham, Ward, 136
customized eBay storefronts, 169–170
Customized Postage, U.S. Post Office, 57
custom wireless equipment, 261
D
data security, 88
data synchronization, 71
default identification, computer, 274
deliveries
commerce web site, 180
confirmation of, 57
design, web site, 180
desktop, of remote computer, 104–105
desktop computers
See also monitors
as messaging centers, 3–13
hardware, 4–6
overview, 3
software, 7–9
testing and using, 9–13
as network servers, 219–233
accessing from other computers, 
232–233
computer requisites, 220–221
creating folder, 221–223
giving access to other users, 226–232
overview, 219–220
sharing folder, 223–224
sharing printers, 224–225
setup for wireless connections, 266–271
use of monitor as television, 48, 51
webcams for, 26–27
working with personal travel assistants, 84
Device Manager window, 5–6, 33–34
DHCP (Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol), 
145–147, 155–156
DHL Web Shipping, 55, 64, 66
diagnostics, webcam, 33
dictation. See speech recognition
Digital Home Office wiki, 141
digital photography monitors, 18
Digital Podcast, 199
digital tuners, 48
digital video cameras, 28
digital video cards, 19
direct e-mail connections, 71, 73–75
directories, podcast, 193–194, 198–199
Direct Push wireless e-mail, 75
Direct Push wireless e-mail, Microsoft, 75
Disable Shadow Volume Copy option, 
Windows XP, 239
discount rates, e-commerce web site, 183
display height, docking station, 39
Display Properties dialog box, 20–23
Distinctive Ring Capable fax software feature, 12
distortions, CRT monitor, 18
docking stations, 37–43
installation of, 40–41
overview, 37–38
security considerations, 41–43
selection of, 38–39
use of, 41
domains, 275–276
Dragon NaturallySpeaking 9, 246, 255–258
www.ebook3000.com

294  Index
drivers, video card, 21
DSL lines, 144
DSL modems, 4
duration, eBay auction, 173
DVD players and external TV tuners, 47–48, 51
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP), 
145–147, 155–156
dynamic IP addressing, 284
E
eBay stores, 167–178
creation of, 168–169
item descriptions, 172–175
other considerations, 178
overview, 167
payment and shipping options, 175–176
product categories, 171–172
review and submission, 176–178
selling format, 170
setting up account, 168
storefront design, 169–170
eCart, 185
ecologee.net, 136–137
e-commerce solution providers, 183–188
EDI interface video cards, 19
editing
wikis, 135
writeboards, 95
electromagnetic shielding, 18
electronic undocking features, docking station, 
39, 41–43
e-mail
invitations to online conferences, 118–119
and PC messaging centers, 7, 11–13
and Remote Assistance, 107–108, 111
shipping notices sent by, 58
wireless, 69–77
on laptops, 75–77
overview, 69
personal digital assistants, 70–75
eMartCart, 185
encoders, MP3, 198
encryption
of virtual private networks, 144
wireless network, 262–263, 277
engines, wiki, 136–139
e-shipping, 53–66
creating profile, 59
overview, 53–54
sending shipments, 59–65
shipping needs, 54
shipping options, 54–58
Exchange Server, 75
expansion bases. See docking stations
Export options, Propaganda, 196–197
Expression, Microsoft, 202
external speakers, 46–47
external TV tuner boxes, 46–51
external wiki links, 141
F
face-tracking webcam features, 26–27
facsimiles (faxes), 7, 11–12
faxes (facsimiles), 7, 11–12
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), 82
FedEx Ship Manager, 55, 58, 64
FeedForAll, 209
Feed Validator, 210
fees
eBay store, 177
e-commerce solution provider, 183–184
managed VPN provider, 158
shopping cart, 185
VoIP service, 132
file backup. See automated file backups
files, Really Simple Syndication, 206–211
file servers. See network servers
filtering, MAC address, 277–281
Final Value Fees, eBay, 177
firewalls, 143, 289–290
FireWire ports, 28
First Data, 184
fixed price selling format, eBay, 170
flat-rate boxes, 56
flat shipping rates, eBay, 175–176
folders, network server, 221–224, 231–232
formats, eBay selling, 170
formatting, text, 93
forums, podcast, 199
forward slashes in HTML code, 204

Index  295
free shipping materials, 56
free space, hard drive, 222
freeware, file backup, 244
freight shipments, 64, 175–176
frequencies, wireless network, 260–261
FrontPage, Microsoft, 202–203
Full Control permissions, 226
G
Garmin, 79, 83–84
Gizmo, 124–125
Global Positioning System (GPS). See mobile GPS
Gmail, 91
GoDaddy.com, 187
Google AdSense, 162–166
Google Base, 199
Google Checkout, 184
Google Docs & Spreadsheets, 91
Google Maps, 81
Google Talk, 125
GoToMeeting, 117
GPS (Global Positioning System). See mobile GPS
graphic art monitors, 18
group network server access, 226, 228–232
guidelines, shipping carrier, 64
H
hard drive size, 220
hardware, PC messaging center, 4–6
headsets, 192
heavy shipments, 64
home wireless networks. See wireless networks
hot-pluggable docking stations, 41
hotspots, wireless, 72
HTML (HyperText Markup Language), 
202–204
HTML Code Tutorial, 204
HyperText Markup Language (HTML), 202–204
I
IAS (Internet Authentication Service), 149
icons
monitor, 23
RSS feed, 211
images
eBay product, 173–174
wiki, 140
importing contacts to VoIP programs, 128–129
Improve Speech Recognition Accuracy window, 
Windows Vista, 253
incoming faxes, 12
installation
of additional monitors, 19–21
docking station, 40–41
Internet Authentication Service, 149
network interface card, 267
of PC messaging center hardware, 8–9
webcam, 28–32
installation folder destinations, 8
instant messaging programs
and online conferences, 121–122
Remote Assistance, 111
and VoIP services, 132
and webcams, 25, 32
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 
Inc., 261
insurance, shipping, 58
integrated switches and routers, 262
internal TV tuners, 48
internal wiki links, 141
Internap Network Services, 158
international shipping, 66
Internet Authentication Service (IAS), 149
Internet-based telephony. See VoIP 
(Voice-over-IP) services
Internet gateways, 182
Internet Protocol (IP) addresses, 145–147, 284–289. 
See also VoIP (Voice-over-IP) services
Internet service providers (ISPs), 187
invitations, online conference, 118–119
IP (Internet Protocol) addresses, 145–147, 284–289. 
See also VoIP (Voice-over-IP) services
ISPs (Internet service providers), 187
Item Description box, eBay, 172–173
items, Really Simple Syndication feeds, 202
J
Join Teleconference dialog box, WebEx Meeting 
Center, 118
www.ebook3000.com

296  Index
K
Kensington notebook docking station, 38, 40
keyboard adjustability options, 
docking station, 39
keywords
and eBay product categories, 171
web site, 166
wiki, 141
Kiko Calendar, 91
L
labels, shipping, 56–57, 61–62
LAME MP3 Encoder, 198
landline telephones, 131–134
laptop computers
See also docking stations; monitors
webcams for, 27–28
wireless e-mail, 75–77
LCD (liquid crystal display) monitors, 16–18, 52
leakage, wireless signal, 290
licenses, business, 189
links
advertising, 166
to RSS feeds, 211
from web sites to podcasts, 198
wiki, 141
Linux PCs, 125, 220
liquid crystal display (LCD) monitors, 16–18, 52
List Folder Contents permissions, 226
Listing Designer, eBay, 174–175
local delivery services, 65
Logitech QuickCam Orbit MP desktop 
webcam, 26
logon, docking station, 41–43
Los Angeles wiki, 138
low light boost, 34
M
MAC address filtering, 277–281
Macintosh PCs, 125, 220, 223
Magellan RoadMate 860T, 84
mail. See e-mail; e-shipping
maintenance, wiki, 142
Manage Documents permissions, 227
Manage My Store page, eBay, 170
Manage Printers permissions, 227
Map Network Drive option, Windows Vista, 233
mapping trips with mobile GPS, 80–84
MapQuest Find Me, 81
marketing. See advertising; podcasts; RSS (Really 
Simple Syndication) feeds
MediaWiki wiki engine, 136
meetings, online. See online conferences
Merchant Accounts Express, 187
merchants. See commerce web sites; eBay stores
messaging centers, PC. See desktop computers
messaging programs
and online conferences, 121–122
Remote Assistance, 111
and VoIP services, 132
and webcams, 25, 32
meters, postage, 58
microphones, 4, 26, 192, 194–195
Microsoft Direct Push wireless e-mail, 75
Microsoft Expression, 202
Microsoft FrontPage, 202–203
Microsoft Office AutoSave and AutoRecover, 236
Microsoft Office Live Basics, 190
Microsoft Office Live Meeting, 116
Microsoft Office Outlook, 11, 111
Microsoft Office suite, 88
Microsoft Office Word, 246–249
Microsoft Speech Recognition Engine, 249–250
Microsoft Windows Live, 89
Microsoft Word, 247–250
mini-wikis, 138–141
Mio A701 GPS smartphone, 83
MIVA Merchant, 187
mobile GPS, 79–85
available options, 80–84
mapping trips, 80–84
overview, 79
mobility tools, wireless, 262
modems, voice-enabled data/fax, 4, 9
Modify permissions, 226
monitors
multiple, 15–24
arranging, 22–24
installation of additional monitor, 19–21

Index  297
monitor connections, 18–19
overview, 15–16
purchasing additional monitors, 16–18
and network servers, 221
as televisions, 45–52
connecting tuner to computer, 51
connecting tuner to monitor and 
speakers, 49–51
monitor requisites, 46
overview, 45
selecting TV tuner, 47–48
speakers, 46–47
MonsterCommerce, 187
monthly fees, e-commerce solution provider, 183
motherboards, 19, 220
motion-blur, 52
Motorola Q Smartphone, 83
MP3 files, 197–198
MP3 players, 192
MSN ContentAds, 163
multiple monitors. See monitors
multipoint video, 119
music, podcast, 200
My eBay, 178
My Profile window, Skype, 129
N
names
eBay store, 169
network server folder, 223
NAS (network-attached storage) drives, 221
navigation. See mobile GPS
network addresses, 145–147, 284–289. See also VoIP 
(Voice-over-IP) services
network-attached storage (NAS) drives, 221
network controllers, 262
network drives, mapping, 233
network interface cards (NICs), 144, 266–267
Network Level Authentication (NLA), 101
network servers, 219–233
See also VPNs (virtual private networks); 
wireless networks
accessing from other computers, 232–233
computer requisites, 220–221
creating folder, 221–223
giving access to other users, 226–232
overview, 219–220
sharing folder, 223–224
sharing printers, 224–225
New Edge Networks, 158
newspapers, 202
newsreaders, 213
New User training, Dragon 
NaturallySpeaking 9, 256
Nextel/Sprint, 81
NICs (network interface cards), 144, 266–267
NLA (Network Level Authentication), 101
noise-canceling microphones, 192
notebook computers. See laptop computers
Notepad, 206–209
numbered commands, Windows Vista speech 
recognition, 254
Num Sum, 91
Nuvi 360 personal travel assistant, 84
O
office applications. See web-based office 
applications
Office AutoSave and AutoRecover, Microsoft, 236
Office Live Basics, Microsoft, 190
Office Live Meeting, Microsoft, 116
Office suite, Microsoft, 88
online address books, 54, 60–63
online auctions. See eBay stores
online conferences, 115–122
overview, 115–116
providers, 116–117
WebEx Meeting Center, 117–122
chat features, 121–122
including video, 119–120
overview, 116–117
setting up meeting with, 117–119
sharing documents and using 
whiteboard, 121
online credit card processing, 180–182
online shipping tools, 56–58
online spending, 180
opening HTML code, 204
OpenOffice.org, 90
Open Office Suite, 90
www.ebook3000.com

298  Index
operating system commands, 252
Options sections, VoIP services, 130
orders
commerce web-site, 188
shipping supplies, 57
outlines, podcast, 193
Outlook, Microsoft, 11, 111
P
P2P (peer-to-peer) wikis, 136, 139
package information, shipping, 63
pallets, shipping, 64
Palm GPS Navigator Smartphone Edition for 
Treo phones, 82
PaperMart.com, 65
passwords
administrator, 274–277
docking station, 41–42
for network server users, 227–228
Remote Assistance, 107–108, 110
payments
advertising program, 166
commerce web site options for, 180
options for eBay stores, 175–176
shipping, 57
PayPal, 168, 178, 181, 184–185
PCI (Peripheral Component Interconnect) 
video cards, 19
PCs (personal computers). See desktop computers
PDAs (personal digital assistants), 70–75
peer-to-peer (P2P) wikis, 136, 139
Peripheral Component Interconnect (PCI) video 
cards, 19
permissions
folder share, 223–224, 226
printer, 227
personal computers (PCs). See desktop computers
personal digital assistants (PDAs), 70–75
personal travel assistants, 83–84
per-transaction fees, e-commerce solution 
provider, 183
phone books, 11
phone lines, 4
photography monitors, 18
physical address filtering, 277–281
Pickup On Demand Service, U.S. Post Office, 64
pickups, shipment, 64–65
picture-in-picture option, TV tuners, 51
pictures, eBay product, 173–174
Plaxo, 91
PmWiki, 136
Pocket PC operating system, 71
Podblaze, 199
Podcast Alley, 199
Podcast.net, 199
podcasts, 191–200
advertising, 199
creating content, 193–194
important considerations, 199–200
necessary tools, 192–193
overview, 191–192
recording, 194–198
and RSS feeds, 209
uploading, 198–199
POP-3 protocol, 74
ports
docking station, 39
replicators, 39
Positive Networks, 158
postage, 56, 58
power, docking station, 41
prepaid shipping, 56
previews, podcast, 193
pricing, eBay, 173
primary monitors, 22
printed shipping labels and postage, 57
printers
fax programs as, 11
permissions, 227
shared, 224–225
product categories, eBay, 171–172
profiles
shipping carrier, 59
VoIP service, 128–129
Windows user, 236
Program Settings dialog boxes, 8–9
Pro Pack, eBay, 175
Propaganda, 192, 194–198
proprietary docking stations, 38–39
public wiki engines, 136–139
punctuation, Dragon NaturallySpeaking 9, 256

Index  299
Q
quantity auctions, eBay, 173
R
radio signals, 80, 260–261
RADIUS servers, 155
Raindance, 117
RAM (random access memory), 70
ranking, search engine, 166
Read and Execute permissions, 226
Read permissions, 226
Really Simple Syndication feeds. See RSS (Really 
Simple Syndication) feeds
real-time e-mail access, 71
recordings
message center, 13
podcast, 194–198, 200
refresh rates, CRT monitor, 51–52
registration, eBay, 168
reinstallation, webcam, 34
Remember the Milk, 91
remote access policies, virtual private network, 
151–153
remote client access, virtual private network, 
156–157
remote controls, external TV tuner, 48
Remote Desktop Connection, 97–111
accessing computer using, 102–105
overview, 97–98
prerequisites, 98
Remote Assistance, 106–111
remote computer setup, 98–102
replaced backup versions, 241
reserve funds, 184
resolution, CRT monitor, 51–52
restoration, file, 242–244
return policies, eBay, 176
return services, shipping carrier, 57
review, eBay store submission, 176–178
roaming networks, 267
routers, 144, 262–266, 279–281
RSS (Really Simple Syndication) feeds, 
198, 201–215
adding to web site, 211–212
and blogging, 213–215
content for, 204–205
creating or identifying web sites to be used, 
205–206
and HTML, 202–204
overview, 201–202
RSS file, 206–211
S
sales. See commerce web sites; eBay stores
satellites, 80
scalability, wireless network, 260
scheduled shipment pickups, 64–65
scope, IP address, for virtual private networks, 
145–147
screen geometry, 18
search engines, 166, 201
SecureNetShop, 185
security
of automated backups, 239
commerce web site, 188–189
data, 88
docking station, 39, 41–43
of online credit card processing, 182
wiki, 136
wireless network, 273–290
administrator passwords, 274–277
combating signal leakage, 290
encryption, 277
firewalls, 289–290
MAC address filtering, 277–281
overview, 262–263, 265, 273–274
static IP addressing, 284–289
stopping auto-connect function, 
283–284
turning of SSID broadcast, 282
Select Category page, eBay, 171–172
Sell at a Fixed Price format, eBay, 170
Seller Account page, eBay, 178
Sell in Store Inventory format, eBay, 170
Sell Item at Online Auction format, eBay, 170
servers, virtual private network, 144, 153–156
services
selling, 179
shipment, 59–60
Service Set Identifier (SSID), 265, 282
www.ebook3000.com

300  Index
shared printers, 224–225
Share menu, WebEx Meeting Center, 121
share permissions, folder, 223–224, 226
Ship From addresses, 60
shipping, 175–176. See also e-shipping
shopping carts, 182, 185–186
signal, cellular, 80
signal leakage, wireless, 290
SimpleBackup, 244
single-point video, 119
Skype, 125–134
creating contact lists, 127–128
downloading software, 126–127
making calls, 130–132
Options section, 130
other considerations, 132–134
overview, 125–126
Profile section, 128–129
smartphones, 69, 82–83. See also personal digital 
assistants (PDAs)
SMTP server settings, 12–13
soft modems, 9
software
automated file backup, 244
cell phone GPS, 81–82
PC messaging center, 7–9
podcasting, 192–193
for RSS feed HTML code, 209
for virtual private networks, 144
for VoIP services, 126–127
and web-based office applications, 88
wiki, 139
sound cards, 4
Sounds and Audio Devices Properties dialog box, 
Windows XP, 29–31
speakers
computer, 4
and monitors as TVs, 46–47, 49–51
and webcams, 29
Special permissions, 226–227
specifications, webcam, 28
speech recognition, 245–258
activating through Office 2003, 247–249
overview, 245–246
third-party programs, 255–258
training programs, 246–247
in Windows Vista, 252–255
in Windows XP, 249–252
Speech Recognition Engine, Microsoft, 249–250
Speech Reference card window, Windows Vista, 
254–255
spending, online, 180
spiders, search engine, 201
Sprint, 71
Squarespace, 215
SSID (Service Set Identifier), 265, 282
stand-alone monitors. See monitors
standards, wireless, 260–261
starting prices, eBay auctions, 173
static IP addressing, 284–289
stickers, shipping, 56
stores, eBay. See eBay stores
subcategories, eBay product, 171–172
submission, eBay store, 176–178
Subscribe To This Feed boxes on web sites, 211
subscriptions
cell phone GPS, 80–81
podcast, 198
subtitles, eBay item, 172
suites, web-based office application, 89–91
Sunrocket, 125
Super VGA connections, 46
supplies, shipping, 56–57
S-video interface, 19, 46, 48
switches, wireless, 262
syncing, 71
syndication feeds. See RSS (Really Simple 
Syndication) feeds
T
Ta-da List, 91
task management applications, 91
technical support, e-commerce solution 
provider, 188
technology, wireless, 260–263
TeleNav GPS Navigator, 81–82
telephony, Internet-based. See VoIP (Voice-over-IP) 
services
televisions. See monitors
Temporal Key Integrity Protocol (TKIP), 262, 277

Index  301
text-based wikis, 139–141
ThinkFree, 90
third-party speech recognition programs, 255–258
Thumbstacks.com, 92
titles
eBay item, 172
Really Simple Syndication feed, 204
TKIP (Temporal Key Integrity Protocol), 262, 277
T-Mobile, 71–75, 81
TomTom GO 910, 84
towers, cellular signal, 80
tracking, shipment, 57
traffic analysis programs, web site, 166
training speech recognition programs, 
246–251, 256
transcripts, online conference, 117
transit times, shipment, 57
Treo phones, 82
trial versions, software, 8
trips, mapping with mobile GPS, 80–84
troubleshooting webcam problems, 32–34
tuner boxes, external TV, 46–51
tuners, internal TV, 48
tutorials
wiki, 140
Windows Vista speech recognition, 254
TypePad, 215
U
Uconnect, 132
undocking features, docking station, 39, 41–43
universal docking stations, 38–39
uploading podcasts, 198–199
UPS Internet Shipping, 55, 64
USB-connected docking stations, 39–40
USB-connected webcams, 28–29
users
network server, 226–228, 231–232
Remote Desktop Connection, 100–103, 105
Windows, profiles of, 236
U.S. Post Office Shipping Assistant, 56–58, 64
V
validation, RSS file, 210
ValueClick Media, 163
Value Pack, eBay, 175
vandalism, wiki, 136
VCRs and external TV tuners, 47–48, 51
Verizon Wireless, 81
VGA connections, 46
ViaVoice, 246
video cameras, digital, 28
video cards, 18–19, 21
video conferences, 115–116, 119–120
Video pane, WebEx Meeting Center, 120
virtual private networks. See VPNs (virtual 
private networks)
Virtual Terminal, 189–190
voice-enabled data/fax modems, 4, 9
voicemail, 12–13
voice recognition. See speech recognition
VoIP (Voice-over-IP) services, 123–134
choice of, 124–126
contact lists, 127–128
downloading software, 126–127
making calls, 130–132
Options sections, 130
other considerations, 132–134
overview, 123–124
setting up profile, 128–129
Vonage, 125
VPNs (virtual private networks), 143–158
applying DHCP services, 145–147
associating DHCP and VPN servers, 155–156
creating certificate authority, 147–149
Internet Authentication Service, 149–151
managed VPN providers, 158
and network servers, 221
overview, 143–144
prerequisites, 144
remote access policy, 151–153
remote client access configuration, 156–157
server configuration, 153–155
testing, 157
VZ Navigator, 81
W
WANs (wide area networks), 143
WAPs (wireless access points), 263–266, 279–281
warranties, hard drive, 220
www.ebook3000.com

302  Index
WAV files, 198
WebAsyst, 91
web-based e-mail accounts, 75
web-based office applications, 87–95
needs and preferences, 89
overview, 87–89
researching and choosing, 89–92
trying out, 92–95
use of, 95
webcams, 25–35
adjusting, 34–35
choice of, 26–28
installation, 28–32
and online conferences, 120
overview, 25
testing, 32–34
Web.com, 190
web conferences. See online conferences
WebEx Meeting Center, 116–122
chat features, 121–122
including video, 119–120
overview, 116–117
setting up meeting with, 117–119
sharing documents and using 
whiteboard, 121
web sites
See also commerce web sites; RSS (Really 
Simple Syndication) feeds
and advertising, 161–166
linking to podcasts, 198
WEP (Wired Equivalent Privacy), 262, 277
whiteboard, WebEx Meeting Center, 121
wide area networks (WANs), 143
Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA), 262, 277
Wikia wiki, 138–141
Wikipedia, 136–137
wikis, 135–142
adding content, 140–141
choosing engine, 136–139
creation of, 139
maintenance, 142
overview, 135–136
WiMax, 71
Windows 95, 223
Windows Live, 89
Windows NetMeeting, 116
Windows Server 2003. See VPNs (virtual private 
networks)
Windows Vista
accessing network servers, 232–233
automated file backup with, 240–242
changing administrator password, 275–277
configuring wireless networks with, 270–271
docking station electronic undocking 
features, 42–43
extending to additional monitor, 21
firewalls, 289–290
IP address, 285–289
and PC messaging center hardware, 5–7
preventing auto-connect to wireless 
networks, 283–284
Remote Assistance, 106–109
Remote Desktop Connection, 98–101, 
102–103
restoring files in, 243–244
speech recognition in, 246, 252–255
webcams, 31–34
Windows XP
accessing network servers, 232
automated file backup with, 236–240
changing administrator password, 274–276
configuring wireless networks with, 267–270
docking station electronic undocking 
features, 41–42
extending to additional monitor, 20–21
firewalls, 289
IP address, 285, 287–288
and PC messaging center hardware, 5–6
Plus! Pack, 250
preventing auto-connect to wireless 
networks, 283
Remote Assistance, 109–111
Remote Desktop Connection, 101–102, 
103–105
restoring files in, 242–243
Service Pack 1, 249–250
speech recognition in, 246, 249–252
webcams, 29–33
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP), 262, 277
wireless access points (WAPs), 263–266, 279–281

Index  303
wireless e-mail, 69–77
laptop computers, 75–77
overview, 69
personal digital assistants, 70–75
wireless Ethernet adapter cards, 144, 266–267
wireless networks, 259–272
See also VPNs (virtual private networks)
access point setup, 263–266
computer setup, 266–271
other considerations, 271–272
overview, 259–260
security, 273–290
administrator passwords, 274–277
combating signal leakage, 290
encryption, 277
firewalls, 289–290
MAC address filtering, 277–281
overview, 273–274
static IP addressing, 284–289
stopping auto-connect function, 
283–284
turning of SSID broadcast, 282
wireless standards, products, and 
technology, 260–263
wireless webcams, 27
WMV files, 198
Word, Microsoft, 246–250
WordPad, 207
workgroups, 275–276
WPA (Wi-Fi Protected Access), 262, 277
Writeboard, 92–95
Write permissions, 226
writing applications, 92
X
X-Cart, 185
XML files, 209–210
Y
Yahoo! Mail, 73, 92
Yahoo! Podcasts, 199
Yahoo! Publisher Network, 162
Yahoo! Small Business, 187
Yahoo! Voice, 125
Z
ZIP codes, 85
Zoho Show, 92
zoom, webcam, 34
www.ebook3000.com

