Over
285,000
cOpies sOld!
6th Edition
 Doing Your 
research 
Project
a guide for 
first-time 
researchers
juDith Bell with stePhen Waters
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing Your Research Project
Sixth Edition
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing Your 
Research Project
A Guide for  
First-time Researchers
Sixth Edition
Judith Bell
with Stephen Waters
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Open University Press
McGraw-Hill Education
McGraw-Hill House
Shoppenhangers Road
Maidenhead
Berkshire
England
SL6 2QL
email: enquiries@openup.co.uk
world wide web: www.openup.co.uk
and Two Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121-2289, USA
First published 1987
Second edition published 1993
Third edition published 1999
Fourth edition published 2005
Fifth edition published 2010
First published in this sixth edition 2014
Copyright © Judith Bell with Stephen Waters, 2014
All rights reserved. Except for the quotation of short passages for the purposes 
of criticism and review, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechani-
cal, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior written permission of 
the publisher or a licence from the Copyright Licensing Agency Limited. Details of 
such licences (for reprographic reproduction) may be obtained from the Copyright 
Licensing Agency Ltd of Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London, EC1N 8TS.
A catalogue record of this book is available from the British Library
ISBN-13: 978-0-335-26446-9 
ISBN-10: 0-335-26446-8
eISBN: 978-0-335-26447-6
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
CIP data applied for
Cover and internal illustrations by Clare Wood
Typeset by SRNova Private Limited, India
Fictitious names of companies, products, people, characters and/or data that may 
be used herein (in case studies or in examples) are not intended to represent any 
real individual, company, product or event.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

v
Acknowledgements	
x
	 	 Introduction	
1
PART I  Preparing the Ground	
5
	 1	 Approaches to Research	
8
	2	 Planning the Project	
28
	3	 Ethics and Integrity in Research	
46
	4	 Reading, Referencing and the Management of  
Information	
65
	5	 Literature Searching	
87
	6	 The Review of the Literature	
104
PART II  Selecting Methods of Data Collection	
119
	7	 The Analysis of Documentary Evidence	
125
	8	 Using Social Media in Research	
141
	9	 Designing and Administering Questionnaires	
156
	10	 Planning and Conducting Interviews	
177
	11	 Diaries, Logs, Critical Incidents and Blogs	
195
	12	 Observation	
210
PART III  Interpreting the Evidence and Reporting  
the Findings	
227
	13	 Interpreting the Evidence and Reporting the Findings	
229
	14	 Writing the Report	
256
Glossary	
274
References	
284
Index	
297
Brief Table of Contents
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

vi
Detailed Table of Contents
Acknowledgements	
x
	
	 Introduction	
1
PART I  Preparing the Ground	
5
	 1	 Approaches to Research	
8
Styles of research	
9
Action research and the role of practitioner researchers	
10
Case study	
11
Survey	
14
The experimental style	
15
Ethnography and the ethnographic style of research	
17
The grounded theory approach	
18
Narrative inquiry and stories	
20
Which approach?	
23
Laying the Groundwork Checklist	
24
Further reading	
25
	 2	 Planning the Project	
28
Selecting a topic	
29
Getting started	
29
The purpose of the study	
32
Hypotheses, objectives and researchable questions	
33
Working title and the project outline	
34
Timing	
35
Supervision	
36
Student–supervisor relationships	
37
Codes of practice for supervision	
38
Change of supervisor	
38
Keeping records of supervisory tutorials	
39
The research experience	
40
Writing as you go along and the research diary	
40
Planning the Project Checklist	
41
Further reading	
44
	 3	 Ethics and Integrity in Research	
46
Research contracts, codes of practice, protocols and the 
principle of informed consent	
47
Ethics committees	
49
Confidentiality and anonymity	
51
Safeguarding confidentiality and anonymity if disseminating  
information online	
52
Ethical research in practice, the problems of ‘inside’ research and 
personal codes of practice	
55
Codes of ethical practice relating to intellectual ownership/property	
59
Ethics and Integrity in Research Checklist	
60
Further reading	
63
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Detailed Table of Contents
vii
	 4	 Reading, Referencing and the Management of Information	
65
Reading	
66
Note-taking	
67
Note-taking and guarding against plagiarism	
67
Referencing	
70
Creating, editing and storing references	
74
Backing-up: better safe than sorry	
76
Making a note of references	
76
The management of information	
77
A lot of fuss about nothing?	
81
Reading, Note-taking, Guarding against Plagiarism, Referencing  
and the Management of Information Checklist	
82
Further reading	
85
	 5	 Literature Searching	
87
Defining the parameters of your search (search limiters) and keywords	
88
Focusing, refining and grouping your keywords	
90
Digital or print?	
90
Libraries, librarians – and books	
91
Google search	
91
Google Books	
93
Journals	
95
Evaluating sources	
97
Copyright and licensing restrictions when downloading items  
from the web	
98
The Top Ten Guide to Searching the Internet Checklist	
99
Further reading	
103
	 6	 The Review of the Literature	
104
The ‘critical review’ of the literature	
105
Theory and theoretical (or conceptual) frameworks	
106
The ‘critical review’ in practice	
109
Reviewing the reviews	
112
Review of the Literature Checklist	
113
Further reading	
115
PART II  Selecting Methods of Data Collection	
119
	 7	 The Analysis of Documentary Evidence	
125
The nature of documentary evidence	
126
Approaches to documents	
126
The location of documents	
127
The selection of documents	
131
The critical analysis of documents	
134
Fact or bias?	
136
The Analysis of Documentary Evidence Checklist	
137
Further reading	
139
	 8	 Using Social Media in Research	
141
Social media and the research process	
143
Using social media in research	
146
Summary	
153
Using Social Media in Research Checklist	
153
Further reading	
154
	 9	 Designing and Administering Questionnaires	
156
Exactly what do you need to find out?	
158
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Detailed Table of Contents
viii
Question types	
158
Question wording	
160
Appearance and layout	
165
Drawing a sample	
166
Piloting the questionnaire	
167
Distribution and return of questionnaires	
168
The rights of respondents and your rights and responsibilities	
169
Non-response	
169
Analysis of data	
170
Designing and Administering Questionnaires Checklist	
170
Further reading	
175
	10	 Planning and Conducting Interviews	
177
Advantages and disadvantages of the interview	
178
The ethics of conducting interviews	
178
Question wording	
179
The interview schedule	
179
Group interviews and focus groups	
182
Recording interviews	
184
Skype and Google Hangouts	
185
Bias – the old enemy	
186
Remember!	
187
Planning and Conducting Interviews Checklist	
189
Further reading	
192
	11	 Diaries, Logs, Critical Incidents and Blogs	
195
Representativeness	
198
The diary-interview method	
198
Piloting returns forms and instructions to participants	
199
Five case studies	
200
The ethics of diary use	
204
Blogs	
205
Diaries, Logs, Critical Incidents and Blogs Checklist	
206
Further reading	
208
	12	 Observation	
210
Unstructured observation	
212
Participant observation	
212
Structured observation and keeping records	
214
Recording behaviour	
215
Content	
218
A few words of warning – again	
219
After the event	
220
Observation Checklist	
221
Further reading	
223
PART III  Interpreting the Evidence and Reporting  
the Findings	
227
	13	 Interpreting the Evidence and Reporting the Findings	
229
List questions	
230
Quantity and category questions	
233
Measures of central tendency	
233
Coding	
239
Grids	
242
Scales	
243
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Detailed Table of Contents
ix
Verbal questions	
250
Conclusions	
250
Interpreting the Evidence and Reporting the Findings Checklist	
251
Further reading	
253
	14	 Writing the Report	
256
Getting started	
257
The final writing task	
257
Structuring the report	
259
The need for revision	
265
Any possibility of plagiarism?	
267
Evaluating your own research	
267
Writing the Report Checklist	
269
Further reading	
272
Glossary	
274
References	
284
Index	
297
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

x
Acknowledgements
I have been helped throughout the preparation of all six editions of 
this book by the interest of friends, colleagues and former research 
students who have given strong support in often difficult times.
I am particularly grateful to Stephen Waters, an outstanding 
former research student. Stephen has supported me in the writing of 
this edition with invaluable work on reading, drafting and updating 
chapters and his collaboration has been a real asset. He also contrib-
uted the new Chapter 8, ‘Using social media in research’, to this sixth 
edition, which provides an introduction to how social networks can 
be harnessed to enhance the research process.
Brendan Duffy, another exceptional former student, wrote 
Chapter 7. ‘The analysis of documentary evidence’, included in this 
and earlier editions. I am very grateful for his continued contribution.
My thanks to Gilbert Fan, Singaporean-based former postgrad-
uate student of the University of Sheffield, who permitted me to 
quote parts of his MEd literature review in Chapter 6 and to John 
Richardson and Alan Woodley, both of the British Open University, 
who have again given me permission to quote from their journal arti-
cle, ‘Another look at the role of age, gender and subject as predic-
tors of academic attainment in higher education’ (Richardson and 
Woodley 2003).
I would also like to acknowledge the contributions of two friends, 
Jan Gray, who provided the narrative inquiry sections in Chapter 1, 
and Katie Waterhouse, who supplied the ‘Top ten guide to Internet 
searching’ in Chapter 5. My thanks to you both.
In my experience, I have found that good librarians generally 
know everything about most things and so I ‘persuaded’ Richard 
Pears, co-author of Cite Them Right (Pears and Shields 2013) and 
faculty support librarian at Durham University library, to read and 
comment on Chapter 5 (‘Literature searching’) when I drafted it for 
the fifth edition. He commented in great detail and also brought me 
up to date about online search facilities in libraries – and a great deal 
more. My apologies for this imposition Richard, but also my thanks.
Long-suffering Fred Bell once again took on the boring task 
of reading all the scripts and checking that the figures, tables, 
graphs and the like matched the texts. As usual he winced at what 
he regarded as some of my oversimplifications and ‘unscientific’ 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Acknowledgements
xi
language, but I have long since learnt which of his complaints and 
objections to ignore and which to accept with gratitude.
My continuing gratitude to Michael Youngman, formerly of the 
University of Nottingham, who devised the question types in Chapter 
8, which have eased the burden of many research students who are 
in the early days of designing questionnaires and interpreting the 
results. The generous assistance and support he invariably gave to 
many struggling PhD students, including me, made the difference 
between our dropping out altogether and actually finishing.
I have always enjoyed Chris Madden’s mazes, which have 
appeared on the front cover of all editions of this book. Unfortunately, 
Chris was unable to contribute to the cover in this edition but I thank 
him for his previous drawings, and welcome our new illustrator, 
Clare Wood, whose new interpretation of the research maze stays 
true to Chris’s original concept. I can still smile (or sometimes even 
laugh out loud) at the pictures of distraught researchers going down 
blind alleys, attacking their laptops, losing patience and wondering 
why they ever started on the research in the first place. Yes. Been 
there; done that! However, the overall image is of students who man-
aged to negotiate the maze and, having overcome the difficulties 
experienced by all researchers, are seen to be leaving it deliriously 
happy, in academic dress, holding their diplomas on high, throwing 
their mortarboards in the air and going forth to do more and even 
better research. The book would not be the same without the maze.
Nor could this sixth edition have been produced without all of 
your support and encouragement. To you all, my grateful thanks.
Judith Bell
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

1
Doing Your Research Project is intended for those of you who are 
about to undertake research for what I refer to as a ‘100-hour pro-
ject’, an undergraduate dissertation or a postgraduate thesis. This 
new sixth edition follows the same tried-and-tested format as the 
previous five editions. It has, however, been thoroughly revised and 
updated throughout, reflecting developments in research practice 
and in the fast-paced world in which we operate as students, faculty 
members and researchers. In particular, Stephen Waters, contribut-
ing author to this edition, has updated the book by adding content on 
using social media in research and written a new chapter (Chapter 8) 
on the subject. You will also find a number of new features in this edi-
tion to help you navigate through your research project:
•	New chapter introductions provide ‘at a glance’ lists of the key 
concepts and new ideas you will come across when you read each 
chapter.
•	New ‘Dead End!’ boxes highlight potential risks or research prob-
lems, to help you to avoid the common pitfalls that can lead you to 
a dead end in the research maze!
•	New key terms boxes appear in each chapter linked to a glossary, 
providing the first-time researcher with a guide to core concepts 
and research vocabulary.
•	Fully revised chapter checklists now appear at the end of all chap-
ters, reminding you of best research practice and helping you 
work through the research process step by step.
•	Fully updated further reading sections provide ‘jumping off’ 
points to extend your learning about research methods and tech-
niques.
•	Comprehensive references provide further sources that will prove 
invaluable to you as you progress through your project and 
develop your skills as an academic researcher.
Regardless of the topic or your discipline, the problems facing 
you will be much the same. You will need to select a topic, identify 
the objectives of your study, plan and design a suitable methodol-
ogy, devise research instruments, negotiate access to institutions, 
Introduction
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

2
INTRODUCTION
materials and people, collect, analyse and present information, 
and, finally, produce a well-written report. Whatever the size of the 
undertaking, techniques have to be mastered and a plan of action 
devised that does not attempt more than the limitations of expertise, 
time and access permit.
Large-scale research projects will require sophisticated tech-
niques, and often statistical analysis, but it is quite possible to pro-
duce a worthwhile study with a minimum of statistical knowledge. 
We all learn how to do research by actually doing it, but a great 
deal of time can be wasted and goodwill dissipated by inadequate 
preparation.
This book aims to provide you with the tools to do the job, to help 
you to avoid some of the pitfalls and time-consuming false trails that 
can eat into your time allowance, to establish good research habits 
and to take you from the stage of selecting a topic through to the pro-
duction of a well-planned, methodologically sound and well-written 
final report or thesis – ON TIME. There is, after all, little point in 
doing all the work if you never manage to submit!
No book can take the place of a good supervisor, but good super-
visors are in great demand, and if you can familiarize yourself with 
basic approaches and techniques, you will be able to make full use 
of your tutorial time for priority issues.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Plan your project
schedule and scope
(Ch 2)
Understand ethics, 
privacy, anonymity and
confidentiality
(Ch 3)
Read, take notes and
write up as you go along
(Ch 4)
Conduct a literature
search
(Ch 5)
If required, do a
literature review
(Ch 6)
Refine your
research question
(Ch 2)
Choose your
research tools
(Ch 7–12)
Conduct your research
and collect the data
(Ch 7–12)
Start: Do your
groundwork 
(Ch 1)
Meet your supervisor,
understand requirements,
brainstorm for topics
(Ch 2)
Compile, analyse and
interpret your data
(Ch 13)
Read, redraft and
proof your report
(Ch 14)
Write a first draft of
your report
(Ch 14)
Submit your research
project on time and to
requirements
(Ch 14)
SUCCESS!
You did it!
Well done.
YOU ARE HERE
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Part I
Preparing the Ground
As a first-time researcher, you are probably a little daunted by the 
task ahead of you. Not only are you faced with deciding what or 
who you are going to research but how you are going to collect 
data, what to do with it when you have got it, and how to write up 
your findings. As the maze on the front cover suggests, the path 
ahead is unlikely to be direct and you will take many twists and 
turns and go down a few blind alleys before you reach your goal. 
I understand how you might be feeling – after all, I was once in 
the same position myself. I wrote this book to act as your guide 
through the maze of research and to give you advance warning of 
possible dead ends and pitfalls so that you avoid making the same 
mistakes as I once did. We all learn by making mistakes and expe-
riencing failure – but it is much less painful to learn from other 
people’s errors and avoid making the same mistakes that they did!
The first part of the book sets out the range of research methods 
and approaches that you have at your disposal and considers what 
you need to do before you begin to collect your data. Chapter 1 takes 
you through the advantages and disadvantages of each research 
method, providing essential information to enable you to decide 
which is the most appropriate for collecting your data. If you have 
yet to decide on the focus of your research, that’s fine – you can 
always come back to Chapter 1 later.
Chapter 2 looks at planning and structuring your research and 
how you might make notes during this process. While writing the 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

DOING YOUR RESEARCH PROJECT
6
report seems a long way off right now, it is important to be able to 
visualize how the report will be organized and to appreciate how it 
might look when completed. As you will see, there is far less varia-
tion between the format of research reports than you might think, 
and understanding how you should present your research is impor-
tant from the outset.
Ethical considerations are reviewed in Chapter 3. Even experi-
enced researchers, who begin with the best of intentions, sometimes 
come across ethical issues they failed to see or appreciate. The issues 
of anonymity and confidentiality are examined, and Stephen Waters 
explains how his intention that the participants in his insider study 
of his own institution should remain anonymous was undermined 
by his lack of foresight when the report was written up. Luckily, the 
research report was not adversely affected and participants kindly 
overlooked what could have been a potential problem, as their iden-
tities were unintentionally revealed. We would rather you did not 
depend on luck but avoid such problems occurring in the first place.
Part 1 also devotes a significant amount of space to how you 
manage information, how you organize references and avoid plagia-
rism – using other people’s words and ideas as your own. It asks 
important questions about whether you will understand notes you 
have made today in the future. Even if you have a good memory, will 
you really be able to go back to a specific page in a book to retrieve a 
quotation that you have forgotten to write out in full? The answer is 
almost certainly that you will not, and thus it is important to get into 
the habit of making detailed notes from the start – on everything, 
even if you think you will never use it. While careful note-taking is 
time-consuming, it will save hours, perhaps days, of work later in 
your research when you would otherwise have to retrace your steps 
before setting out on your research journey again.
Whatever your research topic, it is highly unlikely that you will 
be the first person to have researched the area, although the specific 
focus of your research may be original (and if you are a PhD student, 
this will be essential). Chapters 5 and 6 concentrate on how to find 
relevant literature on your research topic and how you should go 
about writing a review of the literature you find. This will help you 
to put your research in the context of previous investigations and 
will enable you to compare your findings with those of researchers 
who have gone before you. A literature review should also give you a 
valuable insight into the advantages and disadvantages of previous 
research and enable you to build on researchers’ successes and help 
you to avoid similar problems.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Preparing the Ground
7
I do not claim to be able to offer you an untroubled path through 
the research maze. Nevertheless, I hope that this book will be a use-
ful guide along the way. However challenging your research journey, 
I know what a great learning experience it is and how immensely 
rewarding completing a research project can be. I wish you well as 
you set out on your journey.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

8
1
Approaches to 
Research
Key terms
The following key terms are highlighted on the pages shown below. You 
will find a definition for each term in the glossary at the back of the book.
Quantitative
9
Qualitative
9
Action research
10
Case study
11
Theoretical sampling
18
Survey
14
Experiment
15
Ethnography
17
Grounded theory
18
Narrative inquiry/stories
21
INTRODUCTION
This chapter provides you with an overview of the various approaches you might 
take to your research project. It offers brief summaries of the different research 
styles and methodologies, and further reading to help you to understand the 
approach your own research might take. In this chapter, you will find:
•	An explanation of the difference between quantitative and qualitative research.
•	An overview of action research, case study, survey and experimental 
approaches, their advantages and limitations.
•	An introduction to ethnographic research, grounded theory and narrative  
theory.
•	Detailed further reading lists on each of the main approaches described so that 
you can do preparatory reading before beginning your project.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Approaches to Research
9
Styles of research
It is perfectly possible to carry out a worthwhile investigation without 
having detailed knowledge of the various approaches to or styles of 
research, but a study of different approaches will provide insight into 
different ways of planning an investigation and, incidentally, will also 
enhance your understanding of the literature. One of the problems of 
reading research reports and reading about research reports is the 
terminology. Researchers use terms and occasionally jargon that may 
be incomprehensible to other people. It is the same in any field, where 
a specialized language develops to ease communication among pro-
fessionals. So, before considering the various stages of planning and 
conducting investigations, it may be helpful to consider the main fea-
tures of certain well-established and well-reported styles of research.
Different styles, traditions or approaches use different methods of 
collecting data, but no approach prescribes or automatically rejects 
any particular method. Quantitative researchers collect facts and 
study the relationship of one set of facts to another. They use ‘numer-
ical data and, typically ... structured and predetermined research 
questions, conceptual frameworks and designs’ (Punch 2005: 28). 
They therefore use techniques that are likely to produce quantified 
and, if possible, generalizable conclusions. Researchers adopting a 
qualitative perspective are more concerned to understand individu-
als’ perceptions of the world. They doubt whether social ‘facts’ exist 
and question whether a ‘scientific’ approach can be used when deal-
ing with human beings. Importantly, Punch draws our attention to 
one important distinction, which is that ‘qualitative research not only 
uses non-numerical and unstructured data but also, typically, has 
research questions and methods which are more general at the start, 
and become more focused as the study progresses’ (Punch 2005: 28). 
There are occasions, however, when qualitative researchers draw on 
quantitative techniques, and vice versa. It will all depend on what 
data the researcher requires.
Classifying an approach as quantitative or qualitative, ethno-
graphic, survey, action research or whatever, does not mean that 
once an approach has been selected, the researcher may not move 
from the methods normally associated with that style. Each approach 
has its strengths and weaknesses, and each is particularly suitable 
for a particular context. The approach adopted and the methods of 
data collection selected will depend on the nature of the inquiry and 
the type of information required.
It is impossible in the space of a few pages to do justice to any of 
the well-established styles of research, but the following will at least 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

DOING YOUR RESEARCH PROJECT
10
provide a basis for further reading and may give you ideas about 
approaches you may wish to adopt in your own investigation.
Action research and the role of practitioner 
researchers
Action research is an approach that is appropriate in any con-
text where ‘a problem involving people, tasks and procedures cries 
out for solution, or where some change of feature results in a more 
desirable outcome’ (Cohen et al. 2011: 344). It is not a method or a 
technique. As in all research, the methods selected for gathering 
information depend on the nature of the information required. It is 
applied research, carried out by practitioners who have themselves 
identified a need for change or improvement, sometimes with sup-
port from outside the institution; other times not. The aim is ‘to 
arrive at recommendations for good practice that will tackle a prob-
lem or enhance the performance of the organization and individu-
als through changes to the rules and procedures within which they 
operate’ (Denscombe 2010b: 12).
Lomax (2007: 158, 169) provides a series of useful questions for 
action researchers under the headings of ‘purpose’, ‘focus’, ‘relations’, 
‘method’ and ‘validation’. Under the ‘purpose’ heading, she asks:
•	Can I improve my practice so that it is more effective?
•	Can I improve my understanding of this practice so as to make it 
more just?
•	Can I use my knowledge and influence to improve the situation?
Under ‘method’, she asks whether the action researcher can col-
lect ‘rigorous data’ that will provide evidence to support claims for 
action. These and similar questions can serve as a starting point 
for action research but when the investigation is finished and the 
findings have been considered by all participants, the job is still not 
finished. The participants continue to review, evaluate and improve 
practice. The research involves ‘a feedback loop in which initial find-
ings generate possibilities for change which are then implemented 
and evaluated as a prelude to further investigation’ (Denscombe 
2010a: 126). Denscombe goes on to argue that, while generalizations 
are unlikely to emerge from findings of ‘practice-driven and small-
scale’ research, it:
“
should not lose anything by way of rigour. Like any other small-scale 
research, it can draw on existing theories, apply and test research 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Approaches to Research
11
propositions, use suitable methods and, importantly, offer some 
evaluation of existing knowledge (without making unwarranted claims). 
It is the rigour, rather than the size of the project or its purpose, by which 
the research should be judged."
(Denscombe 2010a: 134)
There is nothing new about practitioners operating as researchers, 
but as in all ‘insider’ investigations, difficulties can arise if dearly 
held views and practices of some participants are challenged, as 
can happen if the research evidence appears to indicate that radi-
cal changes are needed if progress is to be made. The participatory 
nature of action research means there is a question as to who owns 
the research and its outcomes:
“
Who is in charge? Who calls the shots? Who decides on appropriate 
actions? Who owns the data? These and similar issues need to be worked 
out sensitively and carefully by the partners to ensure that there are 
shared expectations about the nature of participation in action 
research."
(Denscombe 2010a: 131)
Denscombe also reminds us that:
“
Because the activity of action research almost inevitably affects 
others, it is important to have a clear idea of when and where the action 
research necessarily steps outside the bounds of collecting information 
which is purely personal and relating to the practitioners alone. Where 
it does so, the usual standard of ethics must be observed: permissions 
obtained, confidentiality maintained, identities protected."
(Denscombe 2010a: 132)
Of equal or, perhaps, even greater importance is that before the 
research begins, everyone involved must know why the investiga-
tion is to take place, who will see the final report, and who will have 
responsibility for implementing any recommended changes.
Case study
Even if you are working on a 100-hour project over a three-month 
period, the case study approach can be particularly appropriate for 
individual researchers because it provides an opportunity for one 
aspect of a problem to be studied in some depth. Of course, not all 
case studies have to be completed in three months, or even three 
years. For example, a study by Francis et al. (1994) of what led to the 
closure of a large psychiatric hospital took five years to complete. 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

DOING YOUR RESEARCH PROJECT
12
Sadly, you will have to wait until you are head of research in your 
hospital, local authority, university or government department 
before you will be in a position to undertake and to obtain the fund-
ing for such a venture, so, for the time being, be realistic about the 
selection of your case study topic. Yin reminds us that ‘case stud-
ies have been done about decisions, about programmes, about the 
implementation process, and about organizational change. Beware 
these types of topic – none is easily defined in terms of the begin-
ning or end point of the case.’ He adds that ‘the more a study contains 
specific propositions, the more it will stay within reasonable limits’ 
(Yin 1994: 137). Good advice and worth following.
Case studies may be carried out to follow up and to put flesh on 
the bones of a survey. They can also precede a survey and be used 
as a means of identifying key issues that merit further investigation, 
but are usually carried out as free-standing exercises. Researchers 
identify an ‘instance’, which could be the introduction of a new way 
of working, the way an organization adapts to a new role, or any 
innovation or stage of development in an institution. Evidence has to 
be collected systematically, the relationship between variables stud-
ied (a variable being a characteristic or attribute) and the investiga-
tion methodically planned. Though observation and interviews are 
most frequently used, no method is excluded.
All organizations and individuals have their common and their 
unique features. Case study researchers aim to identify such features, 
to identify or attempt to identify the various interactive processes at 
work, to show how they affect the implementation of systems and 
influence the way an organization functions. These processes may 
remain hidden in a large-scale survey but could be crucial to the suc-
cess or failure of systems or organizations.
Critics of case study
Critics of the case study approach draw attention to a number of 
problems and/or disadvantages. For example, some question the 
value of the study of single events and point out that it is difficult 
for researchers to cross-check information. Others express concern 
about selective reporting and the resulting danger of distortion. A 
major concern is that generalization is not always possible, though 
Denscombe (2010a: 60) makes the point that, ‘The extent to which 
findings from the case study can be generalized to other examples 
in the class depends on how far the case study example is similar to 
others of its type.’ He illustrates this point by drawing on the example 
of a case study of a small primary school. He writes that: ‘this means 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Approaches to Research
13
that the researcher must obtain data on the significant features 
(catchment area, the ethnic origins of the pupils and the amount of 
staff turnover) for primary schools in general, and then demonstrate 
where the case study example fits in relation to the overall picture’ 
(Denscombe 2010a: 61).
In his 1981 paper on the relative merits of the search for gener-
alization and the study of single events, Bassey used the term ‘relat-
ability’ rather than ‘generalizability’. In his opinion ‘an important 
criterion for judging the merit of a case study is the extent to which 
the details are sufficient and appropriate for a teacher working in a 
similar situation to relate his decision-making to that described in 
the case study. The relatability of a case study is more important 
than its generalizability’ (Bassey 1981: 85). He considers that if case 
studies ‘are carried out systematically and critically, if they are 
aimed at the improvement of education, if they are relatable, and if 
by publication of the findings they extend the boundaries of exist-
ing knowledge, then they are valid forms of educational research’ 
(1981: 86)
Writing about an education case study in 1999, Bassey amends or 
rather adds to his 1981 thoughts. He recalls that:
“
Previously I had treated the concept of generalization (of the empirical 
kind, that is) as a statement that had to be absolutely true. This is the 
sense in which physical scientists use the term. It is the basis of their 
concept of scientific method . . . in which a hypothesis stands as a 
generalization (or law) only if it withstands all attempts at refutation. I 
argued that there were very few generalizations (in this absolute sense) 
about education – and even fewer, if any, that were useful to experienced 
teachers."
(Bassey 1999: 12)
He makes it clear that he still holds to this view as far as scien-
tific generalizations (of the absolute kind) are concerned but now 
acknowledges that there are two other kinds of generalization that 
can apply in the social sciences, namely, statistical generalizations 
and ‘fuzzy’ generalizations:
“
The statistical generalization arises from samples of populations and 
typical claims that there is an x per cent or y per cent chance that what 
was found in the sample will also be found throughout the population: it 
is the quantitative measure. The fuzzy generalization arises from studies 
of singularities and typical claims that it is possible, or likely, or 
unlikely that what was found in the singularity will be found in similar 
situations elsewhere: it is a qualitative measure."
(Bassey 1999: 12)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

DOING YOUR RESEARCH PROJECT
14
The pros and cons of case study will no doubt be debated in the 
future as they have been in the past. It’s as well to be aware of the 
criticisms but, as I said at the beginning of this section, case study 
can be an appropriate approach for individual researchers in any 
discipline because it provides an opportunity for one aspect of a 
problem to be studied in some depth. You will have to decide if it 
suits your purpose or not.
Survey
It would be nice to have a clear, short and succinct definition of 
survey but as Aldridge and Levine (2001: 5) point out, ‘Each sur-
vey is unique. Therefore, lists of do’s and don’ts are too inflexible. A 
solution to one survey may not work in another.’ Moser and Kalton 
(1971: 1) agree that it would be pleasant to provide a straightforward 
definition of what is meant by a ‘social survey’ but make it clear that 
‘such a definition would have to be so general as to defeat its pur-
pose, since the term and the methods associated with it are applied 
to an extraordinarily wide variety of investigations’. They continue 
by giving examples of the range of areas that might be covered by 
a survey:
“
A survey may be occasioned simply by a need for administrative facts 
on some aspects of public life; or be designed to investigate a cause–
effect relationship or to throw fresh light on some aspect of sociological 
theory. When it comes to subject matter, all one can say is that surveys 
are concerned with the demographic characteristics, the social 
environment, the activities, or the opinions and attitudes of some group 
of people."
(Moser and Kalton 1971: 1)
The census is one example of a survey in which the same questions 
are asked of the selected population (the population being the group 
or category of individuals selected). It aims to cover 100 per cent of 
the population, but most surveys have less ambitious aims. In most 
cases, a survey will aim to obtain information from a representative 
selection of the population and from that sample will then be able 
to present the findings as being representative of the population as 
a whole. Inevitably, there are problems in the survey method. Great 
care has to be taken to ensure that the sample population is truly 
representative. At a very simple level, that means ensuring that if the 
total population has 1000 men and 50 women, then the same propor-
tion of men to women has to be selected. But that example grossly 
oversimplifies the method of drawing a representative sample and, 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Approaches to Research
15
if you decide to carry out a survey, you will need to consider what 
characteristics of the total population need to be represented to ena-
ble you to say with fair confidence that your sample is reasonably 
representative.
In surveys, all respondents will be asked the same questions in, 
as far as possible, the same circumstances. Question wording is not 
as easy as it seems, and careful piloting is necessary to ensure that 
all questions mean the same to all respondents. Information can be 
gathered by means of self-completion questionnaires (as in the case 
of the census), by using an online survey tool such as Survey Monkey 
(see Chapter 9) or face-to-face by an interviewer. Whichever method 
of information gathering is selected, the aim is to obtain answers to 
the same questions from a large number of individuals to not only 
enable the researcher to describe, but also to compare, to relate one 
characteristic to another and to demonstrate that certain features 
exist in certain categories.
Surveys can provide answers to the questions ‘What?’, ‘Where?’, 
‘When?’ and ‘How?’, but it is not so easy to find out ‘Why?’. Causal 
relationships can rarely, if ever, be proved by the survey method. The 
main emphasis is on fact-finding, and if a survey is well-structured 
and piloted, it can be a relatively cheap and quick way of obtaining 
information, particularly if you use online web-based survey soft-
ware, such as survey monkey, to send your questionnaires by email.
The experimental style
It is relatively easy to plan experiments that deal with measurable 
phenomena. For example, experiments have been set up to meas-
ure the effects of using fluoridated toothpaste on dental caries by 
establishing members of a control group (who did not use the tooth-
paste) and an experimental group (who did). In such experiments, 
the two groups, matched for age, sex, social class and so on, were 
given a pre-test dental examination and instructions about which 
toothpaste to use. After a year, both groups were given the post-
test dental examination and conclusions were then drawn about the 
effectiveness or otherwise of the fluoridated toothpaste. The princi-
ple of such experiments is that if two identical groups are selected, 
one of which (the experimental group) is given special treatment and 
the other (the control group) is not, then any differences between the 
two groups at the end of the experimental period may be attributed 
to the difference in treatment. A causal relationship appears to have 
been established. It may be fairly straightforward to test the extent 
of dental caries (though even in this experiment the extent of the 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

DOING YOUR RESEARCH PROJECT
16
caries could be caused by many factors not controlled by the exper-
iment) but it is quite another matter to test changes in behaviour.
Experiments may allow conclusions to be drawn about cause and 
effect, if the design is sound, but large groups are needed if the many 
variations and ambiguities involved in human behaviour are to be 
controlled. Even allowing for the collection of data in online surveys 
or via a questionnaire in an email attachment, both of which can be 
delivered to a large population in a matter of minutes, large-scale 
experiments are expensive to set up and take more time than most 
students working on 100-hour projects can devote. Tests that require 
only a few hours (for example, to test short-term memory or per-
ception) can be very effective, but in claiming a causal relationship, 
great care needs to be taken to ensure that all possible causes have 
been considered.
It is worth noting at this point that ethical issues are associated 
with experimental research. Permission to conduct the research must 
be obtained from the heads of institutions or units concerned and 
from the participants themselves, all of whom must be fully informed 
about what is involved. Proposals may have to be considered by eth-
ics committees and/or research committees in order to ensure that 
research participants will not come to any harm as a result of the 
research. It is particularly important to seek parents’ permission if 
children are to participate in the research. If your research brings 
you into contact with children or vulnerable adults, you must have 
Disclosure and Barring Service (DBS) clearance. Either you or the 
organization that is supervising your research must apply for a crim-
inal records check to confirm that you have not been convicted of a 
crime involving young people under the age of 18 or against adults 
who are vulnerable. It can take several weeks for you to receive your 
certificate, so make sure that you leave plenty of time for it to arrive 
before beginning to collect your data.
Some research has to be approved by ethics com-
mittees. Check with your supervisor. If you intend 
to collect data from young people under the age 
of 18 or from vulnerable adults, you must obtain 
Disclosure and Barring Service (DBS) clear-
ance to prove that you have no criminal offences 
against these groups. Make sure you leave plenty of time before 
starting your research to obtain your certificate.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Approaches to Research
17
Cohen and colleagues object to the principle of ‘manipulating’ human 
beings. They write that:
“
notions of isolation and control of variables in order to establish 
causality . . . may be appropriate for a laboratory, though whether, in 
fact, a social situation ever could become the antiseptic, artificial world 
of the laboratory or should become such a world is both an empirical 
and moral question . . . Further, the ethical dilemmas of treating humans 
as manipulable, controllable and inanimate are considerable."
(Cohen et al. 2000: 212)
Quite so, though ethical issues have to be considered in all research, 
regardless of the context. If you decide to undertake an experimental 
study, ask for advice, consider any implications and requirements – 
and be careful about making claims about causality.
Ethnography and the ethnographic style 
of research
Brewer defines ethnography as:
“
The study of people in naturally occurring settings or ‘fields’ by 
methods of data collection which capture their social meanings and 
ordinary activities, involving the researcher participating directly in the 
setting, if not also the activities, in order to collect data in a systematic 
manner but without meaning being imposed on them externally."
(Brewer 2000: 6)
Ethnographic researchers attempt to develop an understanding of 
how a culture works and, as Lutz points out, many methods and tech-
niques are used in that search:
“
Participant observation, interview, mapping and charting, interaction 
analysis, study of historical records and current public documents, the 
use of demographic data, etc. But ethnography centres on the participant 
observation of a society or culture through a complete cycle of events 
that regularly occur as that society interacts with its environment."
(Lutz 1993: 108)
Participant observation enables researchers, as far as possible, to 
share the same experiences as the participants, to understand bet-
ter why they act in the way they do. However, it is time-consuming 
and so is often outside the scope of researchers working on 100-hour 
projects or on time-limited Master’s degrees. The researcher has to 
be accepted by the individuals or groups being studied, and this can 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

DOING YOUR RESEARCH PROJECT
18
mean doing the same job, or living in the same environment and cir-
cumstances as the participants for lengthy periods.
Time is not the only problem with this approach. As in case studies, 
critics point to the problem of representativeness. If the researcher is 
studying one group in depth over a period of time, who is to say that 
group is typical of other groups that may have the same title? Are 
nurses in one hospital (or even in one specialist area) necessarily rep-
resentative of nurses in a similar hospital or specialist area in another 
part of the country? Are canteen workers in one type of organization 
likely to be typical of all canteen workers? Critics also refer to the 
problem of generalization but, as in the case study approach, if the 
study is well-structured and carried out, and makes no claims that 
cannot be justified, it may well be relatable in a way that will enable 
members of similar groups to recognize problems and, possibly, to 
see ways of solving similar problems in their own group.
The grounded theory approach
Glaser and Strauss (1965, 1968) developed the grounded theory 
approach to qualitative data analysis in the 1960s during the course 
of a field observational study of the way hospital staff dealt with 
dying patients. So what does it involve? Strauss tells us that:
“
The methodological thrust of the grounded theory approach to 
qualitative data analysis is toward the development of theory, without 
any particular commitment to specific kinds of data, lines of research, or 
theoretical interests. So, it is not really a specific method or technique. 
Rather it is a style of doing qualitative analysis that includes a number of 
distinct features, such as theoretical sampling, and certain methodological 
guidelines, such as the making of constant comparisons and the use of a 
coding paradigm, to ensure conceptual development and density."
(Strauss 1987: 5)
He defines theoretical sampling as: ‘sampling directed by the evolv-
ing theory; it is a sampling of incidents, events, activities, populations, 
etc. It is harnessed to the making of comparisons between and among 
those samples of activities, populations, etc.’ (Strauss 1987: 21).
The theory is not pre-specified. It emerges as the research pro-
ceeds (hence ‘theoretical’ sampling). Over the years, there have been 
some adjustments to the original 1960s approach to grounded the-
ory, but the principles remain much the same, which are that theory 
evolves during actual research by means of the analysis of the data. 
Punch agrees but considers that ‘grounded theory is not a theory 
at all. It is a method, an approach, a strategy whose purpose is to 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Approaches to Research
19
generate theory from data ... The theory will therefore be grounded 
in data’ (Punch 2005: 155).
At first sight, this seems straightforward enough, but as Hayes 
makes clear:
“
The process of conducting grounded theory research isn’t just a 
matter of looking at the data and developing a theory from it. Instead, it 
is what researchers call an iterative process – that is, a cyclical process 
in which theoretical insights emerge or are discovered in the data, those 
insights are then tested to see how they can make sense of other parts 
of the data, which in turn produce their own theoretical insights, which 
are then tested again against the data, and so on."
(Hayes 2000: 184)
She continues by reminding us that:
“
The theory which is produced using a grounded theory analysis may 
sometimes be very context-specific, applying only in a relatively small 
number of situations; but because it is always grounded in data collected 
from the real world, it can serve as a very strong basis for further 
investigations, as well as being a research finding in its own right."
(Hayes 2000: 184)
Most grounded theory researchers will begin with research ques-
tions but they do not start with a hypothesis, nor do they begin their 
investigation with a thorough review of the literature relating to their 
topic. They build up theory from their data and they do not wait until 
all data are collected before they begin the analysis stage. Instead, 
analysis takes place as the data are collected. The researcher exam-
ines the findings of an interview or of participant observation and 
then proceeds to the analysis of those findings before any other data 
are collected. As the research proceeds, there will be more data col-
lection and more analysis and so on until ‘theoretical saturation’ is 
reached, which is the stage at which ‘further data produce no new 
theoretical development. Saturation is necessary to ensure that the 
theory is conceptually complete’ (Punch 2005: 214–15).
Miles and Huberman have some reservations about the principle 
that coding and recording are over when the analysis appears to 
have run its course, when all the incidents can be readily classified, 
when categories are ‘saturated’ and sufficient numbers of ‘regulari-
ties’ have emerged. They warn us to ‘be careful here’ because:
“
Fieldwork understanding comes in layers; the longer we are in the 
environment, the more layers appear to surface, and the choice of when 
to close down, when to go with a definitive coding system or definitive 
analysis can be painful. That choice may be dictated as much by time 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

DOING YOUR RESEARCH PROJECT
20
and budget constraints as on scientific grounds. When those constraints 
are relaxed, saturation can become a vanishing horizon – just another 
field trip away, then another . . ."
(Miles and Huberman 1994: 62)
Glaser (1992) has also expressed some concern at the way grounded 
theory has developed over the years, in particular the use of code 
and retrieve software, such as NVivo, which generates theory from 
qualitative data on grounded theory lines. He considers that more 
subtle procedures are required to tease out the layers of meaning that 
emerge, and this cannot be achieved by narrow analytical procedures.
More recent developments include the identification of more 
sophisticated criteria for grounded theory studies. For example, 
Charmaz (2008: 230–1) outlines four key criteria for considering the 
rigour and quality of a grounded theory study. These criteria pro-
vide a solid framework for any researcher when reviewing their own 
grounded theory study.
The analysis of grounded theory data is, to me at least, quite 
complex. It requires the researcher to identify concepts, codes, cat-
egories and relationships in order to bring order to the data, and 
the time taken to become skilled at identifying and applying them 
is considerable. I confess that I find the level of abstraction and the 
language used, which appear to be implicit in grounded theory, dif-
ficult to absorb. However, that is no more than my perception of the 
difficulty of teasing out those layers of meaning. Many colleagues 
and former students whose views I respect and who have success-
fully completed research based on a grounded theory approach disa-
gree with me. They tell me that the software can cope with the layers 
and the complexity perfectly well. So, all I can say is that before you 
decide to commit yourself to a grounded theory approach, read as 
widely as time permits and, as always, take advice before you finally 
decide how to proceed.
Narrative inquiry and stories
The use and interpretation of narratives and in particular the 
acceptance of stories as valuable sources of data is well estab-
lished in qualitative research, although perhaps less represented 
in books on research methodology than other sources. Stories 
are certainly interesting and have been used for many years by 
management consultants and others who present examples of suc-
cessful (and unsuccessful) practice as a basis for discussion as to 
how successful practice might be emulated and disasters avoided. 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Approaches to Research
21
What has always taxed me has been how information derived from 
storytelling can be structured in such a way as to produce valid 
research findings. It took an experienced group of postgraduate 
and postdoctoral students who had planned their research on nar-
rative inquiry lines to sort me out and to explain precisely what 
was involved. I was not even sure what narrative inquiry actually 
meant and so, always believing the best way to find out is to ask an 
expert, I asked one member of the group, Dr. Janette Gray, to tell 
me. She wrote as follows:
“
It involves the collection and development of stories, either as a form 
of data collection or as a means of structuring a research project. 
Informants often speak in a story form during the interviews, and as the 
researcher, listening and attempting to understand, we hear their 
‘stories’. The research method can be described as narrative when data 
collection, interpretation and writing are considered a ‘meaning-
making’ process with similar characteristics to stories (Gudmunsdottir 
1996: 295). Narrative inquiry can involve reflective autobiography, life 
story, or the inclusion of excerpts from participants’ stories to illustrate 
a theme developed by the researcher. A narrative approach to inquiry is 
most appropriate when the researcher is interested in portraying 
intensely personal accounts of human experience. Narratives allow 
voice – to the researcher, the participants and to cultural groups – and 
in this sense they can have the ability to develop a decidedly political 
and powerful edge."
(Gray 1998: 12)
Colleagues to whom I had spoken and who had successfully 
adopted a narrative inquiry approach to one or more of their research 
projects had always made it clear that stories were not merely used 
as a series of ‘story boxes’ piled on top of one another, with no par-
ticular structure or connecting theme. The problem I had was in 
understanding how such structures and themes could be derived. 
Jan’s explanation was as follows:
“
All forms of narrative inquiry involve an element of analysis and 
development of theme, dependent on the researcher’s perspective. 
Stories share a basic structure. The power of a story is dependent on the 
storyteller’s use of language to present an interpretation of personal 
experience. The skill of the narrative researcher lies in the ability to 
structure the interview data into a form which clearly presents a sense 
of a beginning, middle and an end. Even though the use of story as a 
research tool is a relatively new concept in the social sciences, 
historically story has been an accepted way of relating knowledge and 
developing self-knowledge. One of the major strengths of such a means 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

DOING YOUR RESEARCH PROJECT
22
of conducting inquiry is the ability to allow readers who do not share a 
cultural background similar to either the storyteller or the researcher to 
develop an understanding of notices and consequences of actions 
described within a story format. Narrative is a powerful and different 
way of knowing . . ."
“
Data collection for narrative research requires the researcher to 
allow the storyteller to structure the conversations, with the researcher 
asking follow-up questions. So a narrative approach to the question of 
how mature-age undergraduates perceive their ability to cope with the 
experience of returning to study would involve extended, open-ended 
interviews with mature-aged students. This would allow the students to 
express their personal experience of the problems, frustrations and joys 
of returning to study. It might also involve similar ‘conversations’ with 
other stakeholders in their education – perhaps family members; their 
tutors and lecturers – to provide a multiple perspective of the context of 
the education of mature-aged undergraduates."
(Gray 1998: 2)
Jan added that ‘the benefit of considerate and careful negotiation 
will be a story allowing an incredibly personal and multi-faceted 
insight into the situation being discussed’. I am sure this is so. I have 
become convinced of the value of this approach and that stories can 
in some cases serve to enhance understanding within a case study 
or an ethnographic study. However, narratives can present their own 
set of problems:
“
Interviews are time-consuming and require the researcher to allow 
the storytellers to recount in their own way the experience of being (or 
teaching) a student. This may not emerge in the first interview. Until a 
trust relationship has developed between researcher and storyteller, it 
is highly unlikely that such intimate information will be shared. Such 
personal involvement with the researcher involves risks and particular 
ethical issues. The storytellers may decide they have revealed more of 
their feelings than they are prepared to share publicly and they may 
insist either on substantial editing or on withdrawing from the project."
(Gray 1998: 2)
Problems of this kind can arise in almost any kind of research, 
particularly that which is heavily dependent on interview data, but 
the close relationship needed for narrative inquiry can make the 
researcher (and the storyteller) particularly vulnerable.
When asked in 2009 what had changed in terms of narrative 
inquiry as a methodology, Jan responded:
“
The last decade has seen a broadening of the theoretical basis of 
narrative inquiry to include a deeper appreciation of the impact of 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Approaches to Research
23
context on any interpretation of a participant’s ‘story’. This includes 
an acknowledgement of the need to consider the complex interactions 
between the personal, professional and social contexts within which the 
participant situates their story. Further, there has been a significant 
change in the international, multi-disciplinary recognition of narrative 
inquiry as a rigorous methodology focused on developing an 
understanding of personal and professional experience. For interested 
researchers, Clandinin (2007) provides a comprehensive rationale for 
the theoretical positioning of narrative inquiry as a methodology."
(Gray 2009: 1)
Online diaries in the form of blogs (short for ‘web logs’: see 
Chapters 8 and 11), which combine self-reflection with content in 
the form of a narrative, can provide a rich source of information in 
narrative enquiry. In addition, YouTube and the professional video 
platform Ted contain vast archives of autobiographical reflec-
tions, interviews and presentations that may also be relevant to 
your research area.
That the narrative approach carries with it a number of potential 
difficulties, especially for first-time researchers, and researchers 
operating within a particularly tight schedule, does not mean that 
it should be disregarded when considering an appropriate approach 
to the topic of your choice. Far from it – but as is the case with all 
research planning, I feel it would be as well to discuss the issues 
fully with your supervisor before deciding what to do, and if possible 
to try to find a supervisor who is experienced, or at least interested, 
in narrative inquiry.
Which approach?
Classifying an approach as ethnographic, qualitative, experimen-
tal – or whatever – does not mean that once an approach has been 
selected the researcher cannot move from the methods normally 
associated with that style. But understanding the major advantages 
and disadvantages of each approach is likely to help you to select 
the most appropriate methodology for the task in hand. This chapter 
has covered only the basic principles associated with different styles 
or approaches to research. This should suffice – at any rate until you 
have decided on a topic and considered what further information 
you need to obtain.
Always consult the library catalogue and the librarians and take 
advantage of what the library has in stock or is able to obtain from 
another library, preferably without cost, and make sure you know which 
online facilities are provided by the library and/or your department.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

DOING YOUR RESEARCH PROJECT
24
Laying the Groundwork Checklist
After reading this chapter you should:
1.  Understand the 
main approaches to 
research.
At this stage, you will start 
to build an understanding 
of research methods, their 
characteristics and advantages 
and disadvantages.
Q
2.  Understand the 
difference  
between qualitative 
and quantitative 
research.
You will be able to describe 
what each means to another 
student.
Q
3.  Start to build 
your research 
vocabulary.
Understand research terms, 
including ethnographic 
research, action research, 
grounded theory and 
narrative theory.
Q
4.  Extend your 
understanding of 
research methods.
Use the suggested further 
reading suggestions at the end 
of the chapter to develop your 
knowledge of techniques that 
appear most relevant to your 
research topic.
Q
5.  Focus on specific 
methods that 
interest you.
Consider how the various 
research methods work in 
practice, and how they could be 
applied to your area of study.
Q
6.  Reach a point 
where you feel 
ready to approach 
the planning stages 
of your own project.
Once you understand the 
basics, you are now in a 
position to plan your  
own project. Proceed to 
Chapter 2...
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Approaches to Research
25
Further reading
Action research, case study, survey, experimental style, ethnography, 
grounded theory and narrative have been dealt with very briefly in 
this chapter and many general books about research methods will also 
include sections relating to all seven of these approaches. One of the 
most helpful is:
Denscombe, M. (2010) The Good Research Guide for Small-scale 
Social Research Projects (4th edn). Maidenhead: Open University 
Press. 
Part 1 provides clear accounts of the advantages and limitations of sur-
veys, case studies, Internet research, experiments, ethnography, phenom-
enology, grounded theory, action research and mixed methods research. 
Helpful checklists are provided at the end of main sections. Denscombe 
also includes sections on quantitative and qualitative research.
Quantitative and qualitative research
Brett Davies, M. (2007) Doing a Successful Research Project: 
Using Qualitative or Quantitative Methods. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
This useful book considers the differences between qualitative and 
quantitative research in the context of surveys, questionnaires, sam-
pling, interviewing – and much more.
Punch, K.F. (2005) Introduction to Social Research: Quantitative 
and Qualitative Approaches (2nd edn). London: Sage.
Case study
Bassey, M. (2007) Case study, in A.R.J. Briggs and M. Coleman 
(eds) Research Methods in Educational Leadership and 
Management (2nd edn). London: Sage.
Cohen, L., Manion, L. and Morrison, K. (2011) Research Methods 
in Education (7th edn). Abingdon: Routledge.
Yin, R.K. (2014) Case Study Research: Design and Methods (5th 
edn). London: Sage. 
This book covers all aspects of case study method, from definition, 
design and data collection to data analysis in just about every discipline. 
Also covers data computer-assisted coding techniques – and much more. 
Examples of actual case studies are referred to in Yin’s (2012) companion 
volume, Applications of Case Study Research (3rd edn). London: Sage.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

DOING YOUR RESEARCH PROJECT
26
Survey research
Aldridge, A. and Levine, K. (2001) Surveying the Social World: 
Principles and Practice in Survey Research. Buckingham: Open 
University Press.
Fogelman, K. and Comber, C. (2007) Surveys and sampling, in A.R.J. 
Briggs and M. Coleman (eds) Research Methods in Educational 
Leadership and Management (2nd edn). London: Sage.
Roberts, B. (2002) Biographical Research. Buckingham: Open 
University Press. 
Chapter 6 considers oral history; Chapter 7 deals with narrative, in 
particular narrative analysis; Chapter 9 concentrates on biographical 
research.
Sapsford, R. (2006) Survey Research (2nd edn). London: Sage. 
This book provides useful examples of theoretical and practical aspects 
of survey research and includes examples of using materials on the 
Internet.
The experimental style
Hayes, N. (2000) Doing Psychological Research: Gathering and 
Analysing Data. Buckingham: Open University Press. 
Chapter 3, ‘Experiments’, provides useful information about causality 
in experiments.
Ethnography and the ethnographic style 
of research
Brewer, J.D. (2000) Ethnography. Buckingham: Open University 
Press.
Crang, M. and Cook, I. (2007) Doing Ethnographies. London: Sage. 
Crang and Cook base this book on their own fieldwork experience. This 
book is particularly useful for first-time ethnographers.
Lutz, F.W. (1993) Ethnography: the holistic approach to understand-
ing schooling, in M. Hammersley (ed.) Controversies in Classroom 
Research (2nd edn). Buckingham: Open University Press. 
This excellent chapter relates mainly to ethnographic research in educa-
tion, but also has valuable advice about any type of qualitative research.
Neyland, D. (2007) Organizational Ethnography. London: Sage. 
This book takes us through the history of ethnography. Neyland discusses 
a wide range of procedures, from research design to data analysis, and 
provides interesting examples of organizational ethnography at work.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Approaches to Research
27
The grounded theory approach
Charmaz, K. (2011) Grounded theory methods in social jus-
tice research, in N.K. Denzin and Y.S. Lincoln (eds) The Sage 
Handbook of Qualitative Research (4th edn). London: Sage. 
This chapter has several very helpful aspects for a beginner researcher. 
For example, throughout the chapter excerpts from research data illus-
trate the more abstract descriptions of data analysis.
Punch, K.F. (2005) Introduction to Social Research: Quantitative 
and Qualitative Approaches (2nd edn). London: Sage. 
I particularly like Chapter 8 (‘Design in qualitative research’). Section 
8.5, pp. 155–62 provides a brief but useful and clear section on the mean-
ing and analysis of grounded theory. Chapter 8 also includes sections 
on case study, ethnography and other approaches.
Narrative inquiry and stories
Clandinin, D.J. (2007) Handbook of Narrative Inquiry: Mapping 
a Methodology. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
This handbook provides a comprehensive overview of all aspects of nar-
rative inquiry as a methodology. Part IV is particularly helpful in illus-
trating the power of narrative-based research within the professions.
Clough, P. (2002) Narratives and Fictions in Educational 
Research. Maidenhead: Open University Press. 
Peter Clough provides interesting ‘fictional’ stories to demonstrate the 
use of narrative in reporting research, and discusses the potential mer-
its and difficulties of such an approach.
Goodson, I.F. and Sikes, P. (2001) Life History Research in 
Educational Settings: Learning from Lives. Buckingham: Open 
University Press. 
This book explores reasons for the popularity of life-history research in 
education, though many of the examples considered are likely to have 
similar application to researchers in other disciplines.
Roberts, B. (2002) Biographical Research. Buckingham: Open 
University Press. 
Chapter 6 considers oral history; Chapter 7 deals with narrative, in par-
ticular narrative analysis; Chapter 9 concentrates on ethnography and 
biographical research.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

28
2
Planning the 
Project
Key terms
Hypothesis 
33
Supervisor
36
Research diary
40
INTRODUCTION
This chapter provides you with a step-by-step approach to planning your project. 
It begins by identifying the purpose of the study and taking you through the ini-
tial groundwork stages. This includes developing a hypothesis, making your first 
attempts at writing a question and planning a schedule. The crucial supervisor–
student relationship is also covered. In this chapter, you will find:
•	Getting started – pointers for kick-starting your thought processes, generating 
ideas and focusing on a productive and achievable research topic.
•	Advice on identifying the purpose of the study – thinking critically about what 
your research is going to achieve.
•	How to plan your schedule – planning a realistic timetable for your work, and 
sticking to it!
•	A guide to the supervisor–student relationship – understanding the expecta-
tions on both sides, establishing a professional relationship with your supervi-
sor and what to do if things go wrong.
•	Suggestions for keeping a research diary and advice for writing as you go along.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Planning the Project
29
Selecting a topic
Selecting a topic is more difficult than it might seem. With limited 
time at your disposal, there is a temptation to select a topic before the 
groundwork has been done, but try to resist it. Prepare well and you 
will save time later. Your discussions and inquiries will help you to 
select a topic which is likely to be of interest, which you have a good 
chance of completing, which will be worth the effort and which may 
even have some practical application later on.
Many researchers in areas such as education, social science and 
health are directly concerned with the practical outcomes of research 
and, in particular, the improvement of practice in their organization. 
The aim is not only to gain more understanding of the present but 
to use this knowledge to act more effectively in the future. This is 
not to deny the importance of research that may have no immedi-
ate practical outcome. Eggleston provides a timely reminder of the 
importance of longer-term objectives and of the need to look beyond 
current practices. To restrict research to current practices would, 
in his opinion, lay it ‘open to the charge that its sole function was to 
increase the efficiency of the existing system in terms of accepted 
criteria and deny it the opportunity to explore potentially more 
effective alternatives’ (Eggleston 1979: 5).
Clearly there will always be a need to explore potentially more 
effective alternatives to existing provision. But after 100 hours of 
study, you are unlikely to be in a position to make recommenda-
tions for fundamental change to any system. Whatever the size 
and scope of the study, however, you will always be required to 
analyse and evaluate the information you collect and, in some 
cases, you might then be in a position to suggest desirable changes 
in practice.
Discuss possible practical outcomes with your supervisor and 
ask whether the department has any guidelines for the selection 
of topics and the preparation of research briefs. Consider what the 
emphasis of your study is to be. Is applicability to be important or is 
your study to have different aims?
Getting started
You may be assigned a topic to research, but in most cases you will 
be asked to select a topic from a list or to decide on a topic yourself. 
You may have an idea or a particular area of interest that you would 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
30
like to explore. You may have several ideas, all equally interesting. 
Write them down:
Something to do with mature students?
Stress at work?
The effectiveness (or otherwise) of the research methods/introduction 
to using social media in research/introduction to the library course?
Supervision of research projects?
Teamwork in an accident and emergency department?
Questioning in the classroom?
Supervision of placements?
Starting up a business?
The role of social media in reporting the news?
These are all possible topics but before a decision can be made 
about which to select, some work needs to be done. Think about what 
might be involved in each topic and which will be likely to maintain 
your interest. If you become bored with a topic, the time will drag 
unmercifully and the likelihood is that the quality of your research 
will suffer. Talk to colleagues and friends about your initial ideas. 
They may be aware of sensitive aspects of certain topics that could 
cause difficulties at some stage, or they may know of other people 
who have carried out research in one or more of your topics who 
would be willing to talk to you. If you are hoping to carry out the 
research in your own institution, then another very good reason for 
discussing possible topics with colleagues is that you will probably 
be asking for their support and collaboration: early consultation is 
essential if you are to avoid difficulties later.
Google your topic to see if similar research has already been con-
ducted. Although there are other search engines such as Bing and 
Yahoo, I refer to Google throughout this book in recognition of the 
fact that it is the market leader of search engines. Some supervisors 
prefer you to write your research topic in the form of a question and 
I have also found this helpful when carrying out a Google search. 
Try similar keywords or synonyms related to your question. For 
example, for the topic ‘How do houses built before 1900 contribute 
to global warming?’, ‘houses’ could be replaced by ‘homes’ and ‘built 
before 1900’ could become ‘pre-1900’ or ‘in the eighteenth century’.
If you are on Twitter, it may be worth entering keywords related 
to your research topic in the search feature. Yes, it may be a long 
shot, but it may also lead to a contact who is researching the same 
topic as you or who may know someone who is. It is well worth the 
short time that it will take to look through the search results.
If you have a LinkedIn profile, write an update about the 
research you are doing on your home page and ask if anyone else 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Planning the Project
31
is researching the same area. If you are a member of any LinkedIn 
­networks, do the same there too. If you don’t have a LinkedIn 
account or belong to any networks, you might consider setting one 
up to connect with people who are working in the same research 
field. LinkedIn is a network for professional people and will give you 
the opportunity to present your profile as a researcher, to connect 
with other researchers and to share ideas (see Chapter 8).
Try to reduce your list of research topics to a choice of two – one 
likely to be of main interest and the second to fall back on if your 
preliminary investigations throw up problems. Let’s say you decide 
you would be particularly interested in the topic of mature students, 
but that stress comes a close second. It will have become clear to you 
that ‘something to do with mature students’ requires more focusing 
before you can proceed. So far, you have been thinking in general 
terms but now you need to start the process of trying out ideas and 
asking yourself questions.
Start with your first choice (mature students) and begin to make 
notes of your ideas. If you prefer a digital record, you can use the 
note-making tool that may have come free with your smartphone 
or tablet. You can also download a version of Microsoft’s OneNote, 
which is free for web and mobile apps and compatible with both 
iOS and Android, or EverNote, which is the most versatile and 
capable and works on Mac OS, Windows or Blackberry and which 
is free with a storage limit. Apart from text, both platforms can 
store images, web pages, photos and files. OneNote can also store 
audio notes and video clips. Both EverNote and OneNote can be 
accessed offline and have features that enable you to identify 
your notes with tags and organize them into different catego-
ries so that you can easily find them. Write ‘mature students’ in 
the middle of the paper or screen and link to it all the questions, 
doubts, theories and ideas you can think of. Insert arrows, if nec-
essary, to link one idea or query with another. Write quickly and 
write as you think. If you decide to wait until your thoughts are 
in better order, you may (and probably will) have forgotten what 
you thought of first. It doesn’t matter how illegible and disorgan-
ized your chart is at first so long as you can understand your own 
notes. You can put your ideas in order later. This first shot is for 
you, not other people.
The purpose of this exercise is to help you to clarify your 
thoughts and to try to decide what you actually mean by each state-
ment and each question. It will give you ideas about refining the 
topic so that you will not be attempting to do research into every-
thing there is to know about mature students, but into one precise 
aspect of the topic. It will give you clues as to whether this topic 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
32
is likely to be too complex for you to complete in your timescale, 
or whether it might prove impossible because you would require 
access to confidential information that in all probability would not 
be forthcoming.
Your first shot will be a mess but that doesn’t matter. Your sec-
ond attempt will be far more focused and you will be on the way to 
making a fairly firm decision about which aspect of your topic to 
investigate. Incidentally, don’t throw away your first or your sec-
ond attempts until after your research is complete, examined and/or 
your work is published. You may need to refer to first shots and early 
drafts at some stage, so start a ‘reject’ or a ‘trash’ file.
Consider your priorities. For example, if you have decided that 
you would be interested in investigating barriers to learning among 
mature undergraduates, draw together the various items on your 
first and second thoughts charts into a list of questions on your 
selected topics, eliminating overlaps or rejects, and adding any other 
thoughts that occur to you as you write. At this stage, the order and 
wording are not important. You are on the way.
The purpose of the study
Start with the purpose of the study. It might be difficult at this stage 
to provide the exact wording but it’s important to know why you 
want to carry out this research. Think about it. Write down your 
ideas. Ask yourself questions and make a note of any prompts about 
the likely sub-questions. Be critical. The purpose of this study  
is ... what?
•	To identify any barriers to learning for mature students? 
Meaning of ‘barriers’? Why do I need this information and how 
will I find it? Ask students? Ask a sample of students who started 
their degree course straight from school for comparison? Any dif-
ferences? Any differences between mature students who experi-
enced no barriers and those who did?
•	To identify any differences between the performance of mature 
and younger students? How judged? Degree classification of for-
mer students? Would need access to statistics. Any data protection 
issues?
Each question raises other issues. Ask yourself:
•	What do institutions mean by ‘mature’? What do I mean by 
‘mature’ and ‘older’? Need to think of synonyms for ‘mature’. Over 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Planning the Project
33
21, 25, 30, 60? Age at registration? Age at graduation? Need to get 
this sorted. How will I find out? Will I be given access to records? 
Are the records paper-based or online/in databases or both?
•	Which mature students? Those who graduated since the univer-
sity was established? In the last three years? All students in the 
university, in one department, in one subject area, one group? 
Need to think.
•	Which 
institutions/faculties/departments/groups 
are 
to 
be 
included in this investigation? Need to ask supervisor’s advice 
about how to go about obtaining permission. Is one institution/
department/subject area/group sufficient – or feasible? Would it be 
acceptable for me to concentrate on mature students on my course?
•	Has any research been done already on this topic? Need to go to 
the library to find what has already been written about mature 
students and see what those researchers said about the defini-
tion of ‘mature’ – and other things. Supplement work in the 
library with a search on Google and use LinkedIn and Twitter to 
explore whether other researchers have carried out research in 
this area.
These questions will give you and your supervisor or tutor some 
idea of where you are heading. You’re still at the what stage (the 
how stage comes later), but each stage continues to be a process 
of refining and clarifying so that you end with a list of questions, 
tasks or objectives that you can ask, perform or examine. These 
will become what Laws et  al. (2013: 52) describe as researchable 
questions, which will take you a major step forward in the planning 
of your project.
Hypotheses, objectives and researchable 
questions
Many research projects begin with the statement of a hypothesis, 
defined by Verma and Beard as:
“
A tentative proposition which is subject to verification through 
subsequent investigation. It may also be seen as the guide to the 
researcher in that it depicts and describes the method to be followed in 
studying the problem. In many cases hypotheses are hunches that the 
researcher has about the existence of relationship between variables."
(Verma and Beard 1981: 184)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
34
This definition is taken a step further by Medawar, who writes:
“
All advances in scientific understanding, at every level, begin with a 
speculative adventure, an imaginative preconception of what might be 
true – a preconception which always, and necessarily, goes a little way 
(sometimes a long way) beyond anything which we have logical or 
factual authority to believe in. It is the invention of a possible world, or 
of a tiny fraction of that world. The conjecture is then exposed to 
criticism to find out whether or not that imagined world is anything like 
the real one. Scientific reasoning is therefore at all levels an interaction 
between two episodes of thought – a dialogue between two voices, the 
one imaginative and the other critical; a dialogue, if you like, between 
the possible and the actual, between proposal and disposal, conjecture 
and criticism, between what might be true and what is in fact the case."
(Medawar 1972: 22)
Thus hypotheses make statements about relations between variables 
and provide a guide to the researcher as to how the original hunch 
might be tested. If we hypothesize, because our conjecture suggests 
it may be so, that age (one variable) has an influence on degree 
results (another variable), then we can attempt to find out whether 
that is the case – at least among the individuals in our sample. The 
results of the research will either support the hypothesis (that age 
does have an influence on degree results) or will not support it (age 
has no influence on degree results).
Small-scale projects of the kind discussed in this book will not 
require statistical testing of hypotheses often required in large-scale 
sample surveys. Unless your supervisor advises otherwise, a precise 
statement of objectives and a list of researchable questions are gen-
erally sufficient. The important point is not so much whether there is 
a hypothesis, but whether you have carefully thought about what is 
and what is not worth investigating. It may be permissible to make 
modifications to objectives or changes to the questions as the study 
proceeds, but that does not obviate the need to identify exactly what 
you plan to do at the outset. Until that stage has been achieved, it is 
not possible to consider appropriate methods of data collection, so 
it’s now time to check the following items.
Working title and the project outline
Select a working title – ‘Barriers to learning’ or ‘Mature students’? 
Either will do for the time being. You’re almost ready to produce 
the project outline for discussion with your supervisor, but just go 
through the stages once again:
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Planning the Project
35
•	Are you clear about the purpose of the study? Are you sure about 
it? Do you think it’s really worth doing?
•	Have you decided on the focus of the study?
•	You have not yet identified your sample. Discussion with supervi-
sor required and then permissions sought. You’re not there yet.
•	You’ve been through all your key questions (several times now) 
and know what your priorities are. There will almost certainly be 
adjustments as the research continues, but never mind.
•	You have begun to consider what information you might need to 
be in a position to answer your questions. More work needed, but 
you’ve made a start.
•	You have not yet begun to consider how you might obtain this 
information, but once the focusing is finished, you can begin to 
consider possible ways and means. Remember that you can’t 
assume you will be allowed to interview people or give them a 
questionnaire to answer. You have to clear official channels and 
obtain permission.
There are still some decisions to be made, but you’re ready to pro-
duce the first draft of your project outline for discussion with your 
supervisor. Before you do, think about your submission date. Think 
about time. What are your chances of completing your provisional 
plan in your allocated time? You are not going to be living in isolation 
with only a laptop and your mobile for company for the duration of 
your research, away from work commitments, family responsibilities 
and holidays. They all need to be taken into account in your time plan. 
I make plans all the time and I live by lists. I don’t always succeed in 
keeping to them, but at least their presence is enough to remind me 
about what still needs to be done and to nag me when I am thinking 
about all the things I’d rather do than get back to the writing.
Timing
There is never enough time to do all the work that appears to be 
essential to do a thorough job, but if you have a handover date, then 
somehow the work has to be completed in the specified time. It is 
unlikely you will be able to keep rigidly to a timetable, but some 
attempt should be made to devise a schedule so that you can check 
progress periodically and, if necessary, force yourself to move from 
one stage of the research to the next.
If you have to complete more than one project in the year, it is 
particularly important to produce a list or a chart indicating the 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
36
stage at which all data should have been collected, analysed and 
drafts produced. Delay on one project means that the timing for the 
second and third will be upset. It is immaterial whether you produce 
a list or a chart, but some attempt at planning progress should be 
attempted.
One of the most common reasons for falling behind is that read-
ing and associated research takes longer than anticipated. Books 
and articles have to be located, and the temptation to read just one 
more book or to do one more search online is strong. At some stage 
a decision has to be made to stop reading and researching and start 
writing, no matter how inadequate the coverage of the subject is. 
Forcing yourself to move on is a discipline that has to be learnt. Keep 
in touch with your supervisor about progress. If things go wrong 
and you are held up on one stage, there may be other ways of over-
coming the problem. Talk about it. Ask for help and advice before you 
become weeks out of phase with your timetable, so that you have a 
chance of amending your original project plan.
The project outline is for guidance only. If subsequent events indi-
cate that it would be better to ask different questions and even to 
have a different aim, then change while there is time. You have to 
work to the date specified by the institution, and your supervisor 
and external examiner will understand that.
Make sure that you draw up a timetable for your 
research and put deadlines into your calendar. 
Don’t underestimate the amount of time that read-
ing and background research will take. Try to 
stick to your timetable. If a task takes longer than 
you thought, reset your deadlines and work to the 
new timetable.
Supervision
I cannot emphasize enough the importance of establishing a good 
working relationship with your supervisor. Few researchers, inexpe-
rienced and experienced, can go it alone and expect to produce qual-
ity research. There are exceptions of course – aren’t there always? 
Somebody told me once about a PhD student who made it clear that 
he did not need a supervisor and had no intention of attending any 
research tutorials. He was advised that this would be very unwise 
and that his chances of succeeding without support were very slight. 
He persisted and eventually submitted a thesis that proved to be a 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Planning the Project
37
work of outstanding quality and depth. His external examiner had no 
doubt in recommending that it was a clear pass. There is a problem 
with this approach, namely that few people can aspire to such single-
mindedness and brilliance. Most of us really do need a supervisor in 
whom we have confidence, with whom we can share our thinking, 
who is willing to advise and to give an honest view about our drafts, 
and that applies regardless of whether we are working on a 100-hour 
project, an undergraduate or a postgraduate degree.
Student–supervisor relationships
I have occasionally heard students complain that they are getting a 
raw deal from their supervisors, and in some cases they may have 
been right – though not always. Supervisors are only human. Most 
will also be lecturing, supervising other students and carrying out 
their own research. Time is generally in short supply and some 
friends who are heavily committed with supervision have suggested 
to me that I give the impression that they should be available at all 
hours to see students on demand who might wish to discuss any 
aspect of their work, regardless of the time of day, the time involved 
and the frequency of such requests. Not so. A reasonable balance has 
to be struck, though I realize that the big question is what ‘reason-
able’ means to both sides.
Perhaps, not surprisingly, interviews with students and with 
supervisors reveal a wide variation in supervisory practice (Bell 
1996; Phillips and Pugh 2000). The majority of students appear to 
have enjoyed very positive relationships with supervisors. Their 
comments were on the lines of ‘very helpful’; ‘taught me what 
research was all about’; ‘could not have done this without her’; and 
‘he made me believe I could do it, saw me through the bad times, read 
all my drafts carefully, was straight about what I had written and 
what more needed to be done’. However, when things went wrong, 
they went badly wrong, and students’ comments were on the lines of 
‘could never get hold of him’; ‘never returned my calls’; ‘made me feel 
inadequate’; ‘showed no signs of having read my drafts’; ‘didn’t seem 
to feel she had any responsibility for advising about my approach’; 
‘was only willing to see me once a term for a timetabled 20 minutes. 
He was always late but always finished on time. I had to travel 100 
miles for these 10 minute meetings’; and ‘went on study leave, never 
told me, and no-one was allocated to “take me over” at a crucial time 
in my research when I really needed help’.
Some of the supervisors mounted a vigorous defence. Regular tel-
ephone calls at 11 pm or later in spite of repeated requests not to call 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
38
after 9 pm so exasperated one supervisor that he refused to release 
his number to his next batch of tutees. There were complaints about 
students not turning up for arranged meetings; demands for drafts 
to be read overnight; the assumption that supervisors should always 
be in their room and available for consultation whenever they were 
needed, and so on.
The point of raising these issues here is not to lay blame one way 
or the other but, rather, to consider ways of avoiding conflict if at 
all possible, and, only if reason does not prevail, to consider ways of 
resolving difficult situations.
Codes of practice for supervision
All universities now have (or should have) a code of practice for 
supervision. However, providing such a code is one thing, ensuring 
that everyone involved follows the guidelines is quite another. You 
should certainly be able to see the code of your university or organi-
zation in order to know what your and your supervisor’s rights and 
responsibilities are. Some universities automatically provide a copy 
for students; others do not.
Most codes advise that supervisors and students should at an 
early stage clarify what ‘supervision’ actually means and what is 
reasonable for both to expect. Even where efforts are made to clar-
ify rights and responsibilities, supervisor–student relationships do 
occasionally break down and if all efforts to improve the position 
fail, then the only thing to do is to request a change before depres-
sion and a feeling of hopelessness take over.
Change of supervisor
Achieving a satisfactory change may not be as easy as it might seem. 
One part-time student who was not getting on with her supervisor 
was desperate to change but the department was unable to find 
another supervisor who was willing to accept her. Having drawn a 
blank after following all the laid-down procedures, she decided to 
take action herself. She stood at the door of the postgraduate stu-
dents’ common room one lunch time and shouted, ‘Is anybody here 
doing historical research?’ When several hands went up, she asked 
what they thought of their supervisors and what their specialisms 
were. In desperation, she pleaded for an interview with the super-
visor deemed by his students to be ‘friendly, helpful, knowledge-
able but tough’ and who eventually, though somewhat reluctantly, 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Planning the Project
39
agreed to take her on. They got on well and three years later she was 
awarded her PhD. Her advice to students in a similar position was:
If you have justifiable concerns, talk about them and try to sort them 
informally. If that approach fails, go through the formal channels. In my 
case, neither approach produced the desired changes so I decided I had 
to take matters into my own hands. I didn’t like doing what I did but I 
would never have completed with the first supervisor. He seemed to 
leave me feeling that I wasn’t intellectually up to the research.
Most of the time, everything works well and supervisors are as anx-
ious as their students that they should succeed, but if things go badly 
wrong, state your case clearly and fairly and don’t give in.
Keeping records of supervisory tutorials
I firmly believe that records of supervisory tutorials should be kept 
by supervisors and by research students. Many of my colleagues 
disagree and claim this would be ‘just another piece of unnecessary 
bureaucracy’. I am not speaking here of a large document that would 
require days, if not weeks, to produce, but a one-page form that has 
space for the date of the tutorial, a (very) brief note of issues dis-
cussed, targets set, if any, summary of comments given on drafts 
and on the general progress of the research, advice given and taken 
(or not taken) and the proposed date of the next meeting. Five min-
utes maximum at the end of the tutorial with a copy for the supervi-
sor and for the student. If you create the form in Google Docs within 
Google Drive and editing permission is given to your supervisor, 
you can both edit the form online and access it from any browser. 
Changes are automatically saved, almost as quickly as either party 
makes them. This provides a useful record and reminder about what 
was said, promised and agreed (or disagreed), and acts as a log of 
progress. However, it also serves another purpose. Disputes have 
increased and it is in the interests of supervisors and students that 
there should be such an agreed record. Keeping records is not just 
another attempt at imposing yet another level of useless bureau-
cracy. It is good professional practice. If your supervisor considers 
such a record is unnecessary, keep your own.
Keep a dated record of your supervision ses-
sions. Keep it to one side of A4 and summarize 
the actions you need to take before you meet your 
supervisor again.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
40
The research experience
At its best, the supervisor–student relationship will ensure that your 
research experience is demanding, but also valuable, enjoyable and 
will result in the successful completion of your investigation – on 
time. As I have suggested earlier, only isolationist geniuses with 
plenty of time, a first-class library at their disposal and extensive 
Google search experience are likely to succeed – and there are not 
many geniuses around. Most of us need help, encouragement and 
supervisor expertise. As many first-time and experienced research-
ers have testified, a good supervisor is like gold dust, and by far the 
most valuable resource we have.
Writing as you go along and 
the research diary
Chapter 14, ‘Writing the report’, considers what should be included 
in the final report, but if you wait until the final stage before you 
begin to write, you will be in trouble. Writing should be ongoing, 
starting with your planning and topic selection and from then on, as 
you go along. Start with a personal research diary, research log or 
research notebook. This can be a hard copy notebook or your notes 
can be in digital form – whichever works best for you. Everyone has 
different ideas about what should go in and what should be left out. 
Keep your notebook with you at all times, or if you are working digi-
tally, save your research diary file to whichever device you carry 
with you, and back it up elsewhere too. This document will track the 
progress of your research and be invaluable when you are describing 
the process of your research in your final report. Alternatively, use 
the note-making app or voice-recording tool on your Smartphone 
to make a record of your research, including any meetings that you 
attend with your supervisor or research participants. Don’t forget to 
ask permission to make a recording and be prepared to say how you 
will guarantee its confidentiality.
I have no difficulty in deciding what should go into my research 
notes because I include everything (or almost everything). Rough 
notes, brief summaries of certain sections, target dates (and targets 
achieved or not achieved), dates of interviews, dates questionnaires 
were distributed (and returned). Names and telephone numbers 
of people I have spoken to or met. Records of names, addresses, 
­telephone numbers, email addresses, good ideas I had in the middle 
of the night when I couldn’t sleep, something I remembered when 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Planning the Project
41
Planning the Project Checklist
 
1.  Draw up a shortlist 
of topics.
Talk to colleagues, fellow 
students – anyone who 
will listen. Consult library 
catalogues, but briefly. Google 
your topic by asking questions 
about it. Bookmark interesting 
pages.
Q
2.  Decide on a shortlist 
of two.
Select your first choice and 
keep the second in mind in 
case your first choice proves 
to be too difficult or not 
interesting enough.
Q
I was on a bus. Difficulties experienced, advice to myself not to do 
something in this or that way again! A reminder about something 
I must ask the librarian. A note about how I might resolve the prob-
lem of ... something or other. If I hadn’t made a note of it at that time, 
in all probability I would have forgotten it the next day. A reference 
(new to me) that someone told me about when I was having a sand-
wich in the cafe. The times I left home to see someone and the times 
I returned, if I remember.
Every entry with a date. Do this tomorrow . . . Write this up before 
Thursday! Transfer this reference to the main list of references. 
I recall that one student considered my way of jotting down every-
thing to be disorganized. I suppose it is, but I do flag or highlight 
items that need to be given further thought and, as I’ve already said 
and will continue to say throughout this book, we all have our own 
ways of working, so adopt ways of doing things that seem to work 
for you. As far as I’m concerned, the only rule is that you start your 
diary as soon as you start your research, keep it going and get into 
the habit of writing up small portions (with your comments) as you 
go along. Writing starts here and not when you are at the stage of 
writing the final report.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
42
  3.  Make a list of first –  
and second – 
thoughts, questions 
or produce a chart or 
mind-map of ideas, 
possible problems –  
anything you can 
think of.
This is for your eyes only. 
The purpose is to help you to 
clarify your thoughts about 
which aspects of the topic 
are of particular interest or 
importance.
Q
  4.  Select the precise 
focus of your study.
You can’t do everything, so 
you need to be clear about 
which aspect of the general 
topic you wish to investigate. 
Is your topic likely to be worth 
investigating? Think about 
it. The last thing you want is 
to be stuck with a topic that’s 
going nowhere and which 
bores you to distraction.
Q
  5.  Make sure you 
are clear about 
the purpose of the 
study.
Give some thought to your 
sample. You need to consult 
your supervisor about which 
individuals or groups might be 
included.
Q
6  .  Go back to your 
charts and lists of 
questions, delete 
any items which do 
not relate to your 
selected topic, add 
others which do, 
eliminate overlap 
and produce a 
revised list of key 
questions.
You are aiming to produce 
researchable questions. 
Watch your language! Are 
you absolutely clear about 
the meaning of the words you 
use. Words can mean different 
things to different people.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Planning the Project
43
  7.  Draw up an initial 
project outline. 
Check that you 
are clear about 
the purpose and 
focus of your study, 
have identified key 
questions, know 
what information 
you will require and 
have thought about 
how you might 
obtain it.
Check your submission date. 
Do you have enough time to 
carry out the research you 
have outlined – and to submit 
on time?
Q
  8.  Consult your 
supervisor at the 
stage of selecting 
a topic and after 
drawing up a 
project outline.
You don’t want to get too 
far down the research road 
before you check that all is 
well. Make sure you discuss a 
suitable sample and find out 
who you need to approach for 
permissions.
Q
  9.  It’s best to know 
about your 
institution’s code 
of practice for 
supervision and 
what to do if the 
relationship with 
your supervisor 
breaks down.
Do your best to clarify 
any unclear areas of 
supervisor/student rights and 
responsibilities.
Q
10.  Keep a brief 
record of what has 
been discussed, 
and agreed in 
supervisory 
tutorials.
It will help to remind you 
about what tasks and targets 
have been agreed.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
44
11.  Remember that a 
good supervisor is 
like gold dust and 
by far the most 
valuable resource 
you have, so don’t 
make unreasonable 
demands. If you’re 
asked not to 
phone after 9 pm, 
please make sure 
you don’t.
Unfortunately, very 
occasionally supervisor–
student relationships break 
down. If you have justifiable 
concerns, try to talk about 
them and to sort out problems. 
If that fails, go through formal 
channels, state your case 
clearly and fairly and, if that 
fails, request a change.
Q
12.  From the start of 
your research, get 
into the habit of 
writing everything 
down or making 
electronic notes or 
voice recordings.
And don’t throw away 
or delete your drafts or 
recordings until your 
investigation has been 
submitted, assessed and/or 
published. You never know 
when you might need to refer 
to them.
Q
13.  Start a research 
diary as soon as 
you start your 
research.
And get into the habit of 
writing up small sections as 
you go along. Writing begins 
here, rather than when you 
reach the stage of writing the 
report.
Q
Further reading
Brett Davies, M. (2007) Doing a Successful Research Project: 
Using Qualitative or Quantitative Methods. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Brett Davies considers how to draw up a personal roadmap, planning 
and analysing qualitative data, sampling – and much more.
Cryer, P. (2006) The Research Student’s Guide to Success (3rd 
edn). Maidenhead: Open University Press. 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Planning the Project
45
This book looks at the roles and responsibilities of supervisors and of 
research students and provides guidance about what to do if things do 
not go well.
Delamont, S., Atkinson, P. and Parry, O. (2004) Supervising the 
Doctorate: A Guide to Success. Maidenhead: Open University 
Press. 
This is a book written for supervisors, but it is also full of helpful ideas 
and advice for students.
Eley, A. and Jennings, R. (2005) Effective Postgraduate 
Supervision: Improving the Student–Supervisor Relationship. 
Maidenhead: Open University Press. 
The authors discuss the most frequently encountered difficulties in the 
student–supervisor relationship and offer realistic solutions to difficul-
ties in 30 cases.
Fielding, N.G., Lee, R.M. and Blank, G. (2008) The Sage Handbook 
of Online Research Methods. London: Sage. 
This handbook concentrates on online social research methods and the 
significance of the Internet as a research medium, considering research 
design, online surveys and the Internet as an archival resource.
Laws, S. with Harper, C. and Marcus, R. (2013) Research for 
Development: A Practical Guide (2nd edn). London: Sage. 
Chapter 5 provides guidance about the processes involved in planning 
research, writing the brief, defining the research process, setting the 
research questions and hypothesis testing.
Rugg, G. and Petre, M. (2006) A Gentle Guide to Research 
Methods. Maidenhead: Open University Press. 
This book covers a wide range of topics, including research design, data 
collection methods, statistics and academic writing – all with helpful 
examples.
Wolcott, H.F. (2009) Writing Up Qualitative Research (3rd edn). 
London: Sage. 
Everything Wolcott has written is worth reading; his advice is excellent 
and if you can get hold of his book, read it from cover to cover! He is 
particularly good, as the title of this book indicates, on writing but also 
on planning.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

46
3
Ethics and 
Integrity in 
Research
INTRODUCTION
This chapter considers the many ethical and moral dimensions involved in con-
ducting a research project. It is your responsibility as a researcher to make sure 
that your project does not breach any legal boundaries and that it adheres to 
accepted ethical standards. This chapter will cover the following:
•	Ensuring you follow any ethical guidelines drawn up by your institution and 
research setting, and that you understand your ethical responsibilities as a 
researcher.
•	How to handle research contracts, codes of practice, protocols and the princi-
ple of informed consent.
•	Where appropriate, taking account of the demands of ethics committees and 
preparing to meet their requirements.
•	Understanding the meaning of ‘confidentiality’ and ‘anonymity’ and how they 
apply to the context in which you are carrying out your research. The applica-
tion of these concepts to the online environment.
•	Practical considerations about ethics in practice, including a case study that 
describes how the contributing author, Stephen Waters, tackled his first 
research project and the ethical issues he faced.
•	Understanding the concept of intellectual property rights and the ethical and 
legal obligations relating to the ownership of ideas.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Ethics and Integrity in Research
47
It was once possible to plan and carry out a small piece of research 
with the permission of a head of department, principal of a college, 
head teacher of a school or an administrator without having to go 
through formal channels. The informal route will still apply for many 
100-hour studies as long as whoever is in charge is convinced of 
your integrity and of the worth of your research. In most cases, your 
supervisor will be aware of any restrictions or legal requirements 
relating to your research, and will ensure that you have appropriate 
advice about procedures well before you begin to plan your data col-
lection. However, you may not always be able to rely on your super-
visor’s knowledge. For example, if you work in one organization but 
are supervised somewhere else, the supervisor may not know what 
your organization’s requirements are. If you live in Singapore or 
Kuala Lumpur but are registered for a higher degree in an Australian 
or British university, your supervisor may have no idea at all about 
the local rules, so it will be up to you to find out what is required. In 
particular, if you have any doubts about the ethics of your proposal, 
make sure you consult as widely as you can, discuss your concerns 
and do not proceed if you or your advisers have any misgivings.
Research contracts, codes of practice, 
protocols and the principle of informed 
consent
There is nothing new about research contracts and ethical guide-
lines. They have all been used in a variety of ways for many years. 
They may have been called something different and their use was on 
a less formal basis than now, but they existed. Lutz, writing about 
ethnographic research, advises researchers that:
“
it is undoubtedly necessary for every ethnographer to establish some 
type of ‘contract’ with the society to be studied. Such a ‘contract’ may 
include specifications about what records may and may not be examined; 
where the ethnographer may or may not go, when, and under what 
circumstances; which meetings may be attended and which are closed; 
Key terms
Protocol
48
Informed consent
48
Ethics committees
49
Confidentiality
51
Anonymity
51
Research diary
54
Intellectual property
59
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
48
how long the researcher will stay in the field; who (if anyone) has access 
to field notes, and even who has the right to review and/or approve the 
ethnography and its analysis prior to publication, or under what 
circumstances they may or may not be published at all."(Lutz 1986: 114)
This is good advice – but it is ‘advice’, not a ‘requirement’. Today, many 
organizations and professional bodies, including the Medical Research 
Council, the Nursing and Midwifery Council, the British Sociological 
Association and the General Medical Council to name a few – have 
gone a long way in formalizing procedures and have produced their 
own ethical guidelines, research contracts, codes of practice and pro-
tocols, addressing such issues as deception regarding the purpose of 
investigations, encroachment on privacy, confidentiality, safety, care 
needed when research involves children – and much more.
Hart and Bond (1995: 198–201), writing about action research in 
health and social care, provide examples of different types of codes 
of practice or protocols that require researchers to ensure that par-
ticipants are fully aware of the purpose of the research and under-
stand their rights. Some of these are to be read out at the start of an 
interview, explaining that participation is voluntary, that participants 
are free to refuse to answer any questions and can withdraw from the 
interview at any time. Most promise confidentiality and anonymity, 
but as will be seen later in this chapter, it may be more difficult to ful-
fil such promises than might at first have been thought. Some suggest 
that respondents should be asked to sign a copy of the protocol form 
before the interview begins, indicating that they understand and agree 
to all the conditions. However, Hart and Bond argue that in their view:
“
It is not sufficient for the interviewer simply to read it [the protocol] 
out and then expect the respondent to sign ... The respondent might 
justifiably feel anxious about signing anything, particularly at an early 
stage when the interviewer may be unknown to him or her. In our view it 
would be better to give the respondent time to read and re-read the 
protocol for himself or herself at his or her own pace, and to negotiate any 
additions or changes to it with the researcher. We would also recommend 
that the respondent should have a signed copy of the form as a record."
(Hart and Bond 1995: 199)
This is sound advice. In my view, respondents should never be 
expected to sign any protocol form unless they have had time to read 
and consider the implications. All researchers will be aiming at the 
principle of informed consent, which requires careful preparation 
involving explanation and consultation before any data collecting 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Ethics and Integrity in Research
49
begins (Oliver 2003: 28–30). If an interview is being conducted online, 
for example using Skype or other video conferencing software, the 
contract should have been sent in advance and the participant’s agree-
ment secured. If a signature is necessary, Docusign, electronic signa-
ture software, can be used to sign and return the contract online.
Bowling (2002: 157) also makes what is to me is an important and 
rarely considered point – namely, that in addition to ensuring that 
participants know exactly what will be involved in the research, 
the informed consent procedure ‘reduces the legal liability of the 
researcher’. In these litigious times, it is as well to be sure you have 
done everything, not only to ensure participants’ rights but also your 
own position.
Blaxter and colleagues summarize the principles of research  
ethics as follows:
“
Research ethics is about being clear about the nature of the agreement 
you have entered into with your research subjects or contacts. This is why 
contracts can be a useful device. Ethical research involves getting the 
informed consent of those you are going to interview, question, observe 
or take materials from. It involves reaching agreements about the uses of 
this data, and how its analysis will be reported and disseminated. And it 
is about keeping to such agreements when they have been reached."
(Blaxter et al. 2006: 158–9)
Ethics committees
Ethics committees play an important part in ensuring that no 
badly designed or harmful research is permitted. Darlington and 
Scott consider they have:
“
an important gatekeeping role in all research involving human 
subjects and are likely to be extra vigilant in their consideration of 
proposals for research concerning any potentially vulnerable groups of 
people. Ethics committees have a duty to consider all possible sources 
of harm and satisfy themselves that the researcher has thought through 
all the relevant issues prior to granting permission to proceed."
(Darlington and Scott 2002: 22–3)
Their gatekeeping role is not always welcomed. Reason and Bradbury 
reported some of the experiences of one of the researchers in the 
Midwives’ Action Research Group (MARG). She stated that ‘the 
Ethics Committee not only seems to fulfill an ethical role but also 
a gate-keeping role in hindering would-be researchers whose work 
doesn’t fit the empirical-analytic framework and also which might 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
50
reveal unpleasant truths about the setting’ (Reason and Bradbury 
2001: 295). The researcher felt that the committee members were try-
ing to block her research, and asked ‘What gives them the right to 
tell me which women I can or cannot have a conversation with on a 
voluntary basis for my research? Do they have a legal right? Or is it 
assumed power?’ Well, they certainly have a right to tell researchers 
what they can do and what they can’t. I don’t know whether they 
are legal rights but ethics committees are powerful and if your sub-
mission is rejected, you won’t be allowed to do the research at all. 
Happily, I have never known or heard of reports of ethics committees 
trying to block research. It’s possible that some committee members 
may sometimes appear to be ... well, perhaps, rather overzealous in 
their requirements – at least to researchers who have been required 
to resubmit – but they have a duty to ensure that no sloppy, damag-
ing or illegal research is allowed to slip through, and their require-
ments have to be met.
One complaint frequently levelled at ethics and research com-
mittees is the time taken to respond to submissions. Bowling (2002: 
158) reports that researchers have been known to wait three to six 
months before receiving approval to proceed. Admittedly these 
delays have generally related to medical or other health-related top-
ics where requirements are, and no doubt should be, stringent, but 
few committees are speedy – at least, as far as anxious researchers 
are concerned. They may meet infrequently but dates of meetings 
are generally known in advance and researchers will invariably 
have to submit applications well ahead of those dates. Everything 
takes time, so be aware of dates, and of possible delays.
These requirements and delays may be alarming if you are work-
ing on a 100-hour project, but unless you are concerned with medi-
cal or health-related research, you may not always be required to 
go through the ethics committee procedures. However, you will still 
have to conform to whatever vetting procedures your own organi-
zation, department and profession require, so make sure you know 
what they are.
Ethics and research committees often do their best to fast-track 
approval procedures for small studies but, even so, they will never 
rubber stamp a badly prepared submission, nor should they, so do 
your best to get your submission right. It’s unlikely your first draft 
will be good enough, so make sure your supervisor sees it, take 
advice, obtain any guidelines provided by the committees and meet 
their requirements. Of course, there may be no requirements to 
submit anything to a committee. It may be quite sufficient if your 
supervisor gives you approval to proceed, but if you do find you 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Ethics and Integrity in Research
51
have to wait for approval, there is a lot you can do, such as reading 
about and around your topic, carrying out a Google search, mak-
ing notes, trying out different types of indexing and cataloguing 
systems, and thinking about ways in which your findings might 
become part of your literature review. You might spend time famil-
iarizing yourself with your institution’s library database, recording 
references and, all being well, considering the possible design of 
some of your proposed data collection instruments. What you can’t 
do is begin to collect data and contact participants before written 
approval is received.
Confidentiality and anonymity
Not surprisingly, all the ‘informed consent’ statements and ethical 
guidelines I have seen mention confidentiality and anonymity. We 
all know what they mean, don’t we? Well, do we? Is my ‘confidenti-
ality’ likely to mean the same as yours? I regret to say that I have 
come across many broken promises of confidentiality and anonym-
ity in research projects, and imprecision about what is meant by both 
terms can result in serious misunderstandings between researchers 
and participants. So, if you say that participants will be anonymous, 
then under no circumstances can they be identified. If you promise 
confidentiality, decide what you mean by that in the context of your 
investigation.
Sapsford and Abbott, writing about unstructured interviewing, 
remind us that ‘interviewing is intrusive, but having your personal 
details splashed in identifiable form across a research project is 
even more intrusive’. They make it clear that in their view ‘confi-
dentiality is a promise that you will not be identified or presented 
in identifiable form, while anonymity is a promise that even the 
researcher will not be able to tell which responses came from 
which respondents’ (Sapsford and Abbott 1996: 318–19). These def-
initions are sound and, with appropriate acknowledgement, could 
be adopted in your own research. The implications of each can 
be significant. I discuss some of the issues in ‘Selecting methods 
of data collection’ in Part II of this book, but they are sufficiently 
important to be raised here also. If you promise anonymity to 
questionnaire respondents, then, as Sapsford and Abbott point out, 
that means that no one, including you, will know who has com-
pleted the questionnaire. As far as I am concerned, this means that 
no follow-up letters can be sent, no questionnaires can have coded 
numbers or symbols so that responses can be identified, and no 
other sneaky tricks of any kind can be used. If you feel you have to 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
52
have the option of sending follow-up letters, then you must qualify 
your definition to respondents by saying something along the lines 
of, ‘By “anonymity” in the context of this study, I mean that no 
one will see (your completed questionnaire/interview transcript) 
except me and all questionnaires and records will be shredded or 
deleted once the research is completed.’ Is that what you mean? 
Think about it.
There may also be difficulties regarding confidentiality. If 
in your report you speak about the Director of Resources or the 
Head of English, you are immediately identifying the individual 
concerned. If you invent a pseudonym or a code, it might still be 
easy for readers who are in the know to identify the individual 
or institution concerned. I recall the anger of one school princi-
pal who was guaranteed confidentiality for his school but the way 
the report was written made it clear to the local community which 
school it was. No one minds being identified if the report is com-
plimentary, but this particular principal was head of a school in 
an area of high deprivation that for some years had had a reputa-
tion for truancy and indifferent examination results. Great strides 
had been made and many improvements achieved in the two years 
before the research but, of course, long-term improvement takes 
time. His anger centred on the fact that he had been promised that 
the report would be written in such a way as to make it impossible 
for an individual school to be identified. His comment was that if 
any researcher came anywhere near his school in the future, they 
would be shown the door. So, watch your language and don’t prom-
ise anything you can’t deliver.
Safeguarding confidentiality and anonymity 
if disseminating information online
From time to time, a news story breaks about the loss of data – on a 
mislaid laptop or memory stick for example, or in confidential docu-
ments found in a bin. Most of us have, at one time or another, been 
rather careless. We might even have been unaware of the existence 
of rules and regulations relating to the security and dissemination 
of electronic data – or by any other method, come to that. Common 
courtesy and common sense might have seemed enough, but not 
any more. Now you must be fully aware of and observe individuals’ 
rights of privacy in any research, in particular with respect to the 
storage, processing and dissemination of personal data.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Ethics and Integrity in Research
53
As always, first check what guidelines are provided by your 
department and/or institution. It won’t be sufficient to say that your 
supervisor, or someone else, told you it would be okay if you did that 
or did not do the other. You must obtain a copy of the guidelines and 
consult your supervisor if any item is unclear or if you have any que-
ries about the interpretation of any item.
If you have time, particularly if you are involved in postgraduate 
research, it might also be helpful to consult any available published 
reports relating to the way information has been used in different 
cases. You might wish to consult the 1997 report of the Caldicott 
Committee review of patient-identifiable information. The review was 
commissioned because of concern about ways in which data about 
patients was used in the National Health Service (NHS) in England 
and Wales and the use of information technology to disseminate infor-
mation. This is a very large, thorough and well-conducted review. 
Eighty-six flows of patient-identifiable information were mapped dur-
ing the review and sixteen recommendations for the improvement 
of practice produced. It is easy to see how information stored elec-
tronically and transferred to other departments, hospitals or general 
practitioner (GP) clinics might easily become available to individuals 
and organizations who have no right to that information. The same 
concern might also be expressed about the way companies, hospitals, 
universities and individuals disseminate information about employ-
ees, students and, in the case of research programmes, participants – 
unless steps are taken to ensure no individual can be identified. If 
you have any concerns about maintaining the confidentiality of your 
participants, I recommend that you read this and more recent reports.
You should also be aware of the relevant sections of the Freedom 
of Information and Data Protection Acts, and the many clauses that 
relate to individuals’ right to privacy and the processing of personal 
data. I am confident your supervisor will be able to advise you and to 
direct you to the appropriate documentation. However, if he or she is 
not available, ask around and if you are told that no guidelines exist, 
you might be asking the wrong person, so ask someone else. Ask 
your specialist and/or support librarian. Ask other students. Even 
if helpful guidelines do exist, and particularly if you are concerned 
with an extensive review or even a doctoral study, you may feel you 
need more detailed information provided by these two very detailed 
Acts. So, Google them and consult the ‘processing of sensitive data’ 
sections of the Freedom of Information and Data Protection Acts 
on the Internet or insert questions you would like answered in the 
search box.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
54
If you decide you need more subject-specific information, you 
might see what your specialist research council has to offer. The 
Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC), for example, pro-
duces invaluable information and guidance about participants’ rights 
and your responsibilities. I mention the ESRC because this is the 
area in which I work, but your research council might be the Medical 
Research Council, the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research 
Council, the Natural Environment Research Council, the Arts and 
Humanities Research Council – or whichever council relates most 
closely to your own topic.
The collection, storage, security and dissemina-
tion of data are your responsibility. You must 
carry out your research within the conditions of 
the Data Protection Act (http://www.open.gov.uk/
dpr/dprhome.htm) and any other guidelines that 
relate to the people or organizations you are col-
lecting information about.
Make a note in your research diary of any items you wish to 
return to later, but if you are working on a 100-hour project, then 100 
hours, more or less, is all the time you have. Avoid becoming side-
tracked by the wealth of research results that a Google search will 
unearth. Focus on those that are relevant to your research study and 
bookmark the page or make a note of the URL. Provided that you 
have used keywords effectively to focus your search, most search 
results that are relevant will be found on the first page, one of the 
main reasons why most people do not look beyond it. Search results 
that are within shaded boxes at the top of the first page and results 
on the right-hand side of the page are paid advertising (i.e. Google 
has been paid to rank the advert as high as possible via Google 
Adwords). Each time someone clicks on these adverts, the business 
or organization they promote pays Google. This is known as Pay-
per-Click (PPC). These search results may be the most relevant for 
your research study, or they may not. You will need to decide this 
for yourself when you open them to read the content. Even if you 
are working on a three-year full-time PhD programme, you will 
only have three years, not the rest of your life, so be ruthless about 
rejecting search results that don’t relate closely to the data or infor-
mation you are hoping to find in your study. Remember also that 
an article found in a Google search will have references to related 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Ethics and Integrity in Research
55
studies – some of those references may be what you are looking for, 
so allocate some time to following them up. Time to move on again.
Ethical research in practice, the problems 
of ‘inside’ research and personal codes 
of practice
Regardless of the requirements of your institution and of your super-
visor, this will still be your research. Even if you are not obliged 
to conform to required codes of practice or to the demands of eth-
ics or research committees, you will need to satisfy yourself that 
you have done everything possible to ensure that your research is 
conducted in a way that complies with your own ethical principles. 
This is the approach adopted by Stephen Waters, contributing author 
of this sixth edition and formerly a postgraduate diploma student 
and first-time researcher. At the time of his research study, he was 
a teacher of English in a high school and decided that he would like 
to undertake the research in his own institution. He was interested 
in investigating the role of his own Head of English (called Director 
of English). The Director had expressed interest in and support for 
the study, and this convinced Stephen that the topic would be worth-
while and would have a good chance of being successfully completed 
in the time allowed (effectively three months). He decided to produce 
his own personal code of practice which made clear the conditions 
and guarantees within which he felt he must work, in order to ensure 
his own and his school’s integrity. The preparation proceeded on the 
following lines:
1	 Informal discussion with the head teacher to obtain agreement in 
principle.
2	 Refinement of the topic, statement of the objectives of the study 
and preparation of a project outline.
3	 Discussion with his tutor and further discussion with the Director 
of English.
4	 Minor adjustments made to the project outline and a considera-
tion of the methods to be used.
5	 Formal submission of the project outline to the head teacher, 
together with names of colleagues he wished to interview and the 
guarantees and conditions under which the research would be 
conducted.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
56
The conditions and guarantees were presented as follows:
1	 All participants will be offered the opportunity to remain 
anonymous.
2	 All information will be treated with the strictest confidentiality.
3	 Interviewees will have the opportunity to verify statements when 
the research is in draft form.
4	 Participants will receive a copy of the final report.
5	 The research is to be assessed by the university for examination 
purposes only, but should the question of publication arise at a 
later date, permission will be sought from the participants.
6	 The research will attempt to explore educational management in 
practice. It is hoped the final report may be of benefit to the school 
and to those who take part.
So how did it go? This is what Stephen wrote after the project was 
completed:
“
I felt that presenting the guarantees formally was essential. As I was 
completely inexperienced in research, I had to assure the head teacher 
that the fieldwork would be carried out with integrity and convince him 
that he could place his trust in me.
  With hindsight, I should have exercised greater caution. Condition 3 
could not be met in full since I later found that, although a proper check 
could be made to verify statements participants had made while being 
interviewed, there was insufficient time for them to proofread a full 
draft. Condition 4 was fulfilled but the cost proved to be prohibitive and 
I decided to eliminate this condition when other case studies were 
undertaken. This experience certainly alerted me to the danger of 
promising too much too soon.
  It was only when the time drew near for the findings of my research 
to be disseminated that I became aware of the two areas where the 
wording of my conditions of research was open to interpretation. The 
first was that, in promising confidentiality (Condition 2), I had not made 
it clear what the implications of releasing information would be. As 
there was insufficient time to produce a draft report, no one could check 
whether my interpretation of what they had said was fair. In any case, 
as the head teacher was the only person to hold a written copy of my 
guarantees, the respondents could only interpret the conditions under 
which they had agreed to participate from my verbal explanation. In 
retrospect, it would have been better to have provided a duplicated 
explanation of the written outline of my intentions. Teachers are busy 
people and it was unreasonable to assume that they would be able to 
remember a conversation which had taken place some time before 
their services were formally required. As it was, whether or not they 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Ethics and Integrity in Research
57
remembered the guarantees, they were totally dependent on my 
integrity to present their views in a balanced, objective manner.
  More naively, until I was writing the report, I had not realized that 
identifying people by role may preserve the guarantee of anonymity for 
an outside reader, but it did not confer the same degree of obscurity for 
those within the school. Fortunately, my failure to clarify these points 
did not lead to problems – but it could have done.“
Stephen learnt a great deal from his first experience of conduct-
ing an investigation. He felt he had made some mistakes at his first 
attempt and was uneasy because he had not been able to fulfil all the 
conditions and guarantees. He had prepared the ground very well 
but had not fully appreciated the time and effort involved in report-
ing back to colleagues and in producing copies of reports. He was 
concerned at his lack of precision in defining exactly what he meant 
by anonymity and confidentiality, and made quite sure that in sub-
sequent investigations he clarified the position. He found it harder to 
know what to do about role conflict. He was a full-time teacher and 
a part-time researcher – a not unusual combination – and on occa-
sions found it difficult to reconcile the two roles. There were definite 
advantages to being an ‘inside’ researcher. For example, he had an 
intimate knowledge of the context of the research and of the micro-
politics of the institution, travel was not a problem and participants 
were easily reached. He knew how best to approach individuals and 
appreciated some of their difficulties. He found that colleagues wel-
comed the opportunity to air problems and to have their situation 
analysed by someone who understood the practical day-to-day reali-
ties of their task. On the other hand, he found interviewing some col-
leagues an uncomfortable experience for both parties. As an insider, 
he quickly came to realize that you have to live with your mistakes 
after completing the research. The close contact with the institu-
tion and colleagues made objectivity difficult to attain and, he felt, 
gaining confidential knowledge had the potential for affecting his 
relationship with colleagues. In the event, this did not seem to be 
the case, but he could foresee situations where problems might have 
arisen.
When he had successfully completed his diploma, Stephen was 
asked whether he felt it had all been worthwhile and whether he had 
any comments that might be helpful to others who were undertaking 
a research project for the first time. He wrote as follows:
“
I may have given the impression that my research was so fraught with 
difficulties that it was counter-productive. If so, it is because I wish to 
encourage the prospective inside-researcher to exercise caution and to 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
58
be aware of possible pitfalls. In reality, I enjoyed my research immensely 
and found that the experience of interviewing a cross-section of 
teaching staff provided me with a much greater working knowledge of 
the school’s management practices. Indeed, my research was so 
absorbing that at times I found myself struggling to keep pace with my 
teaching commitments. I am certain, even with hindsight, that I could 
have done little to resolve this dilemma. I can honestly say that my 
research has made me more understanding of the problems confronting 
those responsible for running the school and has subsequently provided 
a great deal of thought about educational issues. If my research had 
not  been practically relevant I would have felt concerned about the 
extent of my commitment to it. As it was, several recommendations 
which appeared in my first report have been taken up by the school; my 
third report on the role of the governing body in the curriculum was 
placed on the agenda of a governors’ meeting in spring and many 
colleagues have been complimentary about the content of the case 
studies in general. If I had to choose one strategy that I would encourage 
prospective inside researchers to adopt, it would be to relate the 
research report to the pragmatic concerns of the institution. That might 
perhaps help to persuade colleagues that participation in research will 
be as beneficial to them as it is to the researcher."
Whether or not you relate your research to the pragmatic con-
cerns of the institution depends on the nature of your task and 
your own special concerns, but whether you are an inside or out-
side researcher, whether you are full-time or part-time, experienced 
or inexperienced, care has to be taken to make no promises that 
cannot be honoured. When Stephen carried out his first piece of 
research, guidelines, protocols and research contracts were less 
common than they are today. He had to devise his own guarantees 
and conditions. Nowadays, most organizations have their own set 
of rules, not only about the conduct of research, but also about who 
owns what. Even so, you should still ensure that your research is 
conducted in a way that conforms to your own ethical principles 
and code of practice.
Be clear what you mean if you promise that your 
research will be confidential and that participants 
will be guaranteed anonymity. Don’t assume that 
these terms have the same meaning for everyone. 
Even if names or roles of participants are not used 
in your research report, it may still be possible for 
readers to work out who you are writing about.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Ethics and Integrity in Research
59
Codes of ethical practice relating to 
intellectual ownership/property
At one time, relatively little was heard about intellectual property 
or ownership. It was, and still is, customary in scientific and techno-
logical departments for supervisors’ names to appear on joint papers, 
the decision about the positioning of the names having been decided 
by the supervisor and/or in accordance with common departmen-
tal or institutional practice. Where research has been sponsored by 
government agencies or commercial organizations, institutions gen-
erally have an agreement in place regarding intellectual property 
rights about which students are, or should be, informed at the start 
of their research, particularly if they have been recruited specifi-
cally to carry out some predetermined and pre-planned research. In 
some cases, students may be required to assign ownership of their 
intellectual property to institutions, to ensure that any potential 
patent or marketable findings are not lost, and so it is particularly 
important that everyone understands what this means. Is what stu-
dents write the property of the institution, organization or research 
council that funded it? Is it the property of the researcher alone, or 
the joint property of the researcher and the supervisor? If jointly 
owned, whose name comes first in any published work? The question 
of the positioning of names may seem trivial, but the importance to 
all concerned cannot be underestimated. Universities in particular 
want their research students, and require their academic staff, to 
publish. Doing well in research assessment exercises brings not only 
recognition and prestige but also money – and all three count.
In hospitals and other health-related organizations, institutional 
property guidelines and rules have been in place for many years and 
advertisements that include responsibility for intellectual property 
are common for individual hospitals and for groups of hospitals, 
which seems to me not only to indicate the importance of this issue 
but also its complexity. Even where codes and guidelines are issued, 
disputes about ownership are still known to rage where students 
who consider they have done all the work find that their supervisor’s 
and professor’s names appear before theirs on published reports of 
the research.
The various codes of practice, guidelines and policies that are 
frequently provided by academic institutions and businesses, 
departments, hospitals and funding bodies should go some way to 
eliminating unethical practice and misunderstandings over own-
ership, just as I believe codes and protocols can help to eliminate 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
60
similar unethical practice in issues relating to informed consent. No 
codes of ethical practice can resolve all problems, but they do at 
least clarify some of the major issues in this difficult area – and that 
is a start.
If you are a first-time researcher, the idea of asking to see your 
institution’s or organization’s guidelines relating to intellectual 
property rights may seem irrelevant. Even so, it might be inter-
esting to find out what the guidelines say. You never know, your 
research may be outstanding and of sufficient interest to be consid-
ered for publication, and it’s as well to know what your rights would 
be in that happy eventuality. It’s always a good idea to be prepared 
for success.
Ethics and Integrity in Research  
Checklist
1.  It is your responsibility 
to discover whether 
any restrictions or legal 
requirements relate to 
your research.
If you or your advisers 
have any doubts about the 
integrity of your proposal, 
don’t proceed unless the 
issues are resolved.
Q
2.  Many organizations now 
have ethical guidelines, 
codes of practice and 
protocols.
Make sure you know if 
such guidelines exist 
and conform to their 
requirements.
Q
3.  Always aim for the 
informed consent of 
your participants.
And make sure that your 
participants’ understanding 
of ‘informed consent’ is the 
same as yours.
  Remember that they 
should not be expected 
to sign a protocol form 
unless they have had time 
to read and consider the 
implications.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Ethics and Integrity in Research
61
4.  If all proposed research 
has to be vetted by the 
ethics committee in your 
organization, make sure 
your submission is well 
thought out. Find out 
when the committees 
meet and allow time for 
your submission to be 
considered.
Consult, show your draft 
to your supervisor, talk 
to any students who have 
had their submission to the 
ethics committee rejected – 
or approved.
Q
5.  Confidentiality 
and anonymity are 
generally promised to 
participants.
However, make sure you 
know what you and your 
participants mean by each.
Q
6.  You must never break 
any promises to 
participants, so watch 
your language and 
never promise anything 
you can’t deliver.
Thus if you promise 
anonymity, you can’t send 
out follow-up letters. No 
tricks!
Q
7.  Make sure you consult 
the guidelines of 
your department 
and institution on 
the dissemination of 
electronic information. 
Try to find time to read 
any reports that relate 
to participants’ rights to 
privacy.
Consult the Data 
Protection and Freedom 
of Information Acts, 
your research council’s 
guidance and any subject-
specific reports that relate 
to individuals’ right to 
privacy with respect to 
the processing of personal 
data.
Q
8.  Regardless of the 
requirements of your 
institution and of your 
supervisor, this will still 
be your research, with 
your name.
Even if you are not obliged 
to conform to the required 
codes of practice, or to 
the demands of ethics and 
research committees, you 
should still ensure that your 
research is conducted in a 
manner that conforms to 
your own code of practice.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
62
9.  If you are carrying 
out research in your 
own institution or 
organization, do 
your best to let your 
colleagues know what 
you plan to do and how 
you hope they might be 
willing to help.
Don’t be too ambitious. 
Consider how much time 
you are allowed in order to 
complete the research on 
time.
Q
10.  If you think you might 
wish to publish some of 
your findings at some 
stage, first make sure 
that you have obtained 
the permission of the 
people concerned.
Also make sure you have 
seen a copy of all codes 
of practice, protocols 
and guidelines relating 
to your organization and 
profession, in particular 
ethical guidelines relating 
to informed consent and to 
intellectual property.
Q
11.  You may think you own 
what you have written 
and thus can do as you 
like with any research 
report, article or book.
That might sometimes be 
possible, but not always, so 
check before you commit 
yourself.
Q
12.  No codes of ethical 
practice, protocols, 
guidelines and policies 
can solve all your 
problems, but they 
help.
They at least clarify some 
of the major issues. Don’t 
forget to keep a record 
in your research diary 
of books, articles, URLs, 
names of people you 
consulted, mobile numbers, 
email addresses – anything 
you might need at a later 
date.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Ethics and Integrity in Research
63
Further reading
Blaxter, L., Hughes, C. and Tight, M. (2006) How to Research (3rd 
edn). Maidenhead: Open University Press. 
Pages 157–62 provide a summary of the principles of research ethics.
Busher, H. and James, N. (2007) Ethics of research in educa-
tion, in A.R.J. Briggs and M. Coleman (eds) Research Methods 
in Educational Leadership and Management (2nd edn). London: 
Sage.
Caldicott Committee (1997) Report on the Review of Patient-
identifiable Information. London: Department of Health.
Cohen, L., Manion, L. and Morrison, K. (2011) Case studies, in 
Research Methods in Education (7th edn). Abingdon: Routledge. 
Chapter 5, ‘The ethics of educational and social research’, provides 25 
pages of sound advice.
Darlington, Y. and Scott, D. (2002) Qualitative Research in 
Practice: Stories from the Field. Buckingham: Open University 
Press. 
See Chapter 2, ‘Ethics and organisations’.
Data Protection Registrar (1998) The Data Protection Act 1998: 
An Introduction [http://www.open.gov.uk/dpr/dprhome.htm]. 
The sections relating to individuals’ right to privacy with respect to the 
processing of personal data are particularly useful.
D’Cruz, H. and Jones, M. (2004) Social Work Research: Ethical 
and Political Contexts. London: Sage. 
The emphasis of this book is on qualitative methodologies in social 
work research. I particularly like Chapter 3, which deals with proce-
dures involved in producing good research questions. Chapter 4, which 
asks ‘how does research contribute to knowledge: different ways of 
knowing’, is also worth consulting.
Denscombe, M. (2010) Ground Rules for Good Research: 
Guidelines for Good Practice (2nd edn). Maidenhead: Open 
University Press. 
Chapter 4 includes: codes of ethics, ethics approval, researcher integ-
rity, protection of the interests of participants, security of the data, 
informed consent, Internet research and guidelines for good practice – 
all excellent.
Department of Health Research and Development includes infor-
mation of interest to researchers and to public health and social 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
64
care workers, at https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/
department-of-health [Accessed 14 March 2014].
Farrell, A. (ed.) (2005) Ethical Research with Children. 
Maidenhead: Open University Press. 
Farrell concentrates on early childhood research and the ethical issues 
involved.
Green, J. and Thorogood, N. (2013) Qualitative Methods for 
Health Research (3rd edn). London: Sage. 
This book concentrates on examples of qualitative methodology in 
health research projects and on the design of ethical and feasible 
projects.
Greig, A.D., Taylor, J. and Mackay, T. (2012) Doing Research with 
Children (3rd edn). London: Sage. 
The authors discuss many changes in research practice with children 
and provide extended guidance on research ethics.
Laws, S. with Harper, C. and Marcus, R. (2013) Research for 
Development: A Practical Guide (2nd edn). London: Sage. 
Chapter 9 deals with ethics codes and responsibilities towards 
respondents.
Miles, M.B. and Huberman, A.M. (2014) Qualitative Data Analysis 
(3rd edn). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Chapter 3 explores ethics issues in analysis.
National Health Service National Patient Safety Agency at http://
www.npsa.nhs.uk/ 
Facilitates and promotes ethical research within the NHS. It provides 
reviews, workshops, reports and much more.
Oliver, P. (2010) The Student’s Guide to Research Ethics (2nd 
edn). Maidenhead: Open University Press. 
Oliver clarifies research terminology, discusses the moral justification 
of research, areas of research that raise ethical issues, issues relating to 
the principle of informed consent, anonymity and confidentiality – and 
much more.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

65
4
Reading, 
Referencing and 
the Management 
of Information
INTRODUCTION
This chapter provides you with guidance for managing the reading, note-taking 
and record-keeping aspect of the research process. You will be probably required 
to read a large volume of material in the course of your research project and this 
chapter provides guidance on maintaining an efficient and well-organized record-
keeping system. In this chapter, you will find:
•	Advice on focused and productive reading and on good note-taking, including 
using note-taking apps and related software.
•	How to guard against plagiarism by being meticulous in recording detailed and 
accurate references during your research.
•	 Advice on getting to grips with referencing as the researcher’s ‘tools of the trade’.
•	A brief guide to referencing books, journal articles, chapters in books and 
online sources.
•	The importance of understanding the referencing guidelines of your institution.
•	Using online tools such as Delicious, Mendeley, Dropbox, EndNote, RefWorks 
and Google to improve the management of information.
Key terms
Plagiarism
68
Harvard referencing
70
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
66
Reading
Ideally, the bulk of your reading should come early on in the inves-
tigation, though in practice a number of activities are generally in 
progress at the same time, and reading may even spill over into the 
data collection stage of your study. If you’re working to a strict 
timescale (and you will be, even if you have the luxury of being on 
a three-year full-time PhD programme), try to discipline yourself to 
ensure that reading doesn’t take up more time than can be allowed. 
This is easier said than done because when you begin work on a 
topic, you’re never sure what might be important and what might be 
irrelevant. Even if you’re very disciplined about reading and resist 
the temptation to be led astray by some really interesting sound-
ing books, articles or websites that may have nothing whatsoever 
to do with your topic, you’ll still find it difficult to confine read-
ing to precise time slots. It is rarely possible to obtain copies of all 
the books and articles at exactly the time you need them and there 
will always be new publications which may seem to be the answer 
to your prayers and which you consider just have to be read. As 
always, the one thing we always have to accept is that we can’t do 
everything. We have to do the best we can in the time available – 
and not use ‘more reading needed’ as an excuse for not actually 
getting down to writing and everything else that needs to be done 
to progress the research!
Any investigation, whatever the scale, will involve reading what 
other people have written about your area of interest, gathering 
information to support or refute your arguments and writing about 
your findings. Reading as much as time permits about your topic 
may give you ideas not only about the research others have done 
but also about their approach and methods – and this is important, 
because everything you do from the start of your research will be 
preparation for the production of the final report.
Experience has shown that no matter how sophisticated we 
may consider ourselves to be as learners and researchers, we all 
need to be reminded about the importance of systematic record-
ing. As soon as we begin to read, we begin to record and we have 
to include all the necessary detail. Keeping an accurate record of 
meetings, references, ideas and the 1001 activities that the lone 
researcher undertakes is a challenge. ‘Next week’, ‘next month’, 
‘one of these days’, ‘when I’ve got a minute’ or ‘when I’ve finished 
reading these 50 journal articles’ won’t do. We all think we’ll 
remember, but after several weeks of reading, memory becomes 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Reading, Referencing and the Management of Information
67
faulty. After a few months, we may vaguely recall having read 
something some time about a particular topic, but when, where 
and by whom escapes us. After a longer period, the chances of 
remembering anything are remote.
Note-taking
In the past, researchers made notes in a notebook that was always 
with them and some, perhaps most, still do. The disadvantage of 
handwritten notes is that if the notebook is mislaid – or worse still, 
lost – the researcher’s work is irretrievable. Handwritten notes are 
also fixed in the order in which they were made and, short of cut-
ting out each entry (assuming you have written on one side of the 
page) and physically moving the notes around, this limits their flex-
ibility. Notes recorded on a PC, laptop, mobile or tablet are far more 
adaptable.
Some note-taking platforms allow audio notes to be taken on your 
mobile and transcribed later. EverNote, Google Keep and OneNote 
are three personal favourites. All are available online and on mobile 
devices and can be synchronized across devices. EverNote and 
Google Keep are available on both Windows and IOS, while OneNote 
is part of Microsoft Office 365 as a paid version or is available free 
as a web app through Microsoft SkyDrive. Note-taking software and 
apps have significant advantages: the notes can be easily moved 
or copied; URL links to audio, video and image files can be saved 
as well as written notes; and, perhaps most importantly, most are 
saved in the cloud, enabling you to access and retrieve them from 
any device with an internet connection.
Note-taking and guarding against 
plagiarism
As you read, make notes of what seem to you to be important issues 
and highlight them. Be on the lookout for recurring themes, cat-
egories and keywords that will become increasingly important in 
your search for a structure or framework for your own research. 
Priorities (and issues) will inevitably change as your reading con-
tinues. You will in all probability abandon some of your early cat-
egories and identify others but keep a record, even of your early 
abandoned categories. You never know – they may crop up again in 
your later reading.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
68
Take care with your note-taking. A particularly perceptive obser-
vation by an author may often illustrate a point you might wish to 
refer to, or even quote, at a later stage. Always make it quite clear in 
your notes which is the quotation and which is your paraphrase – oth-
erwise, when you come to write up your project, you may find you 
are committing the sin of plagiarism.
Plagiarism is using other people’s words as if they are your 
own. Remember that all sources have to be acknowledged, includ-
ing paraphrases of other people’s words and of other people’s ideas. 
Plagiarism has become a major issue in schools and in further and 
higher education, as a result of the availability of model answers to 
examination and assignment questions online – usually for a fee. It 
seems that some people are now prepared to pay for ‘a guaranteed 
A-grade essay’ and blatantly submit the essay, or parts of it, as their 
own. This has become such a concern that plagiarism detection soft-
ware, such as Grammarly, has been developed and now is regularly 
used, particularly in universities, to check examination and assign-
ment texts.
Supervisors will be on the lookout for any examples in your 
drafts. Former colleagues tell me that the situation has become so 
blatant that sometimes, in coursework, students include paragraphs 
taken direct from an online article or a web page – and without any 
attribution. When challenged, the usual response is that everybody 
does it, so why can’t they?
Easy access to vast amounts of online information may give the 
impression that it is public property. It isn’t. Although open sharing 
on the Internet is gradually challenging our understanding of intel-
lectual property and copyright, the legal position is that intellectual 
property and/or copyright is owned by the person, group or organi-
zation that produced the text, image or video. Unless the authors 
or creators of the content grant permission to quote it or use it, you 
need to acknowledge the source(s) of the information.
Most institutions now have guidelines on plagiarism, and make 
it clear that the penalties for infringement will be severe. These 
range from giving plagiarized work a fail grade to expulsion from 
the course. Guidelines are regularly updated, so make sure you have 
copies of the latest version and examine institutional and subject-
specific codes of practice relating to academic and ethical stand-
ards. Of course, the best way to ensure you will never use other 
people’s words or ideas as your own without acknowledgement is 
to be meticulous about your note-taking and to record exact details 
of references. Online tools that enable you to save references are 
covered later in this chapter and in Chapter 5, ‘Literature searching’.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Reading, Referencing and the Management of Information
69
Plagiarism, or presenting someone else’s words 
or ideas as your own, is a serious matter even if 
you do so unintentionally. You must acknowledge 
all sources, even if you don’t use the person’s exact 
words. It is important to keep detailed informa­
tion about references and to make sure your notes 
tell  you who said what and when. This includes information 
found online.
If you are making an exact copy of wording, add inverted com-
mas at the beginning and end of the extract. Record author, chap-
ter and page numbers or web page, show clearly if you have left 
out any word or words in the text by adding three full stops (or 
ellipsis), and file and label the extract where you know you will be 
able to find it, even if this requires some cross-referencing. If you 
prefer paper rather than, or in addition to, saving references online, 
you may prefer to photocopy the extract, adding details about the 
source in the usual way (library staff will advise about copyright 
regulations).
There’s one more thing to bear in mind as you read and make 
notes – namely, the need to ask yourself whether you can trust what 
you read. This is always difficult, but ask yourself whether any other 
sources corroborate a particular source. What does the research/
report/document actually say, and what evidence is provided to sup-
port the findings? What is known about the author? Do they have 
a LinkedIn profile? Are they on Facebook? If so, what does it tell 
you about them? Do you suspect bias? If so, why? Are sources fully 
referenced so that you can check them? Brendan Duffy considers 
all these questions and many more in ‘The critical analysis of docu-
ments’ section of Chapter 7. Before you begin any concentrated 
period of reading, refer to this chapter and section and devise your 
own ‘authenticity’ checklist.
I keep a record of everything I read, even sources that have proved 
to be of no interest or use to me. Other people don’t and have made 
it clear to me that as far as they are concerned, it’s pointless to keep 
records of useless sources and they are not going to clutter up their 
files with rubbish. They may well have a point and you may agree 
with them, but I tell myself there must have been some reason why I 
decided to look at the book or article in the first place. The title may 
have sounded interesting, or I might have read other works by the 
same author that left an impression on me. It would follow, then, that 
at some time in the future, the title may still sound interesting and the 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
70
author may still be remembered as having produced quality work in 
another context. I might come across the reference a second time, and 
ask to borrow the book again. I might have asked for a copy on inter-
library loan, and there may be costs involved with that. All this would 
be a waste of time and money, and in any investigation, whether small 
or large, there is never enough time to do everything that has to be 
done. A note to remind me why I decided the work was of no interest is 
enough to jog my memory and to enable me to abandon that particu-
lar line of enquiry. We all have our own ways of working and you will 
have to decide what your own particular practices are.
Referencing
In the early days of an investigation, it may seem enough to jot down 
a reference on the back of an envelope, but old envelopes thrown into 
a box will not provide a reliable resource, and the likelihood is that 
references will be incomplete and difficult to track down at a later 
stage. If you are only going to need half a dozen references, then 
scraps of paper may serve, but as your investigation proceeds, you 
will accumulate many sources of information and an orderly system 
of recording is essential from the day you start reading.
There are several perfectly acceptable ways of recording sources 
and other information. The Harvard method of referencing – that 
is, author’s surname and date, which I use in this book – has a num-
ber of advantages over other methods. It avoids footnotes, which are 
awkward to deal with, and all sources mentioned in the text appear at 
the end of the report and not chapter by chapter. I have only recently 
discovered that even the Harvard author–date method, which at 
first sight appears to be fairly straightforward, should be referenced 
differently for many different sources. It does slightly worry me to 
think that I have been using the ‘one style for most sources’ approach 
for years. Clearly I must mend my ways.
I now know, thanks to Pears and Shields (2013: 11–83), that cit-
ing and referencing sources using the Harvard (author–date) style 
involves different referencing for books, journal articles, conferences, 
theses, virtual learning environments (VLEs) such as Blackboard, 
and reference organization and retrieval software such as CiteULike 
(www.citeulike.com), URLs, reports, legal material, government pub-
lications, EU publications, scientific and technical information. Then 
there is the reference manager, Mendeley (www.mendeley.com), and 
Zotero (www.zotero.org), the free software tool to help you collect, 
organize, cite, and share your research sources. More about these 
tools in Chapter 5.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Reading, Referencing and the Management of Information
71
I know I shall never remember all this and so, if I am to change my 
lazy ways, I shall need some readily available memory jogger. I am 
confident you will also need some citing and referencing guidelines.
Always start with where you are studying. It may well be that 
detailed guidelines are already available in your library. Check 
which referencing style your supervisor demands. Different supervi-
sors (and different publishers) adopt different styles and your depart-
ment or institution will almost certainly have a preferred ‘house’ 
style that you will be expected to adopt. However, if no guidelines 
are available and in the unlikely event of your supervisor saying you 
can adopt whichever style you wish, at least the following will give 
you a start.
If you look at the bibliographies or references sections at the 
end of several books, it is likely you will find different approaches, 
though each will require the same information.
For books
For books, you will need to provide the following:
•	Author’s surname and forename or initials
•	Date of publication (in parentheses)
•	Title of the book (underlined or italics) and which edition, if appro-
priate
•	Place of publication
•	Name of publisher
For example:
“
Bell, F. and Bell, J. (2014) 3000 Ways of Ruining Lancashire Hotpot 
(3rd edn). Morecambe: Hotpot Publications."
As you see, this is the third edition of a book published in 2014 and so 
the number of the edition must be included. A new edition will incor-
porate a significant amount of upgrading and new writing, as does 
this edition of Doing Your Research Project, whereas a reprint is just 
what it says, namely, the production of more copies of the original 
publication. Only new editions need to be noted.
A word about punctuation. There is no reason why a full stop 
should appear after the title or ‘3rd edn’; you might prefer to use 
a comma or to leave a space. You might decide it would be better 
to indent the second line in order to make the author’s name stand 
out more clearly. If you wish, you could put the author’s name in 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
72
capitals. Make up your mind and whichever approach you adopt, 
every single reference you record from then on must have the same 
format – but remember, always check your organization’s guide-
lines before you start.
Where there are three or more authors of a book, the same format 
will apply as for one author, but there are one or two things to note. 
When sources are referred to (cited) in the text of your report, there 
is no need to include the full reference. It is sufficient to write ‘As Bell 
and Bell (2014: 462) say...’. I like to have page numbers because with-
out them it becomes time-consuming and sometimes impossible to 
find where the quotation appears in the book, though many authors 
omit them. Where books are produced in digital form as well as print, 
the search function usually makes it possible to find quotations much 
more easily. Until all books are produced in digital format, the inclu-
sion of page numbers is very useful, both to you as a researcher and 
to readers of your research.
If you cite a source by three or more authors, then it’s customary 
to use ‘et al.’ in the text for the second and subsequent names, though 
again, practice does vary. There is no full stop after ‘et’ because it is 
a complete Latin word meaning ‘and’, but there is after ‘et al.’ because 
‘al’ is an abbreviation for ‘alii’ meaning ‘others’. The full reference will 
appear in the alphabetic list of references at the end of your report. If 
an author or authors have more than one publication in the same year, 
then suffixes ‘a’ and ‘b’ should be added after the date of publication.
Let’s move on. We have not yet covered all the referencing rules 
and regulations. There are certain differences if you are recording 
information about a journal article or a chapter in a book.
For journal articles
The author’s surname, forename or initials and the date of publica-
tion are the same as for books but you are also required to give:
•	Title of the article (sometimes in inverted commas, sometimes 
not)
•	Title of the journal from which the article or chapter is derived 
(generally underlined or in italics, though again, not always)
•	Volume number of the journal, the issue and page numbers
For example:
“
Spade, D. (2014b) Herbal remedies from the allotment, The Review of 
Garden Diseases, 99 (34): 30–3."
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Reading, Referencing and the Management of Information
73
The volume number (99) is sometimes in bold type, the issue number 
(34) comes in brackets after the volume number, and this article was 
published in 2014 in the journal The Review of Garden Diseases. As 
the authors published an article earlier in the same year, the letter ‘b’ 
is added to the reference. The name of the journal is usually, though 
not always, in italics. Page numbers of journal articles (30–3) are 
always given.
For chapters in books
For a chapter in a book, something along the following lines would 
be appropriate:
“
Tapas, J.M. and Tortilla, F.D. (2014) 2000 ways of ruining good food, in 
F.D. Paella and J.M. Gazpacho (eds) The Philosophy of Frying Pan 
Selection (20th edn). Laujar: Guapa Publications."
This is a chapter in a book edited by Paella and Gazpacho and so 
(eds) is added after their names. After the ‘in’, the convention is that 
initials should be placed before rather than after the surnames of 
editors. Laujar is the place of publication and the name of the pub-
lisher is Guapa Publications. However, follow whatever convention 
your institution requires.
Citing online articles and other data 
and information
There are very many different ways of citing sources, depending on 
the type of source you are identifying. Find out what guidelines on 
referencing online sources are provided by your department, institu-
tion and/or library. Pears and Shields emphasize that the important 
points to remember are that:
“
You should aim to provide sufficient information for a reader to be 
able to locate your information source. As material on the Internet can 
be removed or changed, you should also note the date when you 
accessed/viewed the information – it might not be there in a few months’ 
time. Remember to evaluate all Internet information for accuracy, 
authority, currency, coverage and objectivity. The ability to publish 
information on the Internet bears no relation to the author’s academic 
abilities."
(Pears and Shields 2013: 39)
Remember that if you make a record of electronic journal arti-
cles, in addition to giving the full reference details as above, you 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
74
also need to indicate where the sources were obtained online. For 
example:
•	Name of author
•	Date of publication (in parentheses)
•	Title of article (if appropriate), e.g. Can your genes really make 
you fat?
•	Title of source in italics, e.g. Psychology – and More Psychology
•	[Online]: Note that the word ‘Online’ is in square brackets
•	Available from URL of website, e.g. www.psychologyandmorepsy 
chology.com
•	[Accessed on date]: Note square brackets, e.g. [Accessed 12 June 
2014]
This is what the full citation would look like:
Wurtman, J. (2014) Can your genes really make you fat?, Psychology – 
and More Psychology [Online]. Available at www.psychologyand­more 
psychology.com [Accessed 12 March 2014].
Practice may very slightly but the main point is that sufficient infor-
mation must always be provided so that other researchers are able 
to retrieve the article.
Some of the citations, particularly of electronic sources, are quite 
complex and if your library provides copies of referencing guides, 
make sure you consult them.
Creating, editing and storing references
Bibliographic software such as EndNote, ProCite and Reference 
Manager has many advantages for researchers. For example, 
EndNote gives us the facility to create, store, organize, retrieve and 
cite references and allows us to search and manage online biblio-
graphic databases. Once we know how, we are able to produce our 
own bibliographies in various formats and, if we’re clever enough, to 
insert graphics into text. Copyright and licensing restrictions may 
apply to some databases and electronic journals, which restrict what 
we are permitted to print but others will allow us to download items 
direct into our own records. We may even be able to access summa-
ries of journal articles, texts of newspapers, dissertations, abstracts 
of doctoral theses, books and conference proceedings.
You may find that your library will provide you with access to 
and support for one or more databases. Many university libraries 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Reading, Referencing and the Management of Information
75
subscribe to Copac, which enables you to search the catalogues of 
over 70 libraries at once, including the UK national libraries, univer-
sity libraries, and specialist libraries. Copac also enables you to save 
references and to export them to EndNote and Zotero. Depending on 
your software, you might also be able to save Copac records directly 
into the software from your web browser, or search Copac and down-
load records from within your reference management software.
Never ignore the facilities that are on your doorstep, particularly 
if they come free. Many researchers are part-time, live or work some 
way from their main academic library (or are even based overseas), 
spend little or no time on campus and need to be able to access 
databases remotely. If you wish to have access to your institution’s 
databases and other facilities at home, that may be possible. Many 
universities provide students with a username and a password, which 
provides access to all the institution’s facilities, including the library 
catalogues and databases. Ask your supervisor what steps have to 
be taken. If she or he doesn’t know, or says home access is not per-
mitted, look further. Always look further. Ask one of the librarians. 
I always believe librarians know everything, and they generally do. 
They will know the rules and will tell you what is involved.
In an ideal world, you would familiarize yourself with how a soft-
ware program or database works before you start your research 
proper because, once you begin, you have little time to spend on 
unravelling the intricacies of a new system. That’s the theory, and 
it’s good sense, but not many of us live in an ideal world. Once your 
research starts, you will inevitably be short of time for the numerous 
things you have to do so. If you’re working on a small project with 
relatively few references (say 20 or fewer), you should perhaps ask 
yourself whether the time and effort involved in becoming familiar 
with a new electronic system warrants such a commitment.
Organizations operate in very different ways, impose different 
conditions, regularly change their rules and, I’m afraid, it’s up to you 
to find out which conditions apply in your own case. I do not wish in 
any way to imply that investing in and becoming competent in the 
use of a database or software package is a waste of time, money 
and effort – quite the reverse. Online referencing is a powerful tool, 
saving both time and effort but you should be clear about what is 
involved.
If you decide to go ahead, work at it and never suffer in silence. If 
you’re baffled, search out people who aren’t, particularly if they are 
frequent users of the database or software you have selected. Search 
online for other researchers on social networks and share experi-
ences. Ask for their advice – and don’t be embarrassed at asking 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
76
what you’re afraid may seem like stupid questions. Every database 
has its own idiosyncrasies and regular users may know some handy 
tips or shortcuts that may help you to search more effectively.
Backing-up: better safe than sorry
Never rely totally on your hard drive to save references or anything 
else for that matter. However reliable your PC, laptop, tablet, or 
mobile, keep back-ups of some kind. It’s immaterial how, but some-
thing. Even the most sophisticated system or software can let you 
down ­sometimes – usually when you least expect it and when it will 
cause you the most inconvenience.
I still have memories of one terrible time when, somehow or 
another, almost 50 pages of a file disappeared without trace from 
my computer. So now I do my best to cover all eventualities. After 
all, what if a power cut loses all your work or, more likely, what if 
you forget to save and send ten chapters into oblivion? Back-up your 
work on an external drive or on a USB device or, even better, in the 
Cloud. Dropbox and Google Drive provide limited free storage that 
should be sufficient for most research studies. If you invest in a sub-
scription Cloud storage provider, you can schedule back-ups to take 
place automatically every day or, in some cases, every few hours, 
which gets round the problem of remembering to do it. If only I had 
created a back-up copy, I wouldn’t have lost 50 pages, would I? It’s 
immaterial which method you choose – decide which suits you best 
and then keep to it.
Laptops, tablets, mobiles and PCs can be stolen, 
lost or suffer an unexpected, and perhaps fatal, 
crash. Don’t be tempted to leave backing up your 
documents until later or until you ‘get round to it’, 
however busy you are. Ensure you save the latest 
version of your work on a memory stick or exter-
nal drive or in the Cloud. Investing in a provider who stores all 
your documents in the Cloud automatically is worth every penny.
Making a note of references
As at every other stage in your research journey, it is important to 
make a note of all your references, whether you write them down 
or save them on your PC or laptop. Use whatever system your 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Reading, Referencing and the Management of Information
77
institution specifies. Most will require you to use the Harvard sys-
tem. As advised earlier, ensure that you make a note of all the details 
of the reference, including page numbers where you have found 
quotes, especially if you have used them in your project. Also make 
a note of where you found the reference in case you need to return 
to it. If you found it online, include the URL. Make a copy of informa-
tion you save on your hard drive or within the database itself, if it 
allows you to do so. You may wish to use the note-taking app on your 
smartphone or tablet to make ‘on the spot’ records of your references 
or even take a photo of it on your smartphone. If you use a separate 
note for each reference, you can use EverNote as a kind of index. 
Or, if you prefer to organize your references visually, you can get 
a digital version of Post-It® notes and create a virtual pinboard on 
your desktop, using colour coding for different types of references. 
You could even take pictures of title pages and use the pinboard style 
photo-sharing website Pinterest to ‘pin’ up your images. Whatever 
works for you. This advice may seem to be little obsessive but it is 
worth repeating that it is very difficult to remember the information 
necessary to trace a source that you have used in the past without 
writing down the detailed information required to do so.
The management of information
Even with a small project you will need to establish a cross-refer-
encing and indexing system because there’s no point in doing a large 
amount of reading if, at a later date, you can never find what you 
are looking for. This is especially important when you find informa-
tion online. One of the methods I have used when searching online 
is to copy and paste the URL of a source into a separate references 
document, which I maximize when needed from my toolbar. I also 
bookmark the page as a back-up. I do this for every document I draw 
information from and later decide whether the information is rele-
vant. If not, I keep the reference but use ‘strikethrough’ to cross it out 
and make a note with a date to explain to myself why I decided that 
it was irrelevant. Also, get into the habit of examining how authors 
classify their findings, how they explore relationships between facts 
and how key issues emerge. Methods used by other researchers may 
give you ideas about how you might organize and categorize your 
own data.
Those of you who have created and stored references on your PC 
and laptop will have had the opportunity to identify key words at 
the same time as you record your sources. This can be helpful, but 
whatever method of cross-referencing and indexing you select, the 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
78
approach is fundamentally the same. Somehow or other, even in the 
very early stages of your research, you should be thinking about 
ways in which you will be able to find who wrote what about differ-
ent topics. The last thing you need is to spend days or even weeks 
looking for something you know you read somewhere. You need to 
be able to go straight to it. Easy? Well not really. Orna and Stevens 
remind us:
“
By the very fact of bringing items together in one way (by author, by 
main subject, by date of addition to the store for example), it separates 
items that have other things in common. The same author may have 
written articles on a number of quite different subjects, so while that 
arrangement makes it easy to find everything by a given author, it 
makes it hard to find items on a given subject."
(Orna 1995: 49)
Well, life was never meant to be easy and we just have to do the best 
we can to ensure we have some sort of system which is simple to 
maintain and which is likely to give reasonable access to most of 
the source material and topics in your store. I start a cross-index-
ing system almost from the start of reading. The main reference 
will include all the necessary detail using the Harvard system, but 
if that particular article or book raises interesting issues relating 
to ‘grounded theory’, ‘research methods’, ‘women in leadership’ or 
whatever, then I will create sub-headings underneath the main refer-
ence indicating where I came across those topics and where I can 
find notes or other books and journal articles relating to them. I start 
with general headings and only move to more detailed headings as 
the reading develops. For example, if I discover items relating to 
women chief executives in hospitals, I can add a subgroup to the 
‘women in leadership’ sub-heading.
If you are saving your references in a file, devise a strategy that 
may well defy logic for everyone else, but which works for you. The 
one thing you can’t do is to do nothing.
Your system should enable you to group and sort your findings 
under headings, allow you to refer to notes, quotations and com-
ments about items in books or articles which you might have read 
months earlier and in all probability would have forgotten without 
it. Moreover, the small effort involved in producing a system will 
be providing you with the bones of a future literature review – 
and that will resolve many problems when the time comes to write 
it. There are also a number of online tools you can use to help 
you to manage your references. Two of the best are Delicious and 
Mendeley.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Reading, Referencing and the Management of Information
79
Delicious
Delicious (www.delicious.com) describes itself as:
“
a free service designed with care to be the best place to save what you 
love on the web. We keep your stuff safe so it’s there when you need it – 
always. Delicious remembers so you don’t have to.
  It’s easy to build up a collection of links, essentially creating your 
own personal search engine. It’s quick to organize your links so that 
when you’re looking for something, you can find it within seconds.
  Our smart search makes that process even faster so you never 
waste any time trying to hunt down that one article you read that one 
time . . ."
In a nutshell, that is what Delicious is all about – a free resource 
where you can store URLs – website addresses. You can save online 
academic articles, journals, key words, links to resources online, in 
fact anything you would like to find later. Some websites include a 
Delicious icon at the foot of the page; clicking on it enables you to 
tag or save the link. Think of Delicious as another personal research 
secretary, helping you to find those all-important references when-
ever you need them.
Dropbox
Dropbox (www.dropbox.com) is a Cloud-based storage site where, 
instead of storing your documents on your laptop or PC, you save them 
to your Dropbox account, which you can organize into folders for dif-
ferent purposes. Dropbox gives you a generous amount of free storage 
and increases it each time someone you know accepts your invitation 
to sign up for their own Dropbox account. The two main advantages 
of Dropbox are: (1) you can access your document from any com-
puter that is connected to the Internet; and (2) you can invite anyone 
to share your document and, if appropriate, give them editing rights. 
You could, for example, share the document with your tutor who could 
download it to their computer, add comments and then save it again to 
your Dropbox account, enabling you to access it again to make further 
changes which your tutor could read – and so on. If you have a Gmail 
address, Google has a similar service called Google Drive.
EndNote
EndNote (www.endnote.com) is a commercial reference management 
software package, used to manage bibliographies and references 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
80
when writing essays and articles. It is not only a powerful research 
tool, capable of finding pdf documents saved on its site as well as 
published articles, but enables you to collaborate with other users by 
sharing and exchanging references. Your library may have access to 
EndNote or you can purchase it at a student rate with proof of enrol-
ment at your university or college.
RefWorks
RefWorks (www.refworks.com) is very similar to EndNote. Both 
EndNote and RefWorks have a thirty-day trial period so you can try 
before deciding to buy, if your library doesn’t have a subscription. 
However, as we have seen, university libraries have different ways 
of organizing their databases and providing access to them so, as 
always, be guided by the library staff and don’t be afraid to ask for 
help. They won’t think you are being foolish for asking and they are 
the experts; they could save you hours of searching by showing you 
the best way to find what you are looking for.
Google
The power of Google (www.google.com) as a search engine has been 
acknowledged earlier and it hardly needs any introduction here – in 
March 2014 around 67 per cent of all searches were carried out on 
Google, some 13 billion each month. I look at using Google Scholar in 
literature searches in Chapter 5 but Google also has a number of free 
apps that are well worth considering. I was so impressed with these 
apps that I signed up for Gmail, Google’s email service, and uploaded 
Chrome as my browser so that I could build a package of products 
around Google. As mentioned earlier, there is Google Drive, which, 
like Dropbox, enables you to save and share files in the Cloud. Google 
Docs within Google Drive provides you with a basic editing tool so 
that you can share the editing of a document with another contribu-
tor or group of contributors. Google Hangouts are Google’s version of 
conference calls where several people can have an online meeting or 
discussion or where you can interview a participant in your research. 
Then there is Google Calendar, which will help you to organize your 
research and remind you of important meetings. Google even has 
its own book search app called Google Books. Finally, Google has 
its own networking platform – Google+. Google+ enables users to 
create ‘circles’ of contacts (compare the term ‘social circles’). Each 
circle can be given an identity such as friends, family, researchers, 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Reading, Referencing and the Management of Information
81
participants and so on. You can send messages exclusively to one cir-
cle, a number of circles or to all your circles – so you can share details 
of that good night out with your friends and send another message to 
your research participants to let them know you will be sending them 
a questionnaire later in the month.
No system is absolutely guaranteed to be perfect, and you may still 
occasionally find yourself in the position of looking through bits of 
paper or searching your hard drive or trying to dredge your memory 
about something you once read somewhere, but your system will 
ensure that searching and dredging are reduced to a minimum. We 
don’t have time to spend on wild-goose chases, so get going with 
your cross-referencing.
It is vital that you keep detailed information 
on  all books or articles that you consult, using 
the Harvard system or the system your institution 
requires you to use. You also need to cross-refer-
ence topics or themes with other sources so that 
you can find information about the same topic in 
other books or articles. Although this will seem laborious, it will 
save you hours of searching later for that all-important quota-
tion. When you come to writing the literature review, it will also 
make the process so much easier.
A lot of fuss about nothing?
Well, no. Just acquiring the tools of the trade. Referencing can be 
irritatingly exacting and time-consuming, but once you’ve estab-
lished a routine, recording information becomes (or should become) 
automatic. If you assimilate the information in this chapter and if 
you record your sources accurately and consistently, you will have 
begun to establish good research habits and to lay the foundations 
of your own research. You will be rewarded for your hard work if 
not in heaven, then certainly when you come to write your report. 
You will be able to locate information easily, to regroup and reclas-
sify evidence, and to produce referenced quotations to support your 
arguments.
Incidentally, if you were thinking of asking whether I always 
get references exactly right every time, I would have to admit that 
I can’t make such a bold claim. All I can say is that I do my best to 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
82
check that I’ve noted and included everything because I know the 
grief errors and omissions will cause me if I’m careless. I doubt 
whether any researchers, even the most experienced and the best, 
would be bold enough to claim they never made a mistake. The 
Open University in the UK employs experienced course team writ-
ers and researchers to produce their course materials and readers. 
They are supported by expert, specialist course team librarians 
and have full access to the university library’s print and online 
resources. Writing is their job, and yet one of the specialist librar-
ians told me:
“
Unfortunately, from the number of whey-faced academics and 
researchers about to submit papers or theses who are found panicking in 
libraries as they desperately search for missing sources, page numbers, 
authors’ initials and so on, it is apparent that even an occasional lapse in 
recording bibliographic details can result in hours of wasted time at the 
point when time is particularly short."
Trying to be kind, she continued:
“
It is inevitable that you will from time to time lack a similar detail 
from a reference – sometimes as a result of others’ incorrect 
referencing – but if you adopt a disciplined approach to information 
management you will be able to minimize the number of occasions 
when this occurs."
She’s right. So do your utmost to record every single detail at the 
time you read and that will go a long way to keep stress and frustra-
tion to a minimum. This issue is so important that I return to it again 
in Chapter 5 when covering the literature search.
Reading, Note-taking, Guarding 
against Plagiarism, Referencing and the 
Management of Information Checklist
1.  Read as much as you 
can about your topic 
in the time you have, 
and keep a record of 
what you read.
Try not to exceed your time 
limit. It’s easy to read on 
and on in the search for 
enlightenment.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Reading, Referencing and the Management of Information
83
2.  Be on the lookout for 
recurring themes, 
categories and 
keywords.
These will become 
increasingly important in 
your search for a structure 
or framework for your own 
research.
Q
3.  Remember that all 
your sources have 
to be acknowledged, 
including 
paraphrases of other 
people’s work and 
ideas.
Plagiarism is using other 
people’s words as your own. 
It could be just a few or 
thousands of other people’s 
words.
Q
4.  Decide on a system 
of referencing and 
stick to it.
The Harvard method is 
probably the easiest to deal 
with and the most prevalent, 
but check whether your 
institution has its own rules.
Q
5.  When you record 
sources, make sure 
you always note 
the author’s name, 
forename or initials, 
date of publication, 
title, place of 
publication and 
publisher. Remember 
to keep more than 
one copy.
There are variations for 
books, articles in collections 
and journal articles. Decide 
on ways of recording each 
one – and once you’ve 
decided, never change. It 
might be a good idea to 
keep a template of each as 
a reminder. Stick them on 
the wall or in some other 
readily available place. You 
will need to remind yourself 
many times during the 
course of your research.
Q
6.  Make notes of what 
seem to you to be 
important issues. 
Look for and keep a 
‘first thoughts’ list 
of categories and 
keywords in your 
research diary.
Make it clear in your notes 
which are the authors’ 
words and which are 
your paraphrases, though 
paraphrases also need to be 
cited.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
84
7.  Ask yourself whether 
you can trust what 
you read. Any 
signs of bias? Is 
referencing accurate?
What evidence do the 
authors provide to support 
their claims? Check Chapter 
7 for information about 
sources, evidence and the 
analysis of documentary 
evidence.
Q
8.  Electronic 
referencing can be 
the answer to all 
our prayers. You 
may have access to 
online databases at 
your own institution, 
so ask and, if 
familiarization 
courses are offered, 
make sure you 
attend.
But if you plan to work from 
home, consider the time 
it will take to familiarize 
yourself with the various 
techniques, the cost, 
whether you have sufficient 
space on your hard drive or 
an appropriate cloud-based 
storage plan for your needs.
Q
9.  Take particular care 
when you cite online 
references.
If you have any doubts, 
check your institution’s 
guidelines and/or consult 
some of the items in the 
further reading list.
Q
10.  Establish a system 
of indexing and 
cross-referencing.
There’s no point doing a 
large amount of reading 
if, at a later date, you can 
never find what you are 
looking for.
Q
11.  If you record your 
sources accurately 
and consistently 
you will have begun 
to establish good 
research habits 
and to lay the 
foundations for your 
own research.
You will be rewarded if not 
in heaven, then certainly 
when you come to write 
your report.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Reading, Referencing and the Management of Information
85
Further reading
Neville, C. (2010) The Complete Guide to Referencing and 
Avoiding Plagiarism (2nd edn). Maidenhead: Open University 
Press. 
Colin Neville provides guidance for project, undergraduate and post-
graduate students on the main referencing styles used in the UK. He 
also provides comprehensive guidelines on what plagiarism is and how 
to avoid it in assignments.
Orna, E. with Stevens, G. (2009) Managing Information for 
Research: Practical Help in Researching, Writing and Designing 
Dissertations (2nd edn). Maidenhead: Open University Press. 
I particularly like the introductory ‘First things first’ page, which 
reminds us of the importance of recording information about our 
12.  A lot of fuss about 
nothing?
Certainly not! Just getting 
to grips with the tools of the 
trade. If you decide you can’t 
be bothered to deal with 
the detail or ‘will sort it out 
later’, then referencing will 
give you real grief later on in 
your research, so be warned. 
Keep those templates to hand 
and check each reference 
to make sure everything is 
included. Well, all right. I 
suppose that even the most 
conscientious among us 
isn’t perfect, so if you know 
you have an incomplete 
reference, at least flag it or 
highlight it or do something 
to indicate that you need to 
get the detail sorted as soon 
as you can.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
86
references in an organized, methodical manner so that we can find them 
again easily. And then in the subsequent chapters, the authors set about 
advising us how to do it!
Pears, R. and Shields, G. (2013) Cite Them Right: The Essential 
Referencing Guide (9th edn). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
In only 100 pages, these two librarians cover pretty well everything 
there is to know about referencing and citations, including sections on 
how to avoid plagiarism, setting out citations and quotations, setting 
out references in your reference list and bibliography, and how to cite 
any reference sources using the Harvard (author–date) style, as well as 
referencing online sources.
Rumsey, S. (2008) How to Find Information: A Guide for 
Researchers (2nd edn). Maidenhead: Open University Press. 
This book includes information on virtual learning, electronic research 
and ‘webliographies’.
Other books and journals relating to plagiarism
Google Scholar and other search engines list many other books and 
online journals which relate to plagiarism. However, you are unlikely to 
have time to read them all, so rely on your supervisor to highlight which 
items are considered worth consulting.
  Any publications about plagiarism provided by your institution and/
or department should be priority reading. Take careful note of every-
thing that is said – and of the penalties for breaking the rules. At one 
time, some students might have got away with lifting whole paragraphs 
from the Internet, but now institutions are vigilant. Detection software 
has been widely adopted and that will certainly identify some default-
ers, but you will also do well to remember that it is likely your tutors and 
supervisors will also have referred to and recognized the same online 
literature as you – so be careful.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

87
Literature 
Searching
5
Key terms
COPAC
88
Parameter
88
Keyword
88
INTRODUCTION
This chapter takes you through the process of literature searching, assuming you 
are a first-time researcher. It helps you to focus on what you are looking for, refine 
your search terms and appreciate the range of sources at your disposal. In this 
chapter, you will find help:
•	Identifying search terms, refining and grouping keywords to optimize your 
search, both online and offline.
•	Making Google work for you as a search tool, including using Google Scholar 
and Google Books.
•	Using the library and how to conduct library database searches.
•	 Citing from the Internet and evaluating the academic credibility of online sources.
In Chapter 4, I emphasized the importance of accurate referencing. 
Now, if your references are in good shape and if you have begun to 
establish an easy-to-manage system of cross-referencing, your hard 
work will be rewarded. If you are also familiar with some of the 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
88
online search facilities such as Web of Knowledge and COPAC (two 
large databases of peer-reviewed research literature) and online 
bibliographic and referencing packages such as EndNote, Mendeley 
or Reference Manager, you are likely to have a head start in the 
literature-searching trail. However, even with these advantages, you 
will still need to develop a search strategy and to acquire search 
skills so that, as far as possible, you are able to identify only those 
items that relate directly to your topic and eliminate the many thou-
sands that do not.
Take advantage of whatever guidance your supervisor, depart-
ment, friends or library staff provide about searching. Find out whose 
job it is to help inexperienced searchers and always ask for help if 
you are stuck. Don’t suffer in silence and never believe you are the 
only one who appears to be incapable of solving all search problems. 
You won’t be. Many libraries provide courses on literature searching 
where you will be able to try out approaches and ask any questions. 
No matter how pressed for time you are, make sure you attend.
Libraries often have ‘How to ...’ or ‘Easy Searching Guides’, 
which will take you step-by-step through the requirements of some of 
the search tools and databases to which your institution subscribes. 
Study the instructions, keep them to hand for further reference and 
bookmark them so that you can find them in future rather than hav-
ing to type the URLs every time. Or you could save the instructions 
to a folder called ‘Research Project: How to Search’, or whatever title 
will enable you to find your documents easily.
Literature searching involves special techniques and know-how 
but before you can begin to think about starting your search, you 
have some work to do. For most of you, the Internet will be your 
first and sometimes only line of inquiry. However, the basic prin-
ciples involved in literature searching are the same, irrespective 
of whether your search is online or offline – namely, defining the 
parameters of the study and refining and focusing keywords that 
will allow you to identify relevant sources and, if possible, to elimi-
nate sources that are irrelevant to your research topic.
Defining the parameters of your search 
(search limiters) and keywords
Ask yourself the following questions:
1	 Are you only interested in materials in English? Do you want 
worldwide or only UK sources? What do you mean by ‘English’? 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Literature Searching
89
Take care. If you are not sufficiently precise about your require-
ments, you are likely to generate vast amounts of online American 
material. Is that what you want? If you ask for too much at the 
start of your search, you may be overwhelmed by the amount of 
material you identify.
2	 Do you want information about literature from 1800 to the pre-
sent day? You don’t have unlimited time on a 100-hour study, or 
on a much larger investigation, so start small. Limit yourself to 
what has been published in the past five or ten years and only 
look earlier when you need more information or when your super-
visor says you should expand your search. Not all supervisors 
agree with the ‘five-to-ten years’ suggestion. Two experienced 
supervisors of scientific research who read drafts of this chapter 
made it clear that even in a short project, they would expect 
researchers to cover a much wider range of literature. They 
pointed out that if researchers ignored earlier quality research 
and what they described as ‘standard texts’, they would not be in 
a position to present a balanced picture of the development of 
knowledge in their topic area over a period of time. They’re right 
of course. In a large investigation such as a PhD, researchers will 
almost always be required to produce a full literature review and 
to draw on quality research findings from 10 or 100 and, in his-
torical research, for example, 1000 years or more. However, the 
amount of time a 100-hour researcher has to spend on searching 
is necessarily very limited, so ask your supervisor for guidance 
about literature search and review requirements. Try not to close 
the literature search door too soon, but keep a check on the 
amount of time you allow for searching, and do your best not to 
exceed it.
3	 Where do you plan to concentrate your study? Hospitals, schools, 
start-up businesses, universities, colleges, prisons, adult educa-
tion centres – somewhere else? Try including your location in your 
keywords and see what is produced.
4	 Are you only interested in one discipline area? Nursing, Materials 
Science, Education, Engineering, Horticulture? What?
5	 Do you wish to identify only research carried out in England, 
Yorkshire, Durham, Stockport? Hong Kong, Scotland, Singapore, 
Australia, the USA, Worldwide? Where?
6	 Does it matter whether members of your sample are in higher 
education or not? If it’s of no concern where they are, leave ‘higher 
education’ out of your keywords.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
90
Focusing, refining and grouping 
your keywords
In the early stages of your search, you can’t afford to spend too 
much time sifting through large numbers of references, so focus 
your requirements more sharply to eliminate more of the irrelevant 
items. Look back at the ‘Defining the parameters’ section and check 
whether you are clear about your answers to each item. Sometimes, 
if you are not finding useful results, you may need to try alterna-
tive keywords. Your keywords are ‘mature students’, ‘barriers’ (to 
learning) and ‘higher education’. What about ‘hurdles’ instead of 
‘barriers to learning’? You might also have decided that ‘higher edu-
cation’ wasn’t precise enough but ‘postgraduate’ might be. Think 
of synonyms, consult a dictionary and a thesaurus such as Roget’s 
Thesaurus of English Words and Phrases. Some databases provide 
a thesaurus that enables you to adopt the keywords used in the 
database. If so, use it and make a note of the accepted keywords for 
future use.
Let’s return to the original purpose of your ‘mature students’ 
study. You have identified individual keywords that are likely to be 
important, but what you really want to discover is whether mature 
students (or older students) in higher education (or universities or 
colleges) experience any barriers (or hurdles) that impede their 
learning (or success) – and it is the grouping of these keywords 
that is important. If you are only interested in postgraduate engi-
neering students, for example, then the grouped keywords could be 
‘students + hurdles + postgraduate + engineering’.
Digital or print?
In this chapter and throughout this book, the importance of librar-
ies and librarians is emphasized because, despite widespread Wi-Fi, 
we still need access to what libraries provide and to the expertise 
of librarians. And we also need books and hard copies. If you are 
reading this book in print format, ask yourself what advantages 
there are in doing so. For the foreseeable future, digital and print 
will co-exist in libraries and researchers will make use of both. 
Academics will continue to inhabit a hybrid world of digital and 
print materials for some time to come and even when print has 
been largely supplanted, the need for continued access (local or 
remotely) will be crucial.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Literature Searching
91
Libraries, librarians – and books
Bruce and Mertens (2013) describe a survey conducted in 2013 by 
JISC and RLUK in the UK of how academics carry out research, 
which revealed, among many other things, that the first resort of 
most researchers is a search engine and that academics spend much 
less time in the library than online. The survey concluded that, ‘the 
role of the library has shifted from being the primary gateway to 
content to being a “buyer” and “owner” of content’. They go on to 
say that libraries have recognized the importance of making their 
content ‘discoverable’ online.
Most universities have well-equipped libraries that are more like 
centres of learning, with workstations, fast Wi-Fi connection and 
cafes nearby. Researchers are also discovering that some library 
staff provide courses and seminars on search techniques, learning 
styles and how to judge the quality of online sources. If you haven’t 
been into your library for some time, take a look. Yours may have 
reinvented itself while you weren’t looking.
Google search
There are a number of search engines that you could use to find aca-
demic research relevant to your own study. We focus here on Google 
because it is the most frequently used, giving birth to the verb, ‘to 
google’, to define online searching. In the month of January 2014, 
there were 12.9 billion searches on Google compared with the total 
of all Microsoft search sites, including Bing, which had 3.2 billion, 
and Yahoo! Sites, which attracted 2.2 billion visits.
Using Google to find relevant research studies will be second 
nature if you are a ‘digital native’, as you will probably google prod-
ucts ranging from books to holidays. So, there is probably little I 
will be able to tell you about what happens when you search on 
Google that you don’t already know. However, I thought it might 
be helpful to give you some tips on how to make your search 
more effective. Although Google is a highly advanced technologi-
cal tool for finding information, it is not sufficiently intelligent to 
interpret what you ask it to find if your search terms are vague or 
misleading – it bases its results on searching or ‘crawling’ through 
websites and indexing them according to the words or combina-
tions of words you put into its search box. Let’s see what happens 
when you are not specific. Let’s say that you are researching the 
use of questioning by teachers in secondary classrooms. You enter 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
92
‘Questioning’ into the search box. Try it now . . . What happened? 
Did you find what you were looking for? You may know what you 
mean by the topic ‘Questioning’ but Google doesn’t. Obvious? Well, 
yes, in this example it is, but it’s not always as clear as this. The 
general rule is that the more precise you are, the more relevant the 
search results will be.
I have found through trial and error that my Google searches are 
usually more effective and I get better results if I type a question 
into the search box, so my question about questioning (!) might be: 
‘How do teachers use questioning in the secondary school class-
room?’ Try it now and compare it with the search results for the word 
‘Questioning’. Although the most relevant result is still at the foot of 
the first page, this gives you a starting point and, once opened, the 
website will have content that will give you suggestions for further 
searches.
Apart from asking a question in the Google search box, if you type 
a keyword or group of words within quotation marks (e.g. ‘teacher 
questioning’), Google will search for this phrase only. So, it won’t 
search for the words ‘teacher’ or ‘questioning’ on their own, only in 
this precise combination.
There may be one or two search results at the top of the first 
page listed within a pale rectangular background. This does not 
mean that they are necessarily the most relevant search results. 
They are in this position and highlighted by their background 
because they are paid adverts from Google’s ‘Adwords’ service. 
They may well be the most relevant but not always. Every time 
someone clicks on these adverts, the company sponsoring them 
pays Google. This is called pay-per-click (PPC) advertising. Some 
searches also produce small adverts on the right-hand side – they 
are sponsored adverts too but cheaper than the larger advert at 
the top of the page. So, paid adverts may not necessarily give you 
the most relevant website results. You will need to decide that for 
yourself.
You might also consider carrying out a similar search on Google 
Scholar. Google Scholar provides a simple way to find relevant work 
within the world of scholarly research. You can search across many 
disciplines and sources for articles, theses, books, abstracts and 
court opinions, academic publishers, professional societies, online 
stores, universities and other websites. Google Scholar also provides 
citation tracking for authors. This means that you can search for 
who has quoted (‘cited’) a particular author or researcher, perhaps 
in order to gain academic credibility for their own methodology or 
research findings.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Literature Searching
93
Google Books
In addition to Google Scholar we now have Google Books, the aim 
being to make offline content searchable online. Although this is a 
very useful service, it has its limitations. If a book is out of copyright 
or the writer has given permission, books are available in ‘full view’ 
and free to download in pdf format. Other books are limited to a 
‘preview’ or, where permission for a preview has not been given or 
when the owner of a book cannot be identified, ‘snippets’ of two to 
three lines of text are shown but the full text of the book is search-
able. For other books that have neither a ‘full view’ nor ‘preview’, 
Google Books provides the book title. Each book includes an ‘About 
this book’ page with basic bibliographic data such as title, author, 
publication date, length and subject. For some books, you may also 
see additional information like key terms and phrases, references to 
the book from scholarly publications or other books, chapter titles 
and a list of related books. For every book, you’ll see links directing 
you to bookstores where you can buy the book and libraries where 
you can borrow it.
A Google Book search for a specifically worded piece of text can 
be unsuccessful in identifying relevant sources, particularly if that 
text appears in a footnote, a figure caption, a boxed insert, or inside 
some quotation from a consulted source. Google Books searches 
cannot be regarded as an authoritative source of the frequency or 
extent of specific usages or terms because many books fall into the 
unsearchable category.
While it is important to recognize the limitations to Google 
Books, you may find it perfectly adequate when used in conjunction 
with databases available in your university library. At some point 
in the future, there may come a time when all books are available 
online. That will be wonderful. The digital production of books will 
give us outstanding research tools, particularly for books long out 
of copyright but, as far as I am concerned, it will certainly not mean 
that books are redundant. So, those of you who thought you never 
needed to enter a library or bookshop ever again, sorry, you’re out of 
luck. Back to the shelves.
Check with your library catalogue to see what stock is held. 
Check what is on the shelves in and around your topic or return to 
your online references. If you see anything that might be of interest, 
get to work. Examine the contents lists. Titles can be misleading, but 
the contents lists will give you a good idea of what the book, article 
or journal is really about. Take a quick look at any chapters or sec-
tions that might be relevant to your topic, examine the index and the 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
94
list of references, and note chapters or paragraphs that may be of 
particular interest. Highlight any items that you think might need to 
be followed up at a later stage, and always record the source.
As I advised in Chapter 4, if you use your smartphone, tablet or 
laptop to record sources on the spot, you still need a back-up copy. 
Establish your own almost foolproof approach to recording sources. 
I say ‘almost’ because it is unlikely any approach will be 100 per cent 
foolproof, but you can try to get as close to it as you can.
List possible keywords and add a note to remind you where you 
found the book (library classification number, floor and shelf num-
ber, main library or annexe, in another library, online, another coun-
try – anything that will help you to find it again). All is not lost if your 
library does not hold the items you need because if you familiarize 
yourself with your library websites or databases, I am sure they will 
tell you how to obtain access to information in other libraries. Then, 
it might be possible for you to borrow the book, make a photocopy, 
access a scanned copy of a journal article on the inter-library loan 
scheme or gain access to a digital copy.
Richard Pears, co-author of Cite Them Right: The Essential 
Referencing Guide (2013) and an experienced librarian at Durham 
University, points out that ‘many library catalogues and biblio-
graphic databases enable you to save search results and email them 
to your account or export results to reference management software 
such as Endnote’. He adds that it’s a good idea to ask your subject 
librarian about this because he or she may be able to save you time 
when you produce your bibliography/list of references. Read on.
SCONUL (Society of College, National and University 
Libraries) provides access to the catalogues of more than 170 
libraries in the UK and Ireland. This is particularly useful for those 
of you who do most of your searching away from your main cam-
pus, and who hope to be given access to a library nearer home. It 
gives useful information about what specialist stock is held and 
provides details about opening and closing times in term time and 
during vacations.
Many public libraries have their own Public Library Catalogues 
online and, as mentioned in Chapter 4, the Consortium of University 
Research Libraries Online Public Access Catalogue (COPAC) is 
particularly helpful in giving free access to the online catalogues of 
some of the largest research libraries in the UK and Ireland, includ-
ing the British Library, Oxford and Cambridge University libraries, 
Trinity College Dublin library, National Libraries of Scotland and 
of Wales, and specialist libraries such as those of the Victoria and 
Albert Museum and Kew Gardens.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Literature Searching
95
The British Library’s public catalogue is now free online for 
the material that is held in the major Reference and Document Supply 
collections. You can also browse the British Library through COPAC.
Harvard’s Open Collections Program (OCP) works in col-
laboration with the university’s faculties, librarians and curators to 
develop highly specialized ‘open collections’, which are available to 
Internet users. In developing these collections, OCP produces digital 
objects and catalogue records that are open to anyone online.
Increasing numbers of universities now have their own digital 
repositories and are willing to give free (or subscription) access 
to their latest research. Try OAISTER (www.oaister.org), which 
provides another interdisciplinary source of research. If you want 
to keep up-to-date about what is available, always go first to the 
experts. In other words, it’s best to ask your librarian what the latest 
software or database is.
Journals
Books date fairly quickly and so you will almost certainly need to 
consult journals, particularly journals in your specialist area, many 
(probably most) of which are now available in digital format. Your 
library catalogue will include a list of journals to which your institu-
tion subscribes but if you have specialist librarians, always make 
use of their expertise. They can point you in the right direction, help 
you to refine your research strategy, find appropriate sources, tell 
you where to find print copies of journals, appropriate web pages, 
indexes and abstracts – and they can help you to avoid many hours 
of unproductive searching. Journals are expensive, regardless of 
whether they are on library shelves or available digitally. Either 
way, the library has to pay and, as the cost of books and subscrip-
tions to online materials increases, many institutions have to make 
decisions about what they can afford. If your library does not have 
what you are looking for, ask about an inter-library loan.
There are hundreds of journals, and it can be difficult to know 
which are likely to produce the most useful information, but all disci-
plines have a core of ‘quality’ journals that include nationally or even 
internationally refereed articles. A word about the importance of ref-
ereeing. All researchers hope their work will be published in good 
quality journals and they know that if they submit an article to one of 
the journals in this elite group, the editor will in all probability send 
it to other researchers in the same or similar field for their considera-
tion. When their comments have been considered, the article may be 
accepted, rejected or suggestions made for adjustments. Accepting 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
96
articles for publication is a serious business and all journal editors 
will spend time ensuring, as far as they possibly can, that the articles 
they accept will be of sufficient quality to merit publication.
Not all journals will have such demanding requirements. There 
are many others that might be equally useful, so ask your supervi-
sor and specialist librarians about likely sources which are available 
digitally or in print and which, if any, are available on your library 
shelves. Consult subject indexes, abstracts, the list of contents at the 
front (or sometimes at the back) of the journals, read abstracts at the 
start of articles and make a note of any interesting items, possible 
keywords, any articles which are likely to be of use and which are 
related to your topic and, as with books, add a note to indicate where 
the journal was located. And remember that you can’t lift material 
either offline or online without acknowledgement. Sorry to go 
on about this, but if you plan to draw on any material online, either 
by paraphrasing or by direct quotation, you must acknowledge it in 
a way that will enable readers to know where the information came 
from. Fail to do so and you will be plagiarizing. As noted earlier, the 
use of plagiarism detection software by universities and awarding 
bodies is widespread and you are likely to be in serious trouble when 
you are found out.
This is so important that I think it is worth revisiting how to cite 
online sources. Adopt the following citation order when dealing with 
web pages with individual authors:
•	Author
•	Year that the site was published/last updated (in parentheses)
•	Title of Internet site (in italics)
•	[Online]
•	Available at: URL
•	[Accessed: date]
For example:
“
Pennink (2013) The UK Survey of Academics: how academics  
(re)search [Online]. Available at http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/
query/2013/06/25/the-uk-survey-of-academics-how-academics-
research/ [Accessed 14 March 2014]."
Pears and Shields (2013) are quite right to remind us that we should 
evaluate all online information for accuracy, authority, currency, 
cover and objectivity, but that is easier said than done. I trust tutors 
and supervisors will provide guidance about ways of evaluating 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Literature Searching
97
sources, but I would urge you also to contact library staff to find 
out whether courses are provided. If they are, make sure you attend.
Evaluating sources
As far as possible, it is your job as a researcher to consider the worth 
of the research you have identified in your searches. You can make 
a start by asking yourself a few questions, perhaps along the follow-
ing lines:
•	Have you only drawn on source material that supports your point 
of view, without making efforts to consult a range of sources?
•	Have you really made an effort to carry out a critical examination 
of the evidence?
•	Is the research well designed and are the data collection instru-
ments suitable for the purpose?
•	Do you see any terms that suggest partisanship or bias?
In Chapter 7, Brendan Duffy reminds us that ‘writers will rarely 
declare their assumptions so it is the task of the researcher to expose 
them if possible’. He then asks: ‘Does the evidence supplied convinc-
ingly support the author’s arguments?’ He was writing about the 
analysis of documentary evidence, but his advice is equally valid in 
considering the worth of all research reports.
Of course, it’s not always easy to answer these questions. We 
may have few problems about identifying obvious signs of bias in 
another researcher but we need to be equally watchful about our 
own. For example, we may agree so strongly with an author’s con-
clusions that we fail to question whether those conclusions are fully 
justified. Then there is the problem about insufficient information on 
which to make a judgement. If you are carrying out all your searches 
on the web, you may find that information about research design 
is not always provided in sufficient detail. All you can hope to do 
is to examine reports of research as thoroughly and objectively as 
time and your impartiality allow. However, if you know that articles 
have been ‘refereed’, you have a better chance of making judgements 
about them because, if the refereeing ‘control system’ works well, 
you will know that they have been read by at least one other expe-
rienced researcher, usually an academic, who will have commented 
and given an informed opinion on the quality of the report.
If you are struggling to find out which articles are refereed and 
which are not, ask your library staff and/or your supervisor for help, 
but also take note of the advice given by Internet Detective, the 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
98
free Internet tutorial designed to help you ‘discern the good, the bad 
and the ugly for your online research’. It gives some of the best advice 
on Internet searching I have seen. It is all good sense, well presented, 
in plain English and at times, quite funny. It all helps! If you’ve read 
and I hope noted what they say, read it all again and make a point of 
going back to it from time to time at www.vtstutorials.ac.uk/detec-
tive/ – or just insert Internet Detective in Google’s search box, then 
bookmark the site so that you can easily find it in future.
Apart from bookmarking sites, you can also save URL references 
online by using Instapaper (www.instapaper.com) and, as described 
in Chapter 4, Delicious (www.delicious.com). Instapaper describes 
itself as ‘A simple tool for saving web pages to read later on your 
iPhone, iPad, Android, computer or Kindle.’ I often get sidetracked 
by opening a promising looking website and then moving from that 
website to follow up a reference within it. Before I realize, half-
an-hour has passed and I’ve still got another twenty references on 
Google to search. Instapaper enables you to save references until 
you have time to search them properly. If you have a Smartphone or 
iPad, you can follow up the references ‘on the go’ wherever you have 
a Wi-Fi connection.
Copyright and licensing restrictions when 
downloading items from the web
It’s always helpful to skim through complete articles and reports to 
see if they are as useful as they appear to be but if you want to down-
load web pages to a file and to use extracts from them at a later date, 
you have to be really careful about copyright and licensing restric-
tions. I know you know that, but I’m reminding you again! Database 
helplines should inform you what you can download, print and use, 
and what you can’t. If they don’t, and if you have any doubts, ask for 
help from your supervisor and/or specialist librarian. Some institu-
tions’ web pages provide fairly full statements about what in legal 
terms is ‘fair dealing’ and what is not, so it’s worthwhile seeing if 
yours is one of them. We all cut and paste from web pages but if 
you are careless and fail to give full details of where items come 
from (including paraphrases of items), when they were retrieved and 
whose words you are pasting into your own records, you could be in 
real trouble because, once again, you could find yourself involved in 
a plagiarism case. Sorry to repeat myself, but this issue is important. 
In the past, I think some researchers were caught in this particular 
spider’s web because of genuine ignorance rather than deliberate 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Literature Searching
99
attempts at deceit, but now so many verbal and printed warnings are 
given to students that institutions have little patience with the ‘Well, 
I didn’t know that was wrong’ excuse. So take care.
The Top Ten Guide to Searching the 
Internet Checklist
1.  Give yourself 
plenty of time.
It isn’t called the World Wide Web for 
nothing! There are massive quantities of 
information and huge numbers of blind 
alleys and it is important to allocate 
enough time for the search within the 
project plan. But it is also important to 
set yourself a limit. Web searching can 
be addictive and it is difficult to know 
where to draw the line. Although there 
may be some sites you wish to return 
to throughout the project to check for 
updates, it is important that you keep 
web searching in proportion with the 
other aspects of your literature review.
Q
2.  Be optimistic!
Start by typing in exactly what you 
are looking for, for example, ‘barriers 
to learning for mature students in 
higher education’. You might get lucky, 
and if not, it can often be interesting 
to see what the search engine thinks 
is relevant. I have found that typing 
the full question that I would like 
answering reduces the ambiguity of the 
search and produces the information 
I am looking for.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
100
3.  Be prepared 
with search 
limiters.
Before you start, think about how you 
are going to frame your search just 
as you would with a journal search. 
What other search terms, for example, 
could be used for ‘adult participation in 
learning’? Think through whether you 
want to limit your search to UK sites 
only (most search engines will let you 
specify this). It is also worth setting 
yourself parameters in terms of the age 
of articles referenced or the sector.
Q
4.  Know your 
search 
engines.
Apart from the ubiquitous Google, there 
are also specialist sites such as Google 
Scholar, so it is worth spending some time 
to see which of these sites is bringing up 
the most relevant hits for your search.
Q
5.  When you find 
something, 
don’t lose it!
It is worth writing down, copying and 
pasting into a document or bookmarking 
the exact URL of the page you have 
found, as sometimes a lot of time can 
be wasted trying to retrace your steps. 
Making a note of the site may not always 
be enough, as sometimes websites are 
so complicated it can be difficult to 
relocate the exact page you were looking 
for. You can also bookmark web pages, 
which is also a handy way of making 
the information available offline. The 
ranking of a site on Google can change 
over time, depending on the effectiveness 
of its Search Engine Optimisation (SEO), 
compared with other sites. It may not be 
on the same page the next time you look 
for it, so noting the URL or bookmarking 
it will save you time having to search for 
it again. You might also want to take a 
screenshot and save it as an image. If you 
are using a smartphone or a tablet, you 
could even take a photo of your laptop
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Literature Searching
101
or PC screen and email it to yourself or 
save it to a cloud-based storage system 
such as Google Drive or Dropbox, where 
it can be accessed from any browser on 
any device.
6.  Don’t 
underestimate 
the news.
Sites such as The Guardian, the BBC and 
Sky have dedicated education and other 
specialist departments. Not only can 
these sites provide current stories that 
can help to bring your research right 
up-to-date, they might also contain links 
to any reports referenced or to relevant 
organizations.
Q
7.  Avoid spam.
Many sites will ask you to register 
before you can access information, 
in many cases just to help them by 
monitoring who is using their site. 
Registering will often mean entering 
your email address and unfortunately 
this can mean your name gets onto 
email lists and you will start receiving 
spam emails. One way to get round this 
is to set up a dedicated email address 
for your research. This way you can 
monitor the address for useful emails 
and then close the account once you 
have finished so you don’t receive 
unwanted emails to your main address.
Q
8.  Networking – 
online and 
offline.
Your best route to finding the most 
relevant sites and search engines is to 
talk to your contacts. See if they have 
stumbled over any relevant websites. 
With so many routes to accessing 
information, word of mouth can save a 
lot of time but don’t just limit yourself to 
other people on your course. It is worth 
contacting anyone who is researching 
your area. Look for research networks 
in your field and join them.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
102
9.  Referencing.
It can be difficult to keep track of where 
quotes have come from, so whenever 
you paste a quote, paste the web link 
too. As pointed out earlier, you will 
also need to reference the exact date 
you accessed the site because of the 
evolving nature of content on the 
web. Take particular care when using 
online collaborative environments 
such as wikis where users are able to 
edit content without the changes going 
through a process of peer review. While 
these open resources can provide 
valuable research information, it needs 
to be verified and so try to trace the 
original source and then apply your 
usual process of critiquing who wrote 
the document and why.
Q
10.  Patience and 
persistence!
The web is an invaluable tool for 
researchers because of the vast amount 
of information available. It also easy 
to become distracted when online and 
it is tempting to check your emails, 
texts or your social networks. Switch 
your mobile off or put it on silent and 
focus on the task in hand – become 
unavailable while you are searching. 
Online searches can be very frustrating 
and often feel like searching for a needle 
in a haystack but once you find that 
needle, everything becomes worthwhile.
Q
Don’t forget to obtain a copy of your library, 
institution and departmental guides on search-
ing for references. Quite often, departments will 
have their own rules and regulations that must be 
followed.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Literature Searching
103
Further reading
Hart, C. (2001) Doing a Literature Search: A Comprehensive 
Guide for the Social Sciences. London: Sage. 
This useful book considers aspects of the literature search in the 
social sciences and includes references to relevant books and articles. 
Although it has not been updated to include online searches, the princi-
ples of offline literature searches remain much the same.
Keeble, H. and Kirk, R. (2007) Exploring the existing body of 
research, in A.R.J. Briggs and M. Coleman (eds) Research 
Methods in Educational Leadership and Management (2nd edn). 
London: Sage. 
This chapter includes guidance on constructing a search category, 
searching library catalogues and electronic databases, citations search-
ing, using search engines – and much more.
Pears, R. and Shields, G. (2013) Cite Them Right: The Essential 
Referencing Guide (9th edn). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan 
(online search tool at http://www.citethemright.co.uk). 
This excellent book is the definitive work on referencing.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

104
6
The Review of 
the Literature
Key terms
Literature review
105
Theory
106
Model
107
Framework
107
INTRODUCTION
This chapter explains what a literature review is, and why it is included in a 
research project. It aims to take you through some key terms and illuminate 
the distinction between a list of references and a critical literature review. The 
­chapter uses extracts of case studies to help you understand what kind of review 
is needed to show that findings have been identified in similar research studies, 
and what the similarities and differences are to your own study. The chapter 
provides:
•	A definition of ‘literature review’, and how to create an insightful and critical 
review rather than just a list of literature that you have read.
•	Key definitions of important terms, such as ‘theory’ and ‘framework’.
•	Extracts of case studies of different types of literature reviews to illustrate how 
they may differ according to the requirements and scope of the research.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

The Review of the Literature
105
Writing about health and social care, Aveyard defines a literature 
review as:
“
a comprehensive study and interpretation of literature that relates to 
a particular topic. When you undertake a literature review you identify 
a research question, then seek to answer this question by searching 
for and analyzing relevant literature using a systematic approach. This 
review then leads you to the development of new insights that are only 
possible when each piece of relevant information is seen in the context 
of other information. If you think of one piece of information as part of 
a jigsaw, then you can see how a review of the literature is like the whole 
completed jigsaw."
(Aveyard 2010: 5-6: emphasis in original)
Hart agrees that a literature review is important because:
“
without it you will not acquire an understanding of your topic, of 
what has already been done on it, how it has been researched, and what 
the key issues are. In your written project you will be expected to show 
that you understand previous research on your topic. This amounts to 
showing that you have understood the main theories in the subject area 
and how they have been applied and developed, as well as the main 
criticisms that have been made of work on the topic."
(Hart 2001: 1)
In Hart’s view, ‘the review is therefore a part of your academic devel-
opment – of becoming an expert in the field’. A critical review of 
the literature will be required in most cases for a PhD, but a project 
lasting two or three months will not require anything so ambitious. 
If your supervisor agrees, you may decide to omit an initial review 
altogether. However, evidence of reading will still be required and 
the procedures involved in producing that evidence will be much the 
same, regardless of the size of the task or discipline.
The ‘critical review’ of the literature
The main point to bear in mind is that a review should provide the 
reader with a picture, albeit limited in a short project, of the state of 
knowledge and of major questions on the subject. In principle, that 
sounds easy enough but in practice it can prove to be anything but 
easy. Haywood and Wragg wryly comment that critical reviews are 
more often than not uncritical reviews – what they describe as:
“
The furniture sale catalogue, in which everything merits a one-
paragraph entry no matter how skilfully it has been conducted: Bloggs 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
106
(1975) found this, Smith (1976) found that, Jones (1977) found the other, 
Bloggs, Smith and Jones (1978) found happiness in heaven."
(Haywood and Wragg 1982: 2)
They remind us that it requires discipline to produce a review which 
demonstrates ‘that the writer has studied the work in the field with 
insight’. It is easy to produce a furniture sale catalogue, to collect 
facts and to describe what is, but not so easy to produce this ‘critical’ 
review. It involves questioning assumptions, querying claims made 
for which no evidence has been provided, considering the findings of 
one researcher versus those of others and evaluating. All research-
ers collect many facts, but then must select, organize and classify 
findings into a coherent pattern. Verma and Beard agree that lit-
erature reviews must identify and explain relevant relationships 
between facts, but they also consider that:
“
the researcher must produce a concept or build a theoretical structure 
that can explain facts and the relationships between them ... The 
importance of theory is to help the investigator summarise previous 
information and guide his future course of action. Sometimes the 
formulation of a theory may indicate missing ideas or links and the kinds 
of additional data required. Thus, a theory is an essential tool of research 
in stimulating the advancement of knowledge still further."
(Verma and Beard 1981: 10)
This raises a number of issues relating to the meaning of ‘theory’ and 
of ‘theoretical structure’ and thus, before we look at extracts from 
some successful literature reviews, perhaps I should make sure we 
all mean the same thing when we speak about ‘theory’. And that pre-
sents a few problems because different people have slightly different 
views about meaning.
Theory and theoretical (or conceptual) 
frameworks
Theory has been described as being ‘a set of interrelated abstract 
propositions about human affairs and the social world that explain 
their regularities and relationships’ (Brewer 2000: 192), or ‘theory at 
the lowest level can be an ad hoc classification system, consisting of 
categories which organise and summarise empirical observations’ 
(Bowling 2002: 139). Bowling continues:
“
It can be a taxonomy which is a descriptive categorical system 
constructed to fit the empirical observations in order to describe the 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

The Review of the Literature
107
relationships between categories (e.g. in a health care budget: spending 
on acute services, non-acute services, health promotion activities and 
so on)."
(Bowling 2002: 140)
However, it can be, and often is, merely taken to refer to the current 
state of knowledge in a subject derived from the published litera-
ture – what Wolcott (1992: 3–52) described as ‘theory first’ rather 
than ‘theory after’. Punch clarifies the difference between the two 
as follows:
“
In theory-first research, we start with a theory, deduce hypotheses 
from it, and design a study to test these hypotheses. This is theory 
verification. In theory-after research, we do not start with a theory. 
Instead, the aim is to end up with a theory, developed systematically 
from the data we have collected. This is theory generation."
(Punch 2005: 16)
Care has to be taken before embarking on a ‘theory after’ approach, 
mainly because it requires the collection of a great deal of data that 
is inevitably well beyond the timescale and scope of most small (or 
smallish) studies. Not impossible for a PhD, but still difficult.
Cohen et al. point out that ‘model’ is sometimes used instead of 
or interchangeably with ‘theory’:
“
Both may be seen as explanatory devices ... though models are often 
characterized by the use of analogies to give a more graphic or visual 
representation of a particular phenomenon. Providing they are accurate 
and do not misrepresent the facts, models can be of great help in 
achieving clarity and focusing on key issues."(Cohen et al. 2000: 12–13)
I particularly like Miles and Huberman’s admirably clear statement 
about what they see as theory building and conceptual frameworks. 
They write that:
“
Theory building relies on a few general constructs that subsume a 
mountain of particulars. Terms such as ‘stress’ or ‘role conflict’ are 
typically labels we put on bins containing a lot of discrete events and 
behaviours. When we assign a label to a bin, we may or may not know 
how all the contents of the bin fit together, or how this bin relates to 
another. But any researcher, no matter how inductive in approach, 
knows which bins to start with and what their general contents are 
likely to be. Bins come from theory and experience and (often) from the 
general objectives of the study envisioned. Laying out those bins, 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
108
giving each a descriptive or inferential name, and getting some clarity 
about their interrelationships is what a conceptual framework is all 
about."
(Miles and Huberman 1994: 18)
The label is not important, but the process of establishing a map or 
framework of how the research will be conducted and analysed is. 
As Polit and Hungler point out:
“
A framework is the conceptual underpinnings of a study ... In a study 
based on a theory, the framework is referred to as the theoretical 
framework; in a study that has its roots in a specified conceptual model, 
the framework is often called the conceptual framework (although the 
terms conceptual framework and theoretical framework are often used 
interchangeably)." (Polit and Hungler: 1999: 110; emphasis in original)
So, a theoretical framework is an explanatory device ‘which 
explains either graphically or in narrative form, the main things to 
be studied – the key factors, constructs or variables – and the pre-
sumed relationships among them’ (Miles and Huberman 1994: 18).
Polit and Hungler comment on how helpful frameworks can be to 
the researcher:
“
Frameworks are efficient mechanisms for drawing together and 
summarizing accumulated facts ... The linkage of findings into a coherent 
structure makes the body of accumulated knowledge more accessible 
and, thus, more useful both to practitioners who seek to implement 
findings and to researchers who seek to extend the knowledge base."
(Polit and Hungler 1999: 111)
I find that ‘theory’ and ‘theoretical frameworks’ can on some occa-
sions be used in variable ways, depending on the interpretation and 
understanding of individual researchers. I do sometimes become 
concerned at the view that research cannot proceed unless it has a 
sound ‘theoretical base’, mainly because I am not always sure what 
that means in the context of some of the research being considered. 
These issues need to be discussed or else, ‘what might become an 
opportunity for an informed dialogue about theory, and a concomi-
tant review of the roles it can play, is represented instead as an 
obstacle’ (Wolcott 2001: 80). I hope you will always be able to engage 
in ‘informed dialogue’ with your supervisor and to ask for clarifica-
tion if terminology, principles, meaning and ideas are new or unclear 
to you.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

The Review of the Literature
109
The ‘critical review’ in practice
All the work you have already done in identifying keywords, major 
issues and categories will now help in establishing a framework for 
your analysis and review of the literature. Even when all the nec-
essary groundwork has been done, difficulties may still remain, 
not least because any research involving human beings has to take 
account of the inevitably large number of variables involved, which 
makes it difficult to establish any common patterns of behaviour 
or experience. And then there is the difficulty of researchers start-
ing from different bases so that comparing like with like becomes 
problematic. However, in spite of the difficulties inherent in the pro-
duction of any review, it is still perfectly possible to succeed, as did 
Gilbert Fan, a first-time researcher, and John Richardson and Alan 
Woodley, two very experienced academics and researchers. Let’s 
look now at short extracts from their successful reviews.
The Gilbert Fan review
When he carried out his research, Fan was a member of staff in 
a School of Health Sciences in Singapore and was involved in his 
institution’s Diploma in Nursing programme. He knew that certain 
concerns were being expressed nationally and internationally about 
nurse education, including a decline in student enrolment in nurs-
ing programmes, the apparent low status of nursing, which was 
believed to have contributed to poor recruitment, and high attrition 
rates leading to a shortage of nurses. He decided that a study of stu-
dents’ perceptions of their diploma programme in particular and of 
the nursing profession in general would be useful to him and would 
contribute to the school’s understanding of the programme from a 
student perspective.
He had read widely and his literature review was extensive. He 
knew he could not include all his sources and so he had to decide on 
specific topics which were of particular interest to him and under 
which he could group his findings. Though there were relatively few 
Singaporean studies on which to draw, he found there was plenty to 
choose from other countries, mainly the USA, the UK and Australia. 
He grouped his findings under the headings of:
•	the decline in student enrolment in nursing education;
•	curricula, types of nursing education and nursing competencies;
•	teaching and clinical supervision in nursing education programmes;
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
110
•	the relationship between nursing education and the profession; 
and
•	nursing as a career choice.
Each of the above topics was thoroughly explored and documented 
and the review ran to 32 pages – more than was required for a 
Master’s thesis, but Fan was nothing if not thorough. This small 
extract, which covered only half a page, is part of the section on the 
decline in student enrolment, but I hope it gives you an idea of how 
he approached his task.
“
Pillitteri (1994: 132) sees the decline in student enrolment in nursing 
education programmes to be a serious concern for the profession and 
Naylor (1990: 123) projected that the total number of new graduates 
from all the nursing programmes in the USA would drop from 82,700 in 
1985 to 68,700 in 1995. Among the reasons for such a decline was that 
students did not find nursing attractive as a lifelong career. Such 
perceptions were perpetuated by unrealistic portrayals of nursing in 
the mass media and the alternative careers that women could enter 
today (Brooks 1989: 121; Fagin et  al. 1988: 367; Kelsey 1990 cited in 
Pillitteri 1994: 132)."
(Fan 1998: 31)
Subsequent paragraphs deal further with research findings from all 
four countries (the USA, the UK, Australia and Singapore), which, in 
spite of the fact that each has a different system of nurse education, 
identified similar reasons for the decline in student recruitment and 
high turnover; namely, the traditional structure of nurse education, 
poor career advancement, job dissatisfaction, inflexible work sched-
ules, staff shortage, low pay, family commitments, relocation of fam-
ily, unsupportive supervisors and lack of opportunities for career 
advancement. He supports each of the items with the name, date and 
page number of the sources and, of course, the full details of each are 
provided in the full list of references at the end of the thesis.
Fan made a good job of categorizing his findings under the five 
main headings, each of which had sub-headings. Even with the ongo-
ing work of recording, categorizing and re-categorizing, the produc-
tion of this review must have been complex. However, he succeeded 
and not only produced a good review, but also a good thesis.
The Richardson and Woodley review
On to the second example, which is a small extract taken from a 
journal article produced by John Richardson and Alan Woodley and 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

The Review of the Literature
111
entitled ‘Another look at the role of age, gender and subject as pre-
dictors of academic attainment in higher education’ (Richardson 
and Woodley 2003). Both are experienced researchers, and over the 
years have produced a number of research papers concerned with 
this topic (Woodley and McIntosh 1980; Woodley 1981, 1984, 1985, 
1998; Richardson and King 1998).
In 2003, they published the results of their updated and extended 
investigation into the academic attainment of mature students in 
higher education. Consider the first paragraph of the introduction 
to this study, which makes clear what they intend to do. They write:
“
In this article, we examine the role of a student’s age, gender and 
subject of study as predictors of their academic attainment in higher 
education, and in particular as predictors of the classes of first degrees 
awarded by institutions of higher education in the UK. There has been a 
good deal of interest in this topic over the last 30 years, and our analysis 
builds on the findings of several previous investigations that examined 
the performance of graduates in the UK."
(Richardson and Woodley 2003: 475)
Readers are then referred to a table listing previous analyses of pre-
dictors of academic attainment in UK higher education from 1964 to 
2001.
They continue by analysing their own findings under the head-
ings of: age and academic attainment; gender and academic attain-
ment; subject of study and academic attainment. These are followed 
by variations and groupings relating to age, gender and subject of 
study. The following extract is taken from their section on age and 
academic attainment:
“
Interest in the role of age as a predictor of academic attainment is 
often motivated by a stereotype of older people as being deficient in 
intellectual skills (Richardson and King 1998). Cross-sectional studies 
comparing groups of different ages have indicated that there is a slight 
decline in intellectual function between the ages of 18 and 60, with a 
more pronounced decline thereafter (e.g. Nyberg et al. 1996; Verhaeghen 
and Salthouse 1997). Such results are, however, contaminated by cohort 
differences in life experience, and longitudinal studies comparing the 
same groups at different ages often find no statistically significant 
decline before the age of 60 (Schaie 1996: 107–36). When any age-related 
changes in performance are observed, they typically amount to a 
reduction in information processing, whereas access to stored 
information is usually unaffected (Klatzky 1988; Nyberg et  al. 1996). 
There is thus no reason to expect a reduction in attainment with 
advancing age in situations that demand the retrieval of knowledge 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
112
(Baltes et al. 1984), except when they involve time pressure (Verhaeghen 
and Salthouse 1997). Of course, one situation that fits the latter 
description is the traditional unseen examination."
(Richardson and Woodley 2003: 477–8)
Read this again, but perhaps more slowly this time. Take note of the 
language Richardson and Woodley use, the care they take in draw-
ing conclusions from the research findings and the way some of the 
findings are qualified. If you have time, consult the full article and 
examine the ways in which findings are categorized.
Reviewing the reviews
Look back at the two extracts in this chapter. Richardson and 
Woodley already had extensive knowledge of their topic before they 
undertook the work involved in their 2003 article and they were able 
to produce an exhaustive review of previous studies relating to the 
influence of age, gender and subject of study on academic attainment. 
Gilbert Fan was a first-time researcher, and although he knew a great 
deal about issues relating to his work and had identified an area of 
interest very early in his studies, he did not have the advantage of a 
firm knowledge base about previous research. He was not required to 
produce an exhaustive review of the research findings relating to his 
topic: it was sufficient for him to produce a relatively brief account of 
the selected literature and to draw some conclusions where possible, 
bearing in mind the care needed in making claims. His early ideas 
about likely headings, groups and categories were based mainly on 
his personal and professional experience, and were gradually added 
to, adapted or completely changed during the course of his reading.
A literature review should be more than just a list of 
references that are relevant to your research topic. 
A critical review involves questioning assump-
tions, querying claims made for which no evidence 
has been provided, considering the findings of one 
researcher versus those of others and evaluating 
the conclusions drawn.
Remember!
We can all learn a great deal by reading what other researchers 
have done. Look critically at all reviews that come your way. Ask 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

The Review of the Literature
113
yourself whether they are furniture sale catalogues or well-organ-
ized accounts that are relevant to the topic. Research findings can be 
dangerous if they are used in an undisciplined way and I feel a cer-
tain anxiety when I am told that ‘research proves x or y’ when I see 
no corroborating evidence to warrant such an assertion. Inferences 
may possibly be drawn, results ‘might indicate’, but remember that in 
any dealings with human beings, ‘proof’ is hard to come by.
Review of the Literature Checklist
1.  Evidence of reading will 
always be required in any 
research.
Although in a small 
study, it may not be 
necessary to produce a 
full literature review.
Q
2.  Researchers may collect 
many facts but then must 
select, organize and classify 
findings into a coherent 
pattern.
The aim is to produce a 
critical review, not a list 
of everything you have 
read.
Q
3.  Your framework will not 
only provide a map of 
how the research will be 
conducted and analysed, 
it will also give you ideas 
about a structure for your 
review.
It will help you to draw 
together and summarize 
facts and findings.
Q
4.  Literature reviews should 
be succinct and, as far as 
is possible in a small study, 
should give a picture of the 
state of knowledge and of 
major questions in your 
topic area.
If you have been 
able to classify your 
reading into groups, 
categories or under 
headings, writing your 
review will be relatively 
straightforward.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
114
5.  Ensure that all references 
are complete. Note the page 
numbers of any quotations 
and paraphrases of good 
ideas. You cannot use them 
without acknowledging 
the source. If you do, you 
may become involved in a 
plagiarism challenge.
It should be possible for 
any readers to locate 
your sources.
Q
6.  Watch your language. 
Perhaps inferences may be 
drawn, but ‘proof’ is hard to 
come by when dealing with 
human beings.
Make no claims that 
cannot be justified from 
the evidence you have 
presented. Consider 
again the wording 
Richardson and Woodley 
use in the extract from 
their article.
Q
7.  Examine your sources 
critically before you decide 
to use them.
Any sign of bias, 
inappropriate language 
or false claims? Are you 
able to trust the authors’ 
judgements?
Q
8.  Remember that unless you 
are comparing like with 
like, you can make no 
claims for comparability.
Researchers often start 
their research from 
different bases and 
make use of different 
methods of data 
collection. You may 
still wish to use their 
findings, but be careful 
about how you discuss 
them.
Q
9.  Do not be tempted to leave 
out any reports of research 
merely because they differ 
from your own findings.
It can be helpful to 
include differing results. 
Discuss whether they 
undermine your own 
case – or not.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

The Review of the Literature
115
10.  Start the first draft of 
your review early in your 
reading. Many more drafts 
will be required before 
you have a coherent and 
‘critical’ account but better 
to start small and then 
build on your first attempt 
than to have to make sense 
of everything you have 
read at one attempt.
As you continue, entries 
will be deleted and 
others added, but you 
will have made a start. 
Better to be faced 
with a badly written, 
inadequate review as 
a starting point, than a 
blank page.
Q
Further reading
Aveyard, H. (2010) Doing a Literature Review in Health and 
Social Care: A Practical Guide (2nd edn). Maidenhead: Open 
University Press. 
This is a small book but it is full of useful information and guidance 
about developing research questions, literature searching and literature 
reviews.
Bell, J. and Opie, C. (2002) Learning from Research: Getting 
More from Your Data. Buckingham: Open University Press. 
Chapter 4.3, pp. 137–43 (and elsewhere in this book) considers reviews 
produced by five experienced and successful postgraduate students in 
very different higher educational institutions in Australia, England and 
Singapore.
Hart, C. (1998) Doing a Literature Review: Releasing the Social 
Science Research Imagination. London: Sage, in association with 
the Open University. 
Even if a full review is not required, the appendices on ‘The proposal’, 
‘How to cite references’, ‘Presentation of a dissertation’, ‘Managing 
information and keeping records’ and ‘A checklist of do’s and don’ts for 
reviewing’ will still be useful.
Laws, S. with Harper, C. and Marcus, R. (2013) Research for 
Development: A Practical Guide (2nd edn). London: Sage. 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
116
Chapter 5, pp. 101–19 provides excellent checklists about planning, car-
rying out and writing up the literature, together with guidance about 
using a library and how to research online.
Murray, R. (2011) How to Write a Thesis (3rd edn). Maidenhead: 
Open University Press. 
Pages 122–35 discuss definitions and purposes of literature reviews 
and justification for the inclusion and omission of literature, while 
pages 135–44 provide detailed advice on how to avoid plagiarism.
O’Dochartaigh, N. (2007) How to Do Your Literature Search and 
Find Research Information Online (2nd edn). London: Sage.
Richardson, J.T.E. and Woodley, A. (2003) Another look at the 
role of age, gender and subject as predictors of academic attain-
ment in higher education, Studies in Higher Education, 28 (4): 
476–93.
Ridley, D. (2012) The Literature Review: A Step-by-Step Guide 
for Students (2nd edn). London: Sage. 
This book goes through the various stages of reading, organizing infor-
mation, literature searching and writing up the review.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Plan your project
schedule and scope
(Ch 2)
Understand ethics, privacy,
anonymity and
confidentiality (Ch 3)
Refine your
research question
(Ch 2)
Read, take notes and
write up as you go
along (Ch 4)
Conduct a literature
search
(Ch 5)
If required, do a
literature review
(Ch 6)
Choose your
research tools
(Ch 7–12)
Conduct your research
and collect the data
(Ch 7–12)
Start: do your
groundwork
(Ch 1) 
Meet your supervisor,
understand requirements,
brainstorm for topics
(Ch 2)
Compile, analyse and
interpret your data
(Ch 13)
Write a first draft of
your report
(Ch 14)
Read, redraft and
proof your report
(Ch 14)
Submit your research
Project on time and to
requirements
(Ch 14)
SUCCESS!
You did it!
Well done. 
YOU ARE HERE
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Part II
Selecting Methods of 
Data Collection
Introduction
When you have decided on a 
topic, refined it and specified 
objectives, you will be in a posi-
tion to consider how to collect 
the evidence you require. The 
initial question is not ‘which 
methodology?’ but ‘what do I 
need to know and why?’ Only 
then do you ask ‘what is the best 
way to collect information?’ and 
‘when I have this information, what shall I do with it?’
No approach depends solely on one method any more than it 
would exclude a method merely because it is labelled ‘quantitative’, 
‘qualitative’, ‘case study’, ‘action research’ or whatever. As I indicated 
in Chapter 1, some approaches depend heavily on one type of data 
collection method – but not exclusively. You may consider that a 
study making use of a questionnaire will inevitably be quantitative, 
but it may also have qualitative features. Case studies, which are 
generally considered to be qualitative studies, can combine a wide 
Key terms
Triangulation
120
Reliability
121
Test–retest
121
Alternate forms method
121
Split-half method
121
Validity
121
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

DOING YOUR RESEARCH PROJECT
120
range of methods, including quantitative techniques. Methods are 
selected because they will provide the data you require to produce a 
complete piece of research. Decisions have to be made about which 
methods are best for particular purposes and then data collection 
instruments must be designed to do the job.
Constraints
The extent of your data collection will be influenced by the amount 
of time you have. This may seem a rather negative approach, but 
there is no point in producing a grandiose scheme that requires a 
year and a team of researchers if you are on your own, have no funds 
and in any case have to hand in the project report in three months. 
Even so, if possible, efforts should be made to cross-check findings, 
and in a more extensive study, to use more than one method of data 
collection. This multi-method approach is known as triangulation.
Laws (2013: 143) points out that ‘the key to triangulation is to 
see the same thing from different perspectives and thus to be able 
to confirm or challenge the findings of one method with those of 
another’. She warns:
“
accounts collected from different perspectives may not match tidily 
at all. There may be mismatch and even conflict between them. A 
mismatch does not necessarily mean that the data collection process is 
flawed – it could be that people just have very different accounts of 
similar phenomena. You need to critically examine the meaning of any 
mismatches to make sense of them."
(Laws 2013: 144)
One problem for short-term researchers is that examining the mean-
ing and making sense of any mismatches takes time and so most 100-
hour projects are likely to be limited to single-method studies. You just 
do the best you can in the available time. There are likely to be other 
constraints. For example, if you wish to observe meetings, you will 
be limited by the number and timing of meetings that are scheduled 
to take place in the period of your study. The willingness of people to 
be interviewed, or observed, to complete the questionnaire or diaries 
will inevitably affect your decisions as to which instruments to use.
Reliability and validity
Whatever procedure for collecting data is selected, it should always 
be examined critically to assess to what extent it is likely to be 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

SELECTING METHODS OF DATA COLLECTION
121
reliable and valid. Reliability is the extent to which a test or proce-
dure produces similar results under constant conditions on all occa-
sions. A clock that runs 10 minutes slow some days and fast on other 
days is unreliable. A factual question that may produce one type of 
answer on one occasion but a different answer on another is equally 
unreliable. Questions that ask for opinions may produce different 
answers for a whole range of reasons. The respondent may just have 
watched a TV programme that affected their opinion, or may have 
had some experience that angered or pleased and so affected their 
response. Writing about interviews, Wragg (1980: 17) asks: ‘Would 
two interviewers using the same schedule or procedure get a simi-
lar result? Would an interviewer obtain a similar picture using the 
procedures on different occasions?’ These are reasonable questions 
to put to yourself when you check items on a questionnaire or inter-
view schedule.
There are a number of devices for checking reliability in scales 
and tests, such as test–retest (administering the same test some 
time after the first), the alternate forms method (where equivalent 
versions of the same items are given and results correlated) and 
the split-half method (where the items in the test are split into two 
matched halves and scores then correlated). These methods are not 
always feasible or necessary, and there are disadvantages and prob-
lems associated with all three. Generally, unless your supervisor 
advises otherwise, such checking mechanisms will not be necessary 
unless you are attempting to produce a test or scale. The check for 
reliability will come at the stage of question wording and piloting of 
the instrument.
Validity is an altogether more complex concept. Most definitions 
state that validity tells us whether an item or instrument measures 
or describes what it is supposed to measure or describe, but this 
is rather vague and leaves many questions unanswered. Sapsford 
and Jupp (2006: 1) offer a more precise definition. They take valid-
ity to mean ‘the design of research to provide credible conclusions; 
whether the evidence ... can bear the weight of the interpretation that 
is put on it’. They argue that what has to be established is whether 
data ‘do measure or characterize what the authors claim, and that 
the interpretations do follow from them. The structure of a piece of 
research determines the conclusions that can be drawn from it (and, 
more importantly, the conclusions that should not be drawn from it)’ 
(Sapsford and Jupp 2006: 1).
If an item is unreliable, then it must also lack validity, but a reli-
able item is not necessarily also valid. It could produce the same or 
similar responses on all occasions, but not be measuring what it is 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

DOING YOUR RESEARCH PROJECT
122
supposed to measure. Measuring the extent of validity can become 
extremely involved, and there are many variations and subdivisions. 
For the purpose of 100-hour projects that are not concerned with 
complex testing and measurement, it is rarely necessary to delve 
deeply into the measurement of validity, though efforts should be 
made to examine items critically.
Ask yourself whether another researcher using your research 
instrument and asking factual questions would be likely to get 
the same or similar responses. Tell other people (colleagues, pilot 
respondents, fellow students) what you are trying to find out or to 
measure, and ask them whether the questions or items you have 
devised are likely to do the job. This rough-and-ready method will 
at least remind you of the need to achieve some degree of reliability 
and validity in question wording even though it is unlikely to satisfy 
researchers involved with administering scales and tests with large 
numbers of participants. If you are involved in the validity of scaled 
measures, you might wish to consult the items included in the fur-
ther reading below.
Thinking about computerized data analysis?
If you think you might wish to make use of a software package to 
analyse your returns, take care over the design of all your data col-
lection instruments because the way you word questions may result 
in responses that are difficult to analyse. Data has to be filtered to 
get to the meaning of all those figures and to understand what can 
be claimed from them and what can’t. If possible, decide which soft-
ware package you will use in advance so that your results closely 
match how the data needs to be entered into the software. It is more 
difficult to enter data into analysis software if you decide to do it 
after your data has been collected.
Perhaps the most widely known and most often used software 
package for statistical analysis is IBM’s SPSS Statistics. The pack-
age, originally known as the Statistical Package for the Social 
Sciences, became Statistical Product and Service Solutions to indi-
cate its application beyond the social sciences before being renamed 
IBM SPSS Statistics. The SPSS software is expensive and beyond 
the limited budget of the individual researcher but many university 
departments have multi-user licences that may provide you access 
or at least enable you to submit your data to an IT technician to 
enter on your behalf. Data that has been analysed can be presented 
in a number of ways, including charts and graphs, so you will need 
to decide which is the most appropriate for your project before your 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

SELECTING METHODS OF DATA COLLECTION
123
data is entered. There are two excellent books which are recom-
mended by many universities to students intending to use IBM SPSS 
Statistics Software: Andy Field’s Discovering Statistics Using IBM 
SPSS Statistics and Julie Pallant’s SPSS Survival Manual (see fur-
ther reading below). As well as being invaluable during data analy-
sis, either of these publications will enable you to understand how 
data needs to be entered into the software so that you can decide 
how best to conduct your data collection.
Many departments have a research and data analysis adviser 
or data expert, so make sure you know who that is. The way you 
word your questions may influence the type of analysis you are able 
to carry out, so always make sure the wording is checked by your 
supervisor/research adviser/data analysis adviser before you final-
ize all data collection instruments and regardless of whether your 
research will be mainly quantitative or qualitative.
Not thinking about computerized 
data analysis?
No problem. And particularly in small or relatively small, time-
limited studies, it may be better to keep to manual methods of data 
analysis and interpretation of the results. As I’ve said throughout 
this book, it is about careful selection of a topic, being sure about the 
purpose of your study, negotiating access to institutions, materials 
and people, devising suitable methods of data collection, observing 
the ethics of research, collecting, analysing and interpreting results, 
and producing a well-written report on time. So, time to move on.
A reminder!
First-time researchers often worry about how many questionnaires 
should be distributed or interviews conducted. There are no set 
rules, and you should ask for guidance from your supervisor before 
you commit yourself to a grand plan that will be far in excess of 
what is required. Your aim is to obtain as representative a range of 
responses as possible to enable you to fulfil the objectives of your 
study and to provide answers to key questions.
Research instruments are selected and devised to enable you to 
obtain these answers. The instrument is merely the tool to enable 
you to gather data, and it is important to select the best tool for the 
job. The following chapters take you through the processes involved 
in the analysis of documentary evidence, how to use social media 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

DOING YOUR RESEARCH PROJECT
124
in your research, designing and administering questionnaires, plan-
ning and conducting interviews, diaries and observation studies. 
Little attention is given to the analysis of data in this part, but all 
data has to be analysed and interpreted to be of any use, and so 
Chapters 13 and 14 in Part III should be studied in association with 
the chapters in Part II.
Further reading
Field, A. (2013) Discovering Statistics Using IBM SPSS Statistics 
(5th edn.). London: Sage.
Pallant, J. (2013) SPSS Survival Manual: A Step by Step Guide 
to Data Analysis Using IBM SPSS (5th edn.). Maidenhead: Open 
University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

125
The Analysis of 
Documentary 
Evidence
7
Key terms
Document
126
Source-oriented approach
126
Problem-oriented approach
127
Primary sources
129
Secondary sources
129
Deliberate sources
129
Inadvertent sources
129
Witting evidence
131
Unwitting evidence
131
Content analysis
132
External criticism
134
Internal criticism
134
Bias
136
INTRODUCTION
This chapter aims to provide you with a framework for selecting and evaluating 
documentary evidence. This evidence may be used to supplement other research 
findings or may form the basis of your research; in both respects, it is important 
to evaluate the evidence and avoid bias in your findings. Here is what you will find 
in this chapter:
•	A look at the nature of documentary evidence and how to find it.
•	Definitions of deliberate and inadvertent primary and secondary sources and 
witting and unwitting evidence.
•	A guide to selecting documents relevant to your research.
•	Advice on analysing the content of documentary evidence, including external 
and internal criticism.
•	Understanding the importance of determining fact or bias in documentary evi-
dence.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

DOING YOUR RESEARCH PROJECT
126
Most educational projects will require the analysis of documentary 
evidence. The aim of this chapter is to help you to locate, categorize, 
select and analyse documents. Its approach is derived from histori-
cal methods, which are essentially concerned with the problems of 
selection and evaluation of evidence. Such methods were first devel-
oped by von Ranke and have influenced the form of all academic 
report writing (Evans 2000: 18; Barzun and Graff 2003: 5). In some 
projects, documentary analysis will be used to supplement informa-
tion obtained by other methods; for instance to check the reliability 
of evidence gathered from interviews or questionnaires. In others, it 
will be the central or even exclusive method of research. It will be 
particularly useful when access to the subjects of research is diffi-
cult or impossible, as in the case where a longitudinal study is under-
taken and staff members no longer belong to the organization being 
investigated. The lack of access to research subjects may be frus-
trating, but documentary analysis of educational files and records 
can prove to be an extremely valuable alternative source of data 
(Johnson 1984: 23).
The nature of documentary evidence
During the document search, it is helpful to clarify exactly what 
kinds of documents exist. ‘Document’ is a general term for an impres-
sion left on a physical object by a human being. Research can involve 
the analysis of images, films, videos or other non-written sources, all 
of which can be classed as documents, but the most common kinds of 
documents in educational and medical research are printed or man-
uscript sources, so this chapter concentrates on these. Increasingly, 
records are kept in electronic form but the scholarly approach to 
both online and offline documents is the same. Sources can also 
be quantitative or statistical in nature but it would be mistaken, of 
course, to regard these so-called ‘hard’ sources of evidence as being 
more reliable than other kinds of material. It is vitally important to 
employ the recommended critical method of analysis to check how 
the figures have been produced. What has been counted, how cor-
rectly, by whom, when, where and why? (Stanford 1994)
Approaches to documents
When embarking on a study using documents, it is possible to have 
two different approaches. The first is called the source-oriented 
approach in which you let the nature of the sources determine your 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

The Analysis of Documentary Evidence
127
project and help you generate questions for your research. The feasi-
bility of the project is determined by the nature of extant (existing) 
sources so that a particularly full collection of material, for exam-
ple on the restructuring of a college or hospital, would lead to an 
investigation of that area. Rather than bringing predetermined ques-
tions to the sources, you would be led by the material they contain. 
The second and much more common way of proceeding employs the 
problem-oriented approach, which involves formulating questions 
by using other research methods and then by reading secondary 
sources. This method investigates what has already been discovered 
about the subject before establishing the focus of the study and then 
researching the relevant primary sources (these terms are defined 
below). As your research progresses, a much clearer idea of what 
sources are relevant will emerge and more questions will occur to 
you as your knowledge of the subject deepens (Tosh 2010).
The location of documents
Document searches need to be carried out in exactly the same way 
as literature searches in order to assess whether your proposed pro-
ject is feasible and to inform you about the background to, and the 
nature of, the subject. The document search may have to cover both 
local and national sources of evidence.
National records have proliferated since the advent of a national 
educational system and the introduction of the National Health 
Service (NHS), and it is important to decide what official sources are 
needed for a particular local project. Such sources may be published 
or unpublished. A project on curriculum development in a school or 
local authority or one on the role of district nurses in an area may 
require a trawl of government green papers, white papers, guidance 
papers, government statistics, Office for Standards in Education 
(Ofsted) reports, statutes, policy papers and sources in the National 
Archives, as well as scrutiny of the local sources. The Internet is an 
invaluable aid to locating official documents but as a researcher you 
must also be prepared to hunt down other sources of information, 
particularly in the local context (McCulloch and Richardson 2000: 
86). It can never be assumed, of course, that because docu-
ments exist they will be available for research. Some sources 
may be regarded as too confidential to be released, so enquir-
ies would have to be made about access and availability.
At the local level, the nature of the project will lead you to 
particular sources. In the NHS and medicine generally, there is a 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

DOING YOUR RESEARCH PROJECT
128
great emphasis on evidence-based research and the importance 
of documents, along with individual responsibility of staff for any 
records they create or use in the course of their duties. The NHS has 
developed a code of practice for the management of records that 
stipulates that each NHS organization is required to have an over-
all policy statement on how records are managed, and this will be 
helpful to researchers. Organizations are encouraged to establish 
a records inventory that will help the researcher to find out what 
health and non-health records exist in an institution. A project on the 
role of a ward manager, for example, would need to ascertain what 
administrative and personnel records as well as health records exist 
to provide information. Minutes of meetings, memos, policy state-
ments and diaries, as well as clinical and caseload records would be 
fruitful sources if they were available. Other ideas for projects are 
offered by Walsh and Wigens (2003).
The NHS provides detailed guidance on the retention of records 
and specifies minimum retention periods for different types of docu-
ments. It also provides guidance on dealing with records which have 
ongoing research or historical value and which should be preserved 
in the National Archives. Records from different hospitals that have 
been archived have been used to study, for example, the 1918 influ-
enza epidemic.
Different projects will require different searches. A project on the 
relationship between a college and its funding body, for example, 
would require a document search of the records of both institutions, 
and account would have to be taken of their special characteristics. 
If the college had an academic board or equivalent, its minutes would 
be one source; if the funding authority’s departments dealt with dif-
ferent aspects of the college’s administration, their records would 
be significant. It is important to ask what archives or collections of 
records exist in an organization. What records are preserved by the 
school office, the governing body, the bursar or financial officer or 
the library, and what records are stored by individuals or depart-
ments in the institution? Does the local authority hold records for 
particular schools? How long do organizations hold on to records 
before they dispose of them? Schools have a legal duty to preserve 
attendance registers for ten years after the register was closed. The 
safeguarding of ‘school annals’ to record events deserving of per-
manent record in the history of a school is at the discretion of the 
school. Researchers can be frustrated by the official and unofficial 
weeding policy of institutions and of government departments that 
may have resulted in the destruction of sources later discovered to 
be significant (Duffy 1998: 29–30).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

The Analysis of Documentary Evidence
129
Primary and secondary sources
Documents can be divided into primary and secondary sources. 
Primary sources are those that came into existence in the period 
under research (for example, the minutes of a hospital’s governing 
body). Secondary sources are interpretations of events of that 
period based on primary sources (for example, a history of that hos-
pital which obtained evidence from the board’s minutes). The dis-
tinction is complicated by the fact that some documents are primary 
from one point of view and secondary from another. If the author 
of the hospital history was the subject of research, for example, his 
book would become a primary source for the researcher. The term 
‘secondary analysis’ used in a narrow sense by some social scientists 
to mean the re-analysis of data such as survey material or primary 
documents gathered by other researchers in collections is not to be 
confused with the use of secondary sources (Hakim 2000).
Deliberate and inadvertent sources
Primary sources can in turn be divided into:
1	 Deliberate sources, which are produced for the attention of 
future researchers. These would include autobiographies, mem-
oirs of politicians, medical practitioners or educationalists, dia-
ries or letters intended for later publication, and documents of 
self-justification (Elton 2002). They involve a deliberate attempt 
to preserve evidence for the future, possibly for purposes of self-
vindication or reputation enhancement.
2	 Inadvertent sources are used by researchers for some purpose 
other than that for which they were originally intended. For exam-
ple, they are produced by the processes of local and central govern-
ment and from the everyday working of the health and education 
systems.
Examples of such primary evidence from the education system 
include:
•	the records of legislative bodies, government departments, agen-
cies and local authorities;
•	evidence from national databases, such as RAISEonline (Reporting 
and Analysis for Improvement through School Self-Evaluation: 
www.raiseonline.org) and the FFT (Fischer Family Trust: www.
fischertrust.org), both of which include performance data on indi-
vidual schools;
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

DOING YOUR RESEARCH PROJECT
130
•	inspection reports;
•	national surveys;
•	newspapers and journals;
•	the publications of professional associations, subject teaching 
associations and trades unions;
•	the records of agencies like the Specialist Schools and Academies 
Trust (SSAT);
•	the minutes of academic boards, local consortia, senior manage-
ment groups, middle management meetings, subject departments, 
working groups, staff meetings and parents’ associations;
•	letters and correspondence of educational institutions, including 
email;
•	annual governors’ reports;
•	handbooks and prospectuses;
•	examination papers;
•	school timetables;
•	attendance registers;
•	personal files;
•	staffing returns;
•	option-choice documents;
•	records of continuing professional development;
•	bulletins;
•	budget statements;
•	school or college websites and other Internet material.
Examples of documents from different bodies in the NHS include:
•	the summary care records of primary care trusts;
•	patient health records, including GP medical records;
•	hospital ward books;
•	diaries of health workers;
•	personnel records;
•	budgetary records;
•	research project records;
•	hybrid records of health bodies, which are a mixture of electronic 
and paper records;
•	policy statements;
•	financial and accounting records;
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

The Analysis of Documentary Evidence
131
•	notes associated with complaints;
•	pamphlets and leaflets produced by health authorities that are 
classed as ‘grey literature’ (Gerrish and Lacey 2010: 67).
Such inadvertent documents are the more common and usually the 
more valuable kind of primary sources. They were produced for a 
contemporary practical purpose and would therefore seem to be 
more straightforward than deliberate sources. This may be the case 
but great care still needs to be taken with them because it cannot 
be discounted that inadvertent documents were intended to deceive 
someone other than the researcher, or that what first appear to be 
inadvertent sources (some government records, for example) are 
actually attempts to justify actions to future generations (Elton 2002: 
71). Some of the documents generated by a school for an inspection, 
for example, may have the aim of giving the best possible impression 
to the inspectors; without the imminent inspection, the school might 
not be so prolific in its production of policy statements and schemes 
of work or be so up to date in its staff handbook.
Witting and unwitting evidence
A final point about the nature of documents concerns their ‘witting’ 
and ‘unwitting’ evidence. Witting evidence is the information that 
the original author of the document wanted to impart. Unwitting 
evidence is everything else that can be learned from the docu-
ment (Marwick 2001: 172–9). If, for example, a government minis-
ter made a speech announcing a proposed educational reform, the 
‘witting’ evidence would be everything that was stated in the speech 
about the proposed change. The ‘unwitting’ evidence, on the other 
hand, might come from any underlying assumptions unintentionally 
revealed by the minister in the language he or she used, and from 
the fact that a particular method had been chosen by the govern-
ment to announce the reform. If a junior minister is given the job of 
announcing a reduction in educational expenditure that may well 
indicate that more senior colleagues anticipate that the government 
will be criticized. All documents provide ‘unwitting’ evidence, but it 
is the task of the researcher to try to assess its precise significance.
The selection of documents
The quantity of documentary material you can study will inevitably 
be influenced by the amount of time that is available for this stage 
of your research. It is not usually possible to analyse everything and 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

DOING YOUR RESEARCH PROJECT
132
so you must decide what to select. Familiarity with the different cat-
egories of evidence will help you to make decisions about what is 
fundamental to the project, and ‘controlled selection’ is then needed 
to ensure that no significant category is left out (Elton 2002). Try not 
to include too many deliberate sources and take care not to select 
documents merely on the basis of how well they support your own 
views or hypotheses. Your aim is to make as balanced a selection as 
possible, bearing in mind the constraints of time. Periodically check 
with your schedule, and if you find that you are encroaching on time 
allocated for the next stage of your research, take steps to reduce 
your selection. Your perception of what is valuable will grow as the 
project develops.
Content analysis
The proper selection of documents is particularly important in what 
is termed content analysis, which has been defined as ‘a system-
atic, replicable technique for compressing many words of text into 
fewer content categories based on explicit rules of coding’ (Stemler 
2001), and as ‘any technique for making inferences by objectively and 
systematically identifying specified characteristics of messages’ 
(Holsti 1969: 14). Krippendorff (2012: 24) defines it as ‘a research 
technique for making replicable and valid inferences from texts (or 
other meaningful matter) to the contexts of their use’. Essentially, 
it is a research tool with which to analyse the frequency and use of 
words or terms or concepts in a document, with the aim of assessing 
the meaning and significance of a source. Content analysis can be 
used for television, film and websites as well as written documents 
(Brett Davies 2007: 181–2). It can be used for different purposes, 
including, for example, analysing the sentence length in school text-
books or health pamphlets, the ethnicity of names in reading books, 
or the positive and negative language in performance management 
assessments (Burton et al. 2008: 120). It is useful for analysing the 
significance of speeches and articles by political leaders. For exam-
ple, The Times (2009) analysed a speech in which David Cameron, 
who went on to become Prime Minister, used the term ‘people’ ten 
times and the term ‘power’ 50 times.
It has been suggested that the best approach in content analy-
sis is that which starts with a research question and then decides 
on a sampling strategy after the ‘coding’ or ‘recording units’ have 
been defined. There are different ways of defining such units but 
essentially they are sampling units like health policy statements or 
leaflets in GP surgeries, which will then be analysed in sentences 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

The Analysis of Documentary Evidence
133
or paragraphs, using categories such as the purpose of the policies 
or the advice given to patients. As in the approaches to documents 
explained above, content analysis could develop ‘emergent coding’, 
with the categories being formulated as the sources are explored, or 
there can be a priori coding based upon previous reading and the 
generation of theoretical ideas. Although the most common record-
ing unit is a word, it might also be possible to use a joint term, rep-
etition of phrases, themes, or whole paragraphs on a subject. The 
approach usually involves counting the number of times particular 
terms or recording units occur in a sample of sources, but it could 
also involve such methods as counting the number of column inches 
devoted to a subject in a newspaper or the number of photographs in 
a publication. Stemler (2001) warns about assuming that the words 
mentioned most often are the ones reflecting greatest concerns 
because synonyms may be used and words like ‘state’ or ‘power’ 
have multiple meanings. If your source can be converted into a Word 
document, you can use the ‘Search in Document’ feature to highlight 
keywords for you.
The chosen sampling method is very important and needs to be 
justified and replicable. It might be possible to study all the docu-
ments in a particular category such as school newsletters or pro-
spectuses, but in other cases a sampling technique is needed, for 
instance if a daily newspaper is selected in a research project inves-
tigating tabloid newspapers’ attitudes to comprehensive schools or 
the health effects of alcohol consumption (Walsh and Wigens 2003: 
18). You could examine all the editions of a newspaper over a three-
month period or you could take the first week in each month over a 
one-year period. You must be able to justify the sample and it must 
be sufficiently large to allow valid conclusions. If you are interested 
in the media presentation of teachers’ or nurses’ associations, the 
sampling of newspapers from the first week of each month would 
be inappropriate because significant references to specific associa-
tions are unlikely to be confined to this time-frame. Having estab-
lished the frequency of your chosen terms, you must then be able to 
place them in context before interpreting and explaining them.
After analysing word frequency, it is valuable to assess the con-
text of the key words to test for consistency. Stemler (2001) gives 
advice about valuable software used for content analysis, much of 
which allows the researcher to see how the word was used in con-
text. Content analysis of documents using simple word counts can 
be arid in its approach if the nature of the documents is not ana-
lysed in the way suggested below and this may not be appropriate 
for many small-scale studies.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

DOING YOUR RESEARCH PROJECT
134
The critical analysis of documents
External criticism
The analysis of documents can be divided into external and inter-
nal criticism, even though these may overlap to a large extent. 
External criticism aims to discover whether a document is both 
genuine (that is, not forged) and authentic (that is, it is what it pur-
ports to be and truthfully reports on its subject: Barzun and Graff 
2003: 69n). For example, an observer could write a report of a meet-
ing he had never attended. His report would be genuine because he 
actually wrote it, but it would not be authentic because he was not 
present at the meeting.
With external criticism, it is necessary to know for certain that 
the author produced the document, so certain questions need to be 
asked. In the case of a letter, they would include the following:
•	Was the author of the letter known to be in the place from which it 
came at the time it was supposed to have been written?
•	Do other sources corroborate that the person wrote the letter? Is 
the letter consistent with all other facts known about the author?
•	Does it use the same structure and have the same form as similar 
documents?
•	Is it typical of other letters or documents written by the author?
You may not always be able to identify forgeries or hoaxes but an 
attempt should be made to decide whether a person did actually 
compose the speech delivered or write or sign the letter.
Internal criticism
The analytical method more likely to be used in small-scale educa-
tional research is internal criticism, in which the contents of a doc-
ument are subjected to rigorous analysis, which first seeks answers 
to the following questions:
•	What kind of document is it – a circular, a statute, a policy paper, 
a set of minutes, a letter from a long correspondence? How many 
copies are there?
•	What does it actually say? Are the terms used employed in the 
same way that you would use them? Documents such as statutes 
or legal papers may use a specialized language which must be 
mastered, and private correspondence may contain terms in an 
idiosyncratic way that also need to be understood.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

The Analysis of Documentary Evidence
135
•	Who produced it? What is known about the author?
•	What was its purpose? Did the author aim to inform, command, 
remind (as in a memorandum) or to have some other effect on the 
reader? A document is always written for a particular readership 
and shaped according to the writer’s expectations of how intended 
readers will interpret it. In the same way, the reader should try to 
be aware of the purposes and intentions of the writer during the 
act of reading.
•	When and in what circumstances was it produced? How did it 
come into existence?
•	Is it typical or exceptional of its type?
•	Is it complete? Has it been altered or edited? It may be that there 
is more chance of completeness if it is published a long time after 
the events it describes.
You will also need to assess the assiduousness of the producers of 
documents. Staff will complete documents very carefully if they 
are to be used in appeals procedures or public meetings, and their 
approach to reporting on a pupil may be influenced if they know the 
pupil’s parents. After asking these basic questions, you will need to 
ask further questions about the author:
•	What is known about the author’s social background, political 
views, aims and past experience?
•	Did the author experience or observe what is being described? If 
so, was he or she an expert on what was being witnessed and a 
trained observer of the events described?
•	Did the author habitually tell the truth or exaggerate, distort or 
omit?
•	How long after the event did the author produce the document?  
Is it possible that their memory played tricks?
All these questions may not be relevant to all documents, but in aim-
ing at critical analysis it is important not to accept sources at face 
value. Examine them carefully. Gaps in the evidence can sometimes 
be very significant, as they may indicate a prejudice or a determi-
nation to ignore a proposed change. Decide whether a particular 
political affiliation might possibly influence the tone or emphasis of 
a paper and try to come to a conclusion based on all the available 
evidence. An assessment of the document’s reliability must involve 
the question: ‘Reliable for what?’ Is it a reliable explanation of the 
author’s views on an issue? In other words, is it representative of 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

DOING YOUR RESEARCH PROJECT
136
those views? It might not be truthful in a more general sense; for 
instance, a supporter of streaming in schools may not necessarily 
convey the truth about the effects of using this method of organizing 
classes but it would nevertheless be a truthful and therefore reliable 
expression of this individual’s views on the subject. Alternatively, 
the source might be a reliable example of its type, as in the case of a 
document from a long series.
Fact or bias?
One important aim of critical scholarship is to assess whether fact 
or bias is the main characteristic of a document (Barzun and Graff 
2003: 154–7). Writers will rarely declare their assumptions, so it is 
the task of the researcher to expose them if possible. Watch particu-
larly for any terms that suggest partisanship. Ask yourself whether 
the evidence supplied in the document convincingly supports the 
author’s arguments. Was the author a supporter of a particular course 
of action in which he had a stake? If the document goes against the 
author’s own interest, it may increase the likelihood that it tells the 
truth. Was the author affected by pressure, fear or even vanity when 
writing the document? (Best 1970: 105). Look for clues.
If you detect bias, it does not necessarily mean that the docu-
ment should be dismissed as worthless. In some cases, the most 
useful evidence can be derived from biased sources that reveal 
accurately the true views of an individual or group. Inferences can 
still be drawn from the ‘unwitting’ testimony, even if the ‘witting’ 
evidence is thought to be unsound. A prejudiced account of curricu-
lum development, for example, could provide valuable insights into 
the political processes involved in innovation. The biased document 
will certainly need to be analysed cautiously and compared with evi-
dence from other sources, but it can still be valuable.
Try to put yourself in the position of the author of the docu-
ment and to see through his or her eyes. Instead of jumping to 
early conclusions, deliberately seek contrary evidence to test the 
truthfulness of a document as rigorously as possible – and watch 
out for your own bias. It may be easier to recognize bias in others 
than in oneself, and it is tempting to reject evidence that does not 
support your case, but try to resist the temptation. Sources can 
be interpreted in different ways (even though some sources can 
reasonably be understood in only one way) but the postmodernist 
view that documents can be subjected to an infinity of meaning 
has been brilliantly demolished by Evans (2000). The guiding prin-
ciple in document analysis is nevertheless that everything should 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

The Analysis of Documentary Evidence
137
be questioned. Qualities of scepticism as well as empathy need to 
be developed.
Scrutinize documents for bias – what may appear 
to be a presentation of the ‘facts’ may be a care-
ful selection of data to present a particular point 
of view. Don’t assume that because a document 
is ‘official’ (such as a government paper) that it is 
unbiased.
It could be argued that the techniques of document analysis sug-
gested here are merely the application of common sense. This is 
partly true but, as you study the sources, you will gradually gain 
insights and detailed knowledge that will give you a ‘higher common 
sense’, which will in turn permit a fuller appreciation of the worth of 
the evidence (Barzun and Graff 2003: 122–4). Eventually, the critical 
method becomes a habit, which will allow you, in Marwick’s phrase, 
to ‘squeeze the last drop’ from each document (Marwick 2001: 233).
The Analysis of Documentary Evidence 
Checklist
1.  Decide how 
you want to use 
documentary 
evidence.
Will it be used to supplement 
other sources of evidence or 
will you use it as the exclusive 
method of gathering data?
Q
2.  Decide on your 
approach to the 
documents.
You could let the source 
material determine your 
research questions or, more 
commonly, formulate your 
research questions after 
reading the literature on 
the subject and take these 
questions to the sources.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

DOING YOUR RESEARCH PROJECT
138
3.  Undertake a 
document search 
to ascertain the 
existence of 
different sources 
of information.
These may be found in different 
places in an organization, so it 
is important to be persistent. 
Always negotiate access to 
the documents and do not 
assume that you can consult 
them; some information may 
be confidential.
Q
4.  Analyse the nature 
of the sources 
used.
Some sources will be 
deliberately produced for the 
attention of future researchers. 
More usually, however, sources 
are inadvertently produced 
by the everyday working of, 
for example, the health or 
education system.
Q
5.  If the documents 
are bulky, it may 
be necessary 
to decide on a 
sampling strategy.
Try to read a balanced 
selection of documents in the 
time you have available. The 
strategy must be appropriate 
to the purposes of your search 
and be capable of being 
justified in the report.
Q
6.  Be aware that 
there may be 
different kinds of 
evidence in each 
document.
Look for ‘witting’ and 
‘unwitting’ evidence.
Q
7.  Subject each 
document to the 
‘what does it say?’ 
critical method 
and ask a range of 
questions.
Who wrote it? Why? How 
did it come into existence? 
Is it typical of its kind? Is it 
complete?
Q
8.  Compare the 
document with 
other sources to 
see if it is accurate 
or representative.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

The Analysis of Documentary Evidence
139
9.  Then ask further 
questions about 
the authors of 
documents.
What is their background? 
What are their social and 
political views?
Q
10.  Look for bias in 
the document.
Remember that biased 
evidence can still be very 
valuable.
Q
11.  Decide whether 
the document 
is reliable for 
a particular 
purpose.
Check it against other 
sources to ascertain its 
truthfulness but remember 
that, although it may not 
be an accurate account of 
an event or development, 
it will be a reliable 
expression of the author’s 
views.
Q
12.  Strive to gain a 
full appreciation 
of the value of a 
source.
Use your accumulating 
knowledge to gain insights and 
try to make the critical method 
a habit in your research 
methods.
Q
Further reading
Atkinson, P. and Coffey, A. (2011) Analysing documentary 
realities, in D. Silverman (ed.) Qualitative Research (3rd edn). 
London: Sage. 
As Silverman explains in his introduction, ‘Paul Atkinson and Amanda 
Coffey draw upon ethnomethodology’s study of “the documentary 
method of interpretation” and literary accounts of narrative and genre. 
They apply these contemporary concepts to the documents through 
which organisations represent themselves and the records and docu-
mentary data they accumulate.’
Bowen, G.A. (2009) Document analysis as a qualitative research 
method, Qualitative Research Journal, 9 (2): pp. 27–40. 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

DOING YOUR RESEARCH PROJECT
140
This article is aimed at research beginners and examines the function 
of documents as a data source and discusses document analysis in the 
context of actual research experiences.
Noakes, L. and Wincup, E. (2004) Using documentary evidence in 
qualitative research, in Criminological Research: Understanding 
Qualitative Methods (pp. 106–20). London: Sage. 
Chapter 7 explores the value of the written word and other forms of 
documentary evidence to the qualitative researcher in the context of 
criminological research.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

141
Using Social 
Media in 
Research
8
Key terms
Blogs
 146
Academic research community  
website
147
Crowdsourcing
148
Social networking
149
INTRODUCTION
This chapter looks at the influence of social media and specifically how it can be 
harnessed for academic research. You probably use social media to keep in touch 
with your friends and to share experiences and post content, but have you consid-
ered how it could be a source of data or information for your research and enable 
you to network with other researchers? In this chapter, you will find:
•	How to use social media as a research tool.
•	How to choose the right social media tools based on the goals and aims of your 
research project.
•	An introduction to using blogs, open community research sites, crowdsourcing, 
LinkedIn, Twitter, Facebook, YouTube and more.
•	How the Social Media 3 Cs – Community, Content and Conversation – can feed 
into your research.
•	How to achieve a balance between social and work – avoiding common pitfalls 
when on social media.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
142
“
Socia Media is the term commonly given to Internet and mobile-based 
channels and tools that allow users to interact with each other and 
share opinions and content. As the name implies, social media involves 
the building of communities or networks and encouraging participation 
and engagement."
(Chartered Institute of Public Relations 2011: 4)
Since Facebook was launched in 2003, the number of people con-
necting through social media has grown at an astonishing rate. 
According to visual.ly, which specializes in presenting data through 
images, it took television 13 years to reach 50 million people. 
Facebook reached that number in 3½ years. In 2012, the addictive 
game puzzle video game ‘Angry Birds’ achieved 50 million users in 
35 days after it launched its mobile phone version.
In 2013, the online encyclopedia Wikipedia identified that there 
were over 200 social networking sites. If the use of Facebook 
expands at its present rate of 40 per cent each year, there will be 
over 2 billion active Facebook users by the time this book is pub-
lished. Twitter, the microblogging tool with a character limit for 
‘tweets’ (messages), has over 600 million users worldwide, with an 
average of 500 million tweets sent each day and a total of over 800 
billion tweets sent since Twitter was formed in 2006. LinkedIn, the 
professional networking site, has over 225 million members in over 
200 countries and territories. It seems that we have an unlimited 
need online to play games, have conversations, to make friends and 
belong to groups.
You may be asking yourself: ‘Interesting though these statistics 
are, how can I use Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn and other social 
media tools in my research?’ If so, you will be joining a small but 
steadily growing number of academics exploring how the use of 
social media can contribute to the research process. The publication 
of information about how to use social media for research by univer-
sities and online conversations about how to apply social networking 
to the research process are relatively recent phenomena.
In her blog on the London School of Economics website, 
Sarah-Louise Quinnell (2011) is in no doubt of the value of social 
networking:
“
Social media isn’t the future of research, it is the present and we need 
to embrace it. I was the first person in my department to actively engage 
with social media and digital research methods to conduct my PhD 
research . . . It also enabled me to increase the impact of my research 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Using Social Media in Research
143
through the different audiences I could reach through blogging and 
tweeting."
Social media and the research process
Academic recognition that social media can play a significant role 
in research is growing. Alampi (2012) believes that ‘Social Media 
platforms can inform every step of the research process’. Cann et al. 
assert that, whereas searching for information via search engines 
such as Google ‘can provide you with answers only to the questions 
you ask ... social media can also provide you with intelligently-­
filtered information that helps to stimulate new questions, in the same 
way that a conversation with a colleague might’ (Cann et al. 2011: 9). 
They advise that ‘the process of building, curating and filtering use-
ful networks is a skill which needs to be practised’ (2011: 9), and that 
being an active member of relevant communities is very important 
in social media, as it is in academic discourse. The National Centre 
for Social Research (2013) points out in its blog that researchers were 
not ‘predicting the demise of traditional methods such as the social 
survey. They were trying to work out what social media research 
can add to ... existing ... methodological tools and what research 
problems may be better tackled by social media methods.’ Minocha 
and Petros suggest that researchers should focus on both a social 
and a digital strategy:
“
Developing a social strategy implies deciding with whom, what, 
how and when you would communicate to share, learn and create and 
enhance relationships with others. A digital strategy implies the 
technologies to achieve the social strategy."
(Minocha and Petros 2012: 14; emphasis added)
When I use the terms ‘social media’ and ‘social digital’ in this 
chapter, by ‘social’ I mean the creation and maintenance of relation-
ships with others; by ‘media’ I refer to the ways in which messages 
and information are stored and sent to other people; and by ‘digital’ 
I mean the technologies – the tools – that enable us to communicate 
in this way with others. An example would be a message to other 
researchers inviting them to exchange ideas (‘social’) via a LinkedIn 
group that we had set up (‘media’) and sent via a LinkedIn app on a 
mobile phone (‘digital’). Of course, there are times when the termi-
nology will overlap, and distinguishing between the three functions 
is not always this clear-cut.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
144
Social media tools
As with any research methodology, it is important to ask yourself 
the following questions when you are considering using social media 
in research:
•	What are your goals?
•	Who do you want to reach?
•	Why do you want to reach them?
•	Which digital tool or platform will be most effective in enabling 
you to reach your goals?
•	If you already spend time each day using social media for per-
sonal reasons, how much time are you able to set aside each day 
to use social media for research?
•	At what time of day will you engage on social media? (Take into 
account time differences if you are communicating globally.)
As you know, it is easy to lose track of time online. Plan your online 
research activity as you would any other aspect of research. You 
need to be in control of it rather than allowing it to control you.
You will need to consider two key factors when you use social 
media for research:
1	 Your profile and how you appear to other people who may be 
interested in engaging with you. This can be a relatively brief pro-
file such as a Facebook identity or a very detailed profile as in 
LinkedIn.
2	 The groups or communities to which you belong.
If you are going to use social media to contact other researchers 
or academics, it is very important that you update your profile 
so that, whatever social media platforms you use to share your 
research, you present a professional view. This can be welcom-
ing and friendly but needs to convey that you are serious about 
your academic work and want to connect with others in a similar 
position. Consider your profile photo too. It should be engaging 
but professional. You should be smiling, looking directly into the 
camera and the image should be either a headshot or head and 
shoulder photo, with your shoulders turned slightly sideways. You 
should also be wearing clothes you would wear to go to an inter-
view or smart–casual dress. So I’m afraid that ‘selfie’ you took 
of yourself at your birthday party just won’t do. It may cost you, 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Using Social Media in Research
145
but a professionally taken headshot is worth every penny. If you 
don’t believe me, have a look through the profile photos and pro-
file descriptions of your followers and contacts and ask yourself, 
‘If I didn’t know this person, would I be encouraged to discuss my 
research with them?’ If the answer is no, what are the reasons for 
this? Have a look at my LinkedIn profile at www.linkedin.com/in/
stevewaters1 – after many attempts, my photo was taken profes-
sionally and I received advice from a social media consultant on 
how to structure my profile. I am sure that I could make further 
improvements but I think it does the job.
In addition to the creation of personal profiles, sites like 
Facebook and LinkedIn also allow members to create business or 
professional pages. You may be able to find pages with members 
who share your interest in research or, if you are fortunate, who 
are researching the same topic or field. You could even start a page 
of your own, although the job of gaining members and ensuring 
that the page remains active would be your responsibility, at least 
in the early stages. LinkedIn enables similar networking through 
its groups. You may find groups to join which are relevant to your 
research interests or you can start one of your own and invite your 
contacts.
The value of engaging online can be summarized in the three Cs: 
Community, Content and Conversations. In your everyday, offline 
life you may be a member of a number of different communities, 
such as your family and friends; if you are a parent, your children’s 
school; and, of course, your fellow research students. When you talk 
to someone online it will be because you believe that you have some-
thing to say, the equivalent of having a conversation in the physical 
world. And, whether you are online or offline, you will either initiate 
conversation or join in with conversations that other people have 
started. The value of belonging to a social network lies in what you 
are prepared to contribute as well as what you gain by ‘listening’ to 
other people’s conversations. If you are a lone researcher, you can 
feel isolated; having online relationships and belonging to online 
communities can help to overcome this.
In the next section, I look in detail at the various ways social 
media can help you in your research. Regrettably, it is outside the 
scope of this chapter to explain how to set up accounts on the vari-
ous platforms and sites. You will find detailed instructions on each 
site, usually by clicking on the ‘Help’ button or by googling ‘How  
to ...’ information that has been posted on the Internet by users, 
social media experts and social digital companies.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
146
Using social media in research
Blogs
The word ‘blog’ is a shortening of ‘web logs’; a blog therefore is a  
log – a kind of diary, record or journal – published on the web. It 
consists of entries (‘posts’), usually of up to 1000 words, published 
in date order with the most recent posts appearing at the top of 
the page. Blogs can be set up free on sites like www.blogger.com 
or www.tumblr.com or on Wordpress, which is also a free website 
construction site. Tumblr is a microblogging platform and social net-
working website that enables you to post multimedia and other con-
tent, such as details of your research, to a short-form blog. Users can 
follow other users’ blogs, as well as make their blogs private. Most of 
the Tumblr website’s features can be accessed from the ‘dashboard’ 
interface, where you have the option to post your own content and 
read posts by people who are following blogs on the site.
Alternatively, some websites invite you to submit your own blog 
and give you a link to do so. Some blog writers or ‘bloggers’ update 
their blogs regularly, sometimes daily. Unlike a personal diary, a 
blog usually includes a discussion around a topic and can also pro-
vide readers with content or information. Blogs are easily found by 
Google, so they are a good way of getting your name and content 
recognized. There is a very good description of how to start a blog 
and what to include in it at http://www.startbloggingonline.com/ 
(StartBloggingOnline.com 2013). Blogs have a range of functions. 
They can be a source of data, such as in a research study of how 
online communities use blogs to exchange political ideas, and this 
function is described further in Chapter 11, or they can be used as a 
kind of public diary, as described below, to let people in your com-
munity know what you are doing, to share ideas or to offer and gain 
support from other people in your research community.
Research blogs can be used to inform your readers about the pro-
gress of your research project and to invite comments and ideas. They 
can also be used for publishing project updates and for linking to sim-
ilar content in blogs written by other researchers. Unlike publishing 
conventional academic research findings, which include references 
to other researchers by citing their name and the date of publication, 
blogs include hyperlinks to other relevant websites/blogs. Clicking on 
the hyperlink takes you out of the blog you are reading to another rel-
evant blog or website. Social media sites such as Facebook, Twitter 
and, as you will see later, Google+ can provide readers with links to 
blogs, connecting personal networking with research.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Using Social Media in Research
147
Cameron Neylon, a biophysicist, explains how he became involved 
in writing a blog:
“
I got interested in the more general ideas of effective communication 
on the web and found there was a community already out there. I wanted 
to be able to record my own ideas in this space in a way that was ‘native’ 
to it and to engage with that community, so blogging was a natural 
course to take."
(quoted in Cann et al. 2011: 10)
A good example of a site that is devoted to blogs about academic 
research can be found at http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocial­
sciences/ (LSE 2013), a London School of Economics site that is called 
‘Impact of Social Sciences: Maximizing the Impact of Academic 
Research’.
One researcher summarized her blog in the following way:
“
a place that I can keep it [sic] updated with the research and events in 
my specialized area . . . it is like having a web presence for my research 
that I can myself edit . . . I have kept it very simple ... a blog for me is a 
platform to show that the work is in progress ... WordPress is easy to 
use; once you have set up the parameters, you are ready to go."
(quoted in Minocha and Petros 2012: 18)
www.academia.edu
This is an open and free academic research community website. 
Members upload their research to share their findings and to ask 
fellow academics to comment on their drafts, to offer advice or to 
review research studies that they have completed. The site allows 
you to search for relevant research papers that have been uploaded. 
The site also enables you to ask questions of those who follow you 
on the site, to seek their advice or to make suggestions about your 
research. This is very useful if you are researching alone. The site 
has a higher character limit than Twitter and therefore you have 
more room to ask specific questions.
www.figshare.com
This is also an open community research site, mainly targeted at 
scientists, although other research disciplines are represented. Like 
academia.edu, Figshare enables individual researchers to upload 
research papers or smaller-scale findings and to make them avail-
able online and searchable. A useful feature of this site is that it pre-
sents the full citation or reference in a box from which you can open 
or download the research article.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
148
Crowdsourcing
“
Crowdsourcing is the practice of obtaining needed services, ideas, or 
content by soliciting contributions from a large group of people, and 
especially from an online community, rather than from traditional 
employees or suppliers. This process is often used to subdivide tedious 
work or to fund-raise start-up companies and charities, and can also 
occur offline. It combines the efforts of numerous self-identified 
volunteers or part-time workers, where each contributor of their own 
initiative adds a small portion to the greater result. Crowdsourcing is 
distinguished from outsourcing in that the work comes from an 
undefined public rather than being commissioned from a specific, 
named group."
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crowdsourcing
Wikipedia explains that the Oxford English Dictionary may provide 
one of the earliest examples of crowdsourcing. Seventy years ago, 
an open request was made for contributions by volunteers to identify 
words in the English language and provide example quotations of 
their usage. Over 6 million submissions were received, by post prior 
to the advent of the Internet, and then online. Wikipedia, launched in 
2001, is the most prolific recent example of crowdsourcing. Formed 
from a combination of the Hawaiian word ‘wiki’ meaning ‘quick’ and 
the ‘pedia’ from ‘encyclopedia’, Wikipedia describes itself as:
“
a collaboratively edited, multilingual, free Internet encyclopedia 
supported by the non-profit Wikimedia Foundation. Wikipedia’s 30 million 
articles in 287 languages, including over 4.3 million in the English 
language, are written collaboratively by volunteers around the world. 
Almost all of its articles can be edited by anyone having access to the site. 
It is the largest and most popular general reference work on the Internet 
... having an estimated 365 million readers worldwide."
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/W%C4%B0K%C4%B0PED%C4%B0A
So, how can crowdsourcing help you as a researcher? At the out-
set, it’s important to say that if you are not active on social media 
networks, crowdsourcing is not for you. But then, I’m guessing that 
if you were not interested in developing your use of social media for 
research, you wouldn’t be reading this chapter. Crowdsourcing only 
works when you have already built up a wide audience, for example 
by taking part in Twitter conversations or retweeting other people’s 
tweets to show that you agree or like their comment, or by click-
ing ‘Like’ on Facebook updates or to show your appreciation for a 
Facebook page, or by inviting and accepting friend requests. If you 
intend to crowdsource for professional reasons associated with your 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Using Social Media in Research
149
research, it is also important that you have a LinkedIn profile so 
that fellow researchers and interested academics can check your 
credentials.
Let us suppose that you want to find out how other students use 
social media in their research. If the idea of crowdsourcing on the 
web to seek the views of researchers seems to be overwhelming 
because you just don’t know who to target, focus on the research 
community that you are already a member of – your university. 
Find out if online research communities already exist and post 
your request to them. If your tutor has a Facebook or Linkedin 
account, become their friend on Facebook or connect with them 
on LinkedIn before you send your request to your followers or con-
nections. Ask your tutor to look out for your post and forward it on 
to his or her followers and contacts. Remember that every individ-
ual within a research community, or any other community for that 
matter, has their own contacts, who in turn have their contacts, 
and so on. So, if your request also asks members of a community 
to forward your message to anyone else who might be able to help, 
the potential number of people who may contact you increases 
exponentially.
Linkedin (www.linkedin.com)
As we have seen, LinkedIn is a social networking site for pro-
fessionals. One of its main features is the creation of a detailed 
LinkedIn profile, which is a kind of online CV but with a more per-
sonal touch. Some employers ask for résumés that follow the same 
structure as LinkedIn profiles. Unlike Facebook, which is mainly 
about your social persona, LinkedIn focuses on your academic and 
professional life. Members of LinkedIn invite other members to con-
nect with them and, once the contact is accepted, users can send 
each other messages within the LinkedIn network. You can also join 
groups or set up a group of your own; for example, you could form a 
research interest group around your research topic. LinkedIn’s user 
demographic has been estimated at people aged 30–40; this may be 
an advantage, as it could enable you to connect with more experi-
enced researchers.
Here are some tips to ensure that you use LinkedIn effectively:
•	Ensure your profile is as near 100 per cent complete as possible.
•	Upload a good quality photo – as advised earlier in this chapter, it 
is worth getting a professional headshot or using a head and shoul-
ders image.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
150
•	Start your own research group if a relevant group doesn’t exist.
•	Recommend people for their research skills (but only if you really 
know their work).
•	Link your email contacts to your LinkedIn profile – this will ena-
ble you to see which of your contacts are also on LinkedIn so that 
you can connect with them.
Twitter
If you have a Twitter account, you will probably have used it to 
initiate, retweet or join in with conversations or to share views on 
current issues. The use of the hashtag (#) to identify conversation 
topics makes it possible to find other academics that are ‘talking’ 
about similar research areas to your own. Alternatively, you can 
start a conversation or ask a question by creating a new hashtag. 
As Twitter is used by researchers to build relationships with the 
research community, the University of Exeter (2013) offers timely 
advice: ‘Remember that your Twitter account is an ambassador for 
your research and the University so avoid getting involved in sensi-
tive subjects that could damage your reputation’ (http://www.exeter.
ac.uk/staff/web/socialmedia/).
Salma Patel (2011) suggests several ways in which researchers 
can use Twitter. The first – join the research community – can be 
done by following the conversation #phdchat. As the name suggests, 
the hashtag is used mostly by doctoral researchers. Her other sug-
gestions include:
•	Share links to publications and research.
•	Keep in touch with the ‘outside world’ – other researchers, col-
leagues, conferences.
•	Ask your community for help.
•	Network – follow other researchers, recruit participants for your 
research studies. Ask followers to retweet your messages to their 
network of followers to increase the number of people you are able 
to reach.
•	Share your experiences – other people will do the same.
•	Keep in touch with what is going on in your field or research area.
•	Collaborate with other researchers to ask for their advice on 
research methodology you are intending to use.
Gulliver (2012) suggests looking for hashtags that may relate to 
your area of research. You can also create one of your own or learn 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Using Social Media in Research
151
which hashtags are regularly used for your research field or topic 
and use them to create or join a network. As Gulliver advises, ‘Build 
an audience first, and the audience will follow if they like you and 
will then listen once you have something to pitch.’ She makes the 
point that it is important to convey your personality as well as to 
post what you are doing academically. Engagement and building a 
relationship is vital:
“
Thanks to Twitter, I have been sent copies of obscure articles much 
faster than I would have received them from an interlibrary loan. I just 
need to tweet ‘Does anyone have access to the Journal of X, 1972?’ and 
within an hour someone will have e-mailed me the PDF. It’s tremendously 
useful."
(Gulliver 2012)
Facebook (www.facebook.com)
Facebook was the global social network of choice for young people, 
but is now used by people of all ages who want to interact with friends 
and family online. In fact, young people are migrating from Facebook 
to WhatsApp (bought by Facebook in 2014) and SnapChat because 
their parents are on Facebook! The power of Facebook prompted 
interest in its use for professional networking. Facebook members will 
get friend requests from their work colleagues and managers as well 
as from their personal friends or friends of friends. So, how can you 
use Facebook in your research? The simple answer is to build relation-
ships with fellow researchers and academics who are researching the 
same topic or the same field so that you can share ideas and support 
and help one another. Sundberg (2013), on the site ‘The Undercover 
Recruiter’ (www.theundercoverrecruiter.com), addresses Facebook 
members who would like to use it for professional purposes. The fol-
lowing points have been informed by his thoughtful advice:
•	Check your privacy settings. If your Facebook profile is set so 
that everyone can see everything, personal messages and images 
that you post to your friends can be seen by academic contacts. 
Build different lists of contacts so you can target relevant and 
appropriate comments to each list (compare the use of circles on 
Google+). Amusing though it may be, it is unlikely that you will 
create a good impression if a potential academic contact sees 
messages to your friends about you making a fool of yourself at a 
stag or hen do during the weekend!
•	As for your LinkedIn and Twitter accounts, make sure that your 
profile picture looks professional but friendly. A headshot or a 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
152
head and shoulders shot is best. A ‘selfie’ taken by you holding 
your mobile at arm’s length as you look in the mirror is definitely 
not going to create the professional image you are seeking to 
­convey!
•	Complete your personal profile by adding the name of your uni-
versity or organization. Make sure you state what you do, rather 
than who you are – for example, ‘I am a PhD student, researching 
the use of social media in qualitative research’.
•	When you update your status (i.e. post/write a comment), try to 
share something informative and of interest to your research net-
work (e.g. a new book that has recently been published or a link to 
an article or business or a pertinent quotation).
•	Consider using Facebook groups to bring people together who 
have similar research interests to you by creating a network.
•	Think about setting up a Facebook page to promote yourself as a 
researcher. Give yourself a professional profile and image.
The University of Exeter (2013) gives sound advice via its blog on 
the language you should adopt on your professional Facebook page, 
which applies equally to all the social networks you use:
“
The content that you post should be professional in tone and 
grammatically correct, but should avoid overly formal language. Talk 
to your followers as you would talk to them face-to-face in a professional 
setting."
http://www.exeter.ac.uk/staff/web/socialmedia/linkedin/
Make sure your profile on social media sites pre-
sents a welcoming but professional image. Have 
your headshot taken by a photographer. Describe 
yourself as a researcher and, in a few words, 
describe what you are researching.
YouTube
YouTube is often visited to access humorous, embarrassing or inno-
vative videos (see Blendtec (2010), for example, at http://www.you-
tube.com/watch?v=lAl28d6tbko, if you would like a short break from 
your research!). However, there are also a huge number of videos on 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Using Social Media in Research
153
YouTube that are aimed at the professional researcher. For exam-
ple, the video at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SfxrrMVzXK0 
(Arguadiola 2012) identifies the most important considerations when 
writing a literature review. When you find a video that is useful, you 
can ‘subscribe’ to that video, which makes it easy to find again. You 
will also be notified of new YouTube videos from that creator who is 
likely to produce videos on similar topics.
Summary
I hope this chapter has given you an overview of how you might use 
social media to let other researchers know who you are and what 
you are doing, to build contacts with fellow researchers and to 
help you to organize and structure your research. Social media is 
hugely powerful and you can harness some of that power to make 
you a more effective researcher and to save you time and expense, 
especially during data collection. Although the potential of social 
media is unarguable, as with all of your research activities you 
need to manage your time effectively – social media activity can 
be addictive and hours can slip by almost unnoticed. If you get it 
right, you will be able to counteract the isolation that many lone 
researchers face and be able to receive and give advice to other 
researchers.
Using Social Media in Research  
Checklist
1.  Decide what your goals 
are for using social 
media in research
Do you want to share 
publications, ask for help 
from your community, 
keep up to date with 
research?
Q
2.  Who do you want to 
reach and why?
Identify who you want to 
connect with and choose 
the platform they use
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
154
Further reading
Gray, C. (2011) Social media: a guide for researchers. London: 
Research Information Network [Online]. Available at http://www.
rin.ac.uk/our-work/communicating-and-disseminating-research/
social-media-guide-researchers [Accessed 10 March 2014]. 
As its name suggests, the UK-based Research Information Network 
(RIN) is a research community that supports the development of effec-
tive information strategies. It is targeted at a wide audience of ‘research-
ers, institutions, funders, information professionals and everyone who 
plays a role in the research information landscape’. The guide explains 
the range of social media tools and platforms that are at the research-
er’s disposal and includes case studies. It is downloadable from the RIN 
website.
3.  Which tool or platform 
is appropriate?
Different platforms offer 
different functionality –
explore your options
Q
4.  How much time do you 
want to spend on social 
media for research?
Balance the time you 
want to spend on social 
media for personal 
reasons with the time 
you spend on social 
media for research 
purposes
Q
5.  Social media is about 
3 Cs: Community, 
Content and 
Conversations
Consider how the 3 Cs 
can contribute to your 
research
Q
6.  Make sure that you 
have a professional 
profile as a researcher 
on LinkedIn
Consider whether your 
profile on social media 
gives a professional 
impression
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Using Social Media in Research
155
Poynter, R. (2010) The Handbook of Online and Social Media 
Research. Chichester: Wiley.  
Although the focus of Poynter’s book is market research, there is a great 
deal of information about online research methodology that is generic 
or can be adapted to other research disciplines. The book also chal-
lenges conventional notions of academic research, which has been slow 
to adapt to the online world and social media.
Thomas, M. (2012) Social Media Made Simple: How to Avoid 
Social Media Suicide. Berkshire: AppleTree Publishing. 
Mary Thomas’s title summarizes the content of her book perfectly. This 
is a jargon-free and clear explanation of social media and the range of 
platforms you might use. It also includes templates that you can adapt 
to help you to plan your research.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

156
Key terms
Operationalizable
161
Likert scale
163
INTRODUCTION
Designing a questionnaire is a skilled task requiring careful planning and thought. 
This chapter aims to equip you with a basic but thorough introduction to design-
ing a questionnaire, including compilation of the questions through piloting, dis-
tribution and analysis of the completed questionnaires either in print on online. 
This chapter contains:
•	An introduction to the use of the questionnaire to gather research data, looking 
at how online tools such as Survey Monkey can help you to design and struc-
ture it.
•	Guidance on identifying what information you need to find out and the range of 
question types to consider.
•	Advice on avoiding pitfalls such as ambiguity, imprecision, double questions and 
making assumptions.
•	Ideas for the visual presentation of your questionnaire.
•	Instructions for drawing up a representative sample, piloting and distributing 
questionnaires, including your responsibility for informing respondents how the 
data you acquire will be stored and used.
9
Designing and 
Administering 
Questionnaires
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Designing and Administering Questionnaires
157
You will only reach the stage of designing a questionnaire after you 
have done all the preliminary work on planning, consulting and 
deciding exactly what you need to find out. Only then will you know 
whether a questionnaire is suitable for the purpose and is likely to 
be a better way of collecting information than interviews or obser-
vation, for example, or whether it will be more effective if used in 
addition to other data collection methods. Whatever its purpose, you 
will need to ensure you produce a well-designed questionnaire that 
will give you the information you need, that will be acceptable to 
your respondents and that will give you no problems at the analysis 
and interpretation stage.
Whether you are designing a Word document or an online survey 
by using dedicated software such as Survey Monkey, it is harder to 
produce really good questionnaires than might be imagined. They 
are fiendishly difficult to design and should never be considered 
by anyone who believes that ‘anyone who can write plain English 
and has a modicum of common sense can produce a good question-
naire’ (Oppenheim 1992: 1). Of course, as Oppenheim says, com-
mon sense and the ability to write plain English are always a plus 
in any walk of life, but designing a questionnaire requires rather 
more. It requires discipline in the selection of questions, in question 
writing, in the design, piloting, distribution and return of the ques-
tionnaires. What is more, thought has to be given to how responses 
will be analysed at the design stage, not after questionnaires have 
been submitted or returned. (The same point was made in Chapter 
6, where you were advised that before using IBM’s SPSS Statistics 
software to analyse data, you must plan in advance the nature of 
the data that you wish to acquire from respondents.) If you send out 
questionnaires and just hope for the best, you may find the returns 
impossible to deal with.
Survey Monkey (www.surveymonkey.com) is the most popu-
lar and versatile online questionnaire and survey tool, with over  
1½ million surveys completed online each day in 2014 and over 16 
million users worldwide. The free version is more than adequate for 
100-hour projects and, unless the research is heavily dependent on 
quantitative data, for most PhD dissertations too. Survey Monkey 
helps you to design the questionnaire, taking you through the pro-
cess step-by-step and gives you more than 20 different templates to 
choose from. With the free plan, you get up to 10 questions per sur-
vey, 15 available question types, up to 100 responses, and the facility 
to collect responses by weblink, email and Facebook. Questionnaires 
are integrated with a mailing facility, so you only have to add the 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
158
email addresses of your respondents to the Survey Monkey template 
and click ‘send’. You can track responses and display results graphi-
cally, which enables you to present your results professionally in 
your research report.
A piece of advice – consider planning and writing or typing your 
questionnaire before designing it in Survey Monkey. It is possible 
to structure the questions and produce the design simultaneously 
within Survey Monkey, but you need to be able to juggle both while 
also being able to keep the overall framework of the questionnaire in 
your mind. You may be able to do all of this, but I struggle to balance 
all these factors at the same time. It is also important to trial the 
questionnaire to find out if participants will have difficulty under-
standing the questions or in following its structure. Enlist the help 
of family and friends by sending them the pilot questionnaire and 
asking them to respond via email.
 If you do not intend your questionnaire to be completed online, 
you can still design it in Survey Monkey and print a hard copy or 
reproduce it as a Word document.
Exactly what do you need to find out?
Your preliminary reading and your research plan will have identified 
important areas for investigation. Go back to your hypothesis or to 
the objectives and decide which questions you need to ask to achieve 
those objectives. You will need several attempts at wording in order 
to remove ambiguity, to achieve the degree of precision necessary 
to ensure that respondents understand exactly what you are asking, 
to check that your language is jargon-free, to decide which ques-
tion types to use and to ensure that you will be able to classify and 
analyse responses. Guidance on analysis is provided in Chapter 13; 
before you complete your questionnaire design, you should read this 
chapter carefully. Time spent on preparation will save many hours 
of work later on.
Question types
It is as well to be aware of the advantages and limitations of differ-
ent question types, to be as sure as you can be that each item in your 
questionnaire will produce the information you need, and that each 
will produce analysable responses. Different people give them dif-
ferent names, but most will include some or all of Youngman’s (1982) 
list of seven question types:
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Designing and Administering Questionnaires
159
Verbal/
Open
The expected response is a word, a phrase or 
an extended comment. Responses to verbal 
questions can produce useful information but 
analysis can present problems. Some form of 
content analysis may be required for verbal 
material unless the information obtained is to 
be used for special purposes (see Chapter 7). For 
example, you might believe it necessary to give 
respondents the opportunity to provide their own 
views on the topic being researched – or to raise 
a grievance. You might wish to use questions as 
an introduction to a follow-up interview, or in 
pilot interviews where it is important to know 
which aspects of the topic are of particular 
importance to the respondents. Well-structured 
questions will not present so many problems at 
the analysis stage.
List
A list of items is offered, any of which may be 
selected. For example, a question may ask about 
qualifications and the respondent may have 
several of the qualifications listed.
Category
The response is one only of a given set of 
categories. For example, if age categories are 
provided (20–29, 30–39, etc.), the respondent can 
only fit into one category. Take care not to use 
overlapping ages such as 20–29 and 29–39.
Ranking
In ranking questions, the respondent is asked to 
place something in rank order. For example, the 
respondent might be asked to place qualities or 
characteristics in order.
Quantity
The response is a number (exact or approximate), 
giving the quantity of some characteristic.
Grid
A table or grid is provided to record answers to 
two or more questions at the same time.
Scale
Various styles of scaling devices can be used in 
questionnaires, but they require careful handling 
(more about scales in Chapter 13).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
160
Students have discovered that once they have tried out and become 
familiar with different ways of analysing and presenting question-
naire responses to list, category, ranking, scale, quantity or grid 
questions, they are able to select the most appropriate format when 
they come to the stage of designing and analysing data in their 
project.
Question wording
Ambiguity and imprecision
Words that have a common meaning to you may suggest something 
different to other people, so you need to consider what your ques-
tions might mean to different respondents. For example, suppose 
you wanted to find out how much time mature students spend study-
ing. You ask: ‘How much time, on average, do you spend studying?’ 
You invite your respondent to tick the box for ‘a great deal’, ‘a certain 
amount’ or ‘not much’. What will you do with the responses? What 
will they mean? ‘A great deal’ may mean something different to stu-
dent A than to student B. In any case, students may spend 20 hours 
a week at some times of the year but probably not more than four at 
other times. What is ‘average’? If you really wish to know how much 
time students spend studying, you will need to find different ways 
of putting the question. When you think about this topic, you may 
decide you have to ask students to keep a diary for a specific period 
of time. You may need to specify the time spent studying different 
subjects. It will all depend on exactly what it is you need to know. 
Once you are clear about that, you will be able to word your ques-
tions sufficiently precisely to ensure that they mean the same to all 
respondents.
Precision in wording is important. Remember that concepts such 
as ‘satisfaction’ and ‘class’ can’t actually be observed. There are many 
‘satisfaction questions’ in the questionnaires I receive from banks, 
credit card companies, hotels, shops, hospitals, financial advisers – 
and many others. ‘How satisfied are you with ...?’, or even ‘Are you sat-
isfied with ...?’, with an instruction to tick the ‘yes/no’ box. Satisfaction 
is a concept and, as we can’t actually observe concepts, we have to 
find different ways in which they might be observable, and therefore 
measurable. Rose and Sullivan provide a useful example of ways in 
which the concept of ‘class’ might be measurable. They write that:
“
If we wish to understand something about class (a concept and 
therefore . . . not observable), what can we observe in the world which 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Designing and Administering Questionnaires
161
manifests class? That is, what indicators can be used for class so that we 
can obtain data about class? This is the essence of the measurement 
problem and when we link an unobservable concept with an observable 
indicator we are producing operationalizations."
(Rose and Sullivan 1996: 12–13)
They explain that operationalizable refers to ‘the rules we use to 
link the language of theory (concepts) to the language of research 
(indicators)’. So, what indicators of ‘class’ or ‘satisfaction’ might 
there be? Think about it. Ask friends, colleagues, family members 
for measurable alternatives, and as always, go back to the beginning 
and ask yourself, what do you really need to know?
Assumptions
If respondents are confused, irritated or even offended, they may 
leave the item blank or even abandon the questionnaire. You want 
answers to all questions if at all possible, so try to avoid confusion 
and watch out for assumptions. Consider the following question:
“
Which type of school does your child attend?"
The respondent is asked to tick the appropriate box from a long list 
of types of school. The researcher has assumed the respondent has 
one child, but what if she has no children? Does she ignore this ques-
tion? What if she has more than one child – one in an infant school, 
one in a high school, and so on – what does she do then? Does she 
put the number of children in the appropriate box? Are you prepared 
for a category response, or had you intended this to be a list? It may 
not matter, but if your analysis is planned on the basis of a cate-
gory response, you will create for yourself extra trouble when list 
responses are given. Incidentally, your respondents might well ask 
why you want this information. Is the information essential for your 
study? If not, leave it out.
Memory
Memory plays tricks. If you were asked to say which television pro-
grammes you saw last week, could you remember everything? Could 
you be sure that one particular programme was last week – or was it 
the week before? Consider the following question, which appeared in 
a questionnaire concerned with parents’ education:
“
What subjects did you study at school?"
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
162
If respondents left school recently, they may be able to remember 
quite clearly, but if they left school 20 or more years ago, they may 
find it difficult to remember. If they do not include English in the list 
of subjects, would that mean that no English was studied or did they 
just forget to include it? Consider what information you really need. 
If you want to know which of a list of subjects that respondents stud-
ied, you might decide it would be better to provide a list of subjects 
that can be ticked. That way, you would ensure that main subjects 
were covered – but the type of question will depend on the type of 
information needed.
Knowledge
Take care with questions that ask for information the students may 
not know or may not have readily to hand. For example, it may seem 
reasonable to ask mature students what the criteria are for allocat-
ing students to tutorial groups. But the likelihood is that they will not 
know; and if respondents have to search for information, they may 
put the questionnaire to one side until they have time – and forget all 
about it.
Double questions
It may seem obvious to remind you that double questions should never 
be asked, but it’s easy to overlook the following type of question:
“
Do you attend research methods and statistics courses?"
Would the answer ‘yes’ mean that you attend both, or one? If you 
need to know, the question should be divided into:
Do you attend research methods courses?
and
Do you attend statistics courses?
It is common to come across questionnaires with double questions, 
particularly in hotel feedback forms, such as:
The management is always looking for ways of improving the service to 
guests. We should be grateful if you would circle the appropriate number 
below and return the completed form to reception.
How would you rate the service and cleanliness of the hotel?
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Designing and Administering Questionnaires
163
Excellent
Very good
Good
Satisfactory
Less than 
satisfactory
5
4
3
2
1
I found this in the bedroom of a large chain hotel and all the sub-
sequent questions followed a similar format. Assuming any of the 
guests bothered to complete the questionnaire, I can imagine that 
responses to 2–5 would be grouped together and would therefore 
provide ‘evidence’ that 95 per cent of guests were very satisfied with 
the service and cleanliness of the hotel. The conclusion that would 
be drawn from the results would be misleading. The double question 
is obvious but there are other issues in this item. Perhaps you con-
sidered the service was good in parts. Helpful, pleasant and efficient 
receptionists, a maid who did a remarkably good job, but the porter 
was surly and the restaurant service appalling. As far as cleanliness 
was concerned ... well, I won’t go on.
Likert scales (originally devised by R. Likert in 1932) of the kind 
in this hotel questionnaire are devices used to discover strength of 
feeling or attitude towards a given statement or series of statements, 
and the implication here is that the higher the category chosen, the 
greater the strength of agreement, but care has to be taken not to 
read too much into these ranked scales. They are usually, though 
not always, ranked on a 3-, 5- or 7-point scale and ask respondents 
to indicate rank order of agreement or disagreement by circling the 
appropriate number. They certainly arrange individuals or objects 
from the highest to the lowest, but the intervals between each may 
not be the same. We cannot say that the highest rating (5 in the hotel 
example) is five times higher than the lowest (which is 1). All that can 
be said is that they indicate order. In spite of these limitations, Likert 
scales can be useful, as long as the wording is clear, there are no dou-
ble questions, and no unjustified claims are made about the findings.
Leading questions
It is not always easy to spot a leading question, but the use of emo-
tive language or the way a question is put can influence respondents 
to answer questions in one way. For example:
“
Do you not agree that mature students should have the right to 
express their views in tutorials?"
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
164
Well, it might be difficult for students to answer ‘no’ in response to 
that question.
Presuming questions
Presuming questions are often a source of error in questionnaires. 
When they are included, it is often because the researcher holds 
strong views about a subject and overlooks the fact that everyone 
may not feel the same way. For example:
“
Does the university/college/hospital make adequate provision for 
counselling?"
Is that for students, patients, staff – someone else? You may think all 
institutions should provide a counselling service. But what if your 
respondents do not? What if they do not really know what a coun-
selling service does? In its present form, ‘adequate’ is meaningless. 
There is a presumption in the question that a counselling service is 
necessary, and that makes the question invalid.
Hypothetical questions
Look out for questions that will provide only useless responses. Most 
hypothetical questions come into this category. For example:
“
If you had no family responsibilities and plenty of money, would you 
travel around the world and live in 5-star hotels?"
But, a respondent might answer, ‘I do have family responsibilities. I 
have no money and never shall have as far as I can see, so what’s the 
point of thinking about it?’
Offensive questions and questions covering 
sensitive issues
It goes without saying that questions that may cause offence should be 
removed. If you really need information on what might be regarded by 
some respondents as sensitive issues, you will need to take extra care 
in the wording and positioning of questions. Some researchers think it 
is better to place such questions towards the end of the questionnaire, 
the theory being that if respondents abandon the questionnaire at that 
point, you at least have answers to all the earlier questions.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Designing and Administering Questionnaires
165
Age is often considered to be in the sensitive category and, rather 
than asking respondents to give their exact age, it may be better 
to ask them to tick a box to indicate age category (perhaps 21 or 
younger; 22–25; 26–30, and so on). Again, be careful not to have over-
lapping categories. It’s quite common to see age categories listed as 
21 or less, 21–25, 25–30, and so on.
If you are using numerical ranges in question-
naires to place the respondents in categories, take 
care not to overlap them, e.g. ‘What is your age?’ 
21–30, 30–40, 40–50. This will make it impossible 
to allocate responses to a specific category.
Appearance and layout
A really well-prepared questionnaire will lose much of its impact if 
it looks untidy. Look at published surveys that used a questionnaire 
as one method of data collection and they will give you ideas about 
layout. Recipients need to be encouraged to read and to answer the 
questions, and they may be put off by a poorly structured document 
that has been hastily prepared. There are no hard-and-fast rules 
about layout, but there are a few common-sense guidelines that will 
help with appearance.
1	 Instructions should be clear (in capitals, or in a different font).
2	 Spacing between questions will help the reader and will also help 
you when you analyse responses.
3	 If you want to keep the questionnaire to a limited number of 
sheets, it may be better to reduce the size of the document or 
photocopy.
4	 Keep any response boxes in line towards the right of the sheet. 
This will make it easy for respondents and will help you to record 
responses.
5	 Allow space on the right of the sheet for coding, if necessary. 
(Find out more about coding in Chapter 13.)
6	 Look critically at your questionnaire and ask yourself what 
impression it would give if you were the recipient.
7	 Take care over the order of the questions. Leave sensitive issues 
to later in the questionnaire. Start with straightforward, easy-to-
complete questions and move on to the more complex topics.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
166
8	 Remember your promise to respect anonymity and confidential-
ity. Refer back to Chapter 3 if you’ve forgotten.
9	 Keep names off questionnaires if at all possible.
Drawing a sample
The number of respondents in your investigation will necessarily 
depend on the amount of time you have. If you are working on a 
100-hour project, you will not be able to include all mature students 
in the country. If you have decided to restrict your research to one 
institution, then you will need to find out how many mature students 
there are. If there are 100, it’s unlikely you will have the time or the 
means to include them all. You will need to select a sample.
In very large surveys, like the census, techniques are employed 
to produce a sample that is, as far as possible, representative of the 
population as a whole. Generalizations can then be made from the 
findings. In small studies, we have to do the best we can.
All researchers are dependent on the goodwill and availability 
of respondents, and it will probably be difficult for an individual 
researcher working on a small-scale project to achieve a true random 
sample. If that proves to be the case, you may be forced to interview 
anyone from the total population who is available and willing at the 
time. Opportunity samples of this kind are generally acceptable, as 
long as the make-up of the sample is clearly stated and the limita-
tions of the data are realized. However, even in a small study, efforts 
should be made to select as representative a sample as possible. Say 
you decide to include 50 per cent of your population. A random sample 
will give each of the individuals concerned an equal chance of being 
selected. You may decide to select alternate names on an alphabeti-
cal list, the first person being selected by sticking a pin in the paper. 
Everyone selected may not be willing to participate, and so it is wise 
to have reserve names available. For example, if the twentieth per-
son refused or was not available, you might have decided beforehand, 
and as part of your research design, to approach the twenty-first.
There may be occasions when you wish to include representative 
sub-groups. You perhaps wish to select the appropriate proportion of 
men and women, of individuals in different age categories or some 
other sub-group of the target population. If so, you might have the 
following type of stratification:
Total target population: 100
Number of men: 60. Number of women: 40.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Designing and Administering Questionnaires
167
Instead of selecting alternate names, the sample population could be 
selected on the basis of every second man and every second woman, 
and so 30 men and 20 women would be selected. If a more scientific 
approach is required for your project, you will need to read more 
widely and to acquire a certain amount of statistical expertise.
There is helpful advice on creating an online survey in the 
Survey Monkey blog at http://blog.surveymonkey.com/blog/2012/04/ 
13/10-online-survey-tips/. Even if you do not intend your question-
naire to be completed online, a great deal of the advice given also 
applies to offline surveys.
Piloting the questionnaire
All data-gathering instruments should be piloted to test how long 
it takes recipients to complete them, to check that all questions 
and instructions are clear, and to enable you to remove any items 
that do not yield usable data. There is a temptation in a small study 
to go straight to the distribution stage but, however pressed for 
time you are, do your best to give the questionnaire a trial run, 
even if you have to persuade members of your family or friends. 
Ideally, it should be tried out on a group similar to the one that 
will form the population of your study, but if that is not possible, 
make do with whoever you can get. Respondents will tell you how 
long it took to complete the questionnaire, and if they leave any 
questions unanswered, you will be able to find out why. The pur-
pose of a pilot exercise is to get the bugs out of the instrument so 
that respondents in your main study will experience no difficul-
ties in completing it. It also enables you to carry out a preliminary 
analysis to see whether the wording and format of questions will 
present any difficulties when the main data is analysed. If you 
intend to email the questionnaire or use Survey Monkey, use the 
same distribution method with your pilot volunteers. That way, 
you will know if there are any problems with the distribution and 
return method itself.
Ask your volunteers the following questions:
1	 How long did it take you to complete?
2	 Were the instructions clear?
3	 Were any of the questions unclear or ambiguous? If so, would you 
say which and why?
4	 Did you object to answering any of the questions?
5	 In your opinion, has any major topic been omitted?
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
168
6	 Was the layout of the questionnaire clear/attractive?
7	 Any comments?
Their responses will enable you to review the questionnaire and 
amend it if necessary for the main distribution. It will take you some 
time to achieve a good standard of design and presentation, but if 
the preparation is sound, it will save you hours and even weeks of 
work at the analysis stage.
Distribution and return of questionnaires
Remember that under no circumstances can you distribute your 
questionnaires until you have obtained clearance to proceed 
from your supervisor, your institution’s research committee, 
ethics committee and any other body that has responsibility 
for scrutinizing students’ topics, project plans and proposed 
methods of collecting data. In my view, written approval should 
always be obtained, so never assume it will be ‘all right’ and that ver-
bal agreement given over a coffee will suffice. It might, but it might 
not. You need to be sure of your own position. Once you have the 
necessary approval, you will need to decide how to distribute your 
questionnaire and what to do about non-response.
There are distinct advantages in being able to give questionnaires 
to respondents personally. You can explain the purpose of the study 
and, in some cases, questionnaires can be completed on the spot. 
You are likely to get better cooperation if you can establish personal 
contact but, if this is impossible, you will need to investigate other 
ways of distribution. Permission can sometimes be obtained to dis-
tribute through internal mailing systems but it is more likely that 
you will use the respondents’ personal email addresses. If you use 
Survey Monkey, this is how it will distribute your questionnaires. 
If all else fails, you may have to mail copies, but postal surveys are 
expensive and response rates are generally low, so you would only 
wish to resort to distribution by post if you found it impossible to 
contact potential respondents by any other means.
Before you distribute your questionnaire, you must 
obtain permission from your supervisor and check 
whether you need clearance from any official body 
such as a research or ethics committee.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Designing and Administering Questionnaires
169
The rights of respondents and your rights 
and responsibilities
As mentioned in Chapter 3, even if you will be meeting respondents 
face-to-face, it is my view that they should be provided with a written 
statement about their rights and your responsibilities and the pur-
pose of the research. Make it clear that official approval has been 
given and say what will be done with the completed questionnaires. 
Who will see them? Will they be deleted or shredded when you have 
finished with them or when your report has been examined? If you 
intend to store them, do you have a good reason for doing so? How long 
will it be for? And can you guarantee security of the data? Does the 
collection of data conform to the requirements of the Data Protection 
Act? If confidentiality and anonymity are guaranteed, make it clear 
what you mean by both. Look back at Chapter 3 if you have doubts. 
Promise what you know you can deliver and nothing more.
If you are not able to distribute your questionnaires face-to-face, 
a letter will be required, in addition to your statement. The letter can 
form the body of your email. Take care with the wording of your 
letter. A letter that is too brusque or too ingratiating can have an 
adverse effect on response, so show your draft letter to a few friends 
and ask their opinion. Remember to give the return date, either in the 
letter or in a prominent position on the questionnaire. Experience 
has shown that it is unwise to allow too long. If no date is specified 
or if too long is given, it becomes too easy for potential respondents 
to put the questionnaire to one side, which often means that it will 
never be seen again. Two weeks is a reasonable time for completion. 
Give the precise day and date rather than relying on a polite request 
for the questionnaire to be submitted or returned in two weeks’ time. 
For some reason, it seems to help to jog memories if the day as well 
as the date is stated. Include a self-addressed envelope (stamped, if 
respondents have to return the questionnaire by post).
Non-response
Keep a record of the date questionnaires are distributed and the date 
they are submitted or returned. Generally, there is a good response 
at first and then returns slow down. Inevitably, they will not all be 
submitted or returned by the specified date but if you do not include 
any method of identification on the questionnaires in order to guar-
antee anonymity, for example, you will have no way of knowing 
who has replied and who has not and so there can be no follow-up. 
Non-response is a problem ‘because of the likelihood – repeatedly 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
170
confirmed in practice – that people who do not return questionnaires 
differ from those who do’ (Moser and Kalton 1971: 267–8). So, if at all 
possible, some effort should be made to encourage more people to 
return completed questionnaires.
Opinions vary as to the best time to send out follow-up requests, 
assuming your guarantees of anonymity and confidentiality will 
allow follow-ups, but in a limited-time project you will need to write 
about a week after the original date if you are to complete data col-
lection in the time allocated. In some large projects, a third and even 
a fourth reminder will be sent, but the number of returns obtained by 
this process is unlikely to warrant the time and trouble it will involve.
Analysis of data
In an ideal world, it would be best to wait for all questionnaires to 
be submitted or returned and to glance through all responses before 
beginning to code and record. In a limited-time project, it may be 
necessary to begin recording responses as soon as the first question-
naires are submitted or returned. The procedures for analysing and 
presenting results, described in Chapter 13, may influence the way 
you structure the questionnaire and word the questions, so before 
you decide finally on content and format, read Chapter 13 carefully 
and make sure you read the checklist to this chapter to be sure you 
have covered all essential tasks.
Designing and Administering 
Questionnaires Checklist
1.  Make sure you have 
approval to proceed 
before you move 
too far on with your 
preparation. Never 
assume it will be ‘all 
right’.
Check the requirements of 
your ethics, research and 
any other bodies that have 
responsibility for approving 
research in your institution. 
Remember that approval may 
take some time, so if you 
can, submit your research 
proposals well in advance.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Designing and Administering Questionnaires
171
2.  Decide what you 
need to know and 
list all items about 
which information 
is required. Ask 
yourself why 
you need this 
information.
Don’t clog up your 
questionnaire with irrelevant 
items just in case they might 
come in handy. They won’t.
Q
3.  Is a questionnaire 
the best way of 
obtaining the 
information?
Consider what information 
you need. If another method 
of data collection is likely 
to be better, consider the 
alternatives.
Q
4.  If you decide a 
questionnaire will be 
best, begin to word 
questions. Write 
them on separate 
cards or Post-It® 
notes, to enable you 
to order them easily 
later on.
Remember that concepts 
can’t be measured, so if you 
really do need to know about 
respondents’ satisfaction 
with x or y, think of 
indicators of satisfaction.
Q
5.  Check the wording 
of each question. Is 
there any ambiguity, 
imprecision or 
assumption? Are you 
asking respondents 
to remember things? 
Will they be able 
to? Are you asking 
for knowledge 
respondents may not 
have? Any double, 
leading, presuming, 
hypothetical or 
offensive questions?
Keep language simple. Don’t 
use words respondents 
may not understand (that 
includes technical language) 
unless you are dealing with 
a professional group, all 
of whom understand your 
linguistic shortcuts.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
172
6.  Decide on question 
type.
Verbal, list, category, 
ranking, scale, quantity or 
grid. Each type requires 
a different analysis (see 
Chapter 13 for further 
information about analysis).
Q
7.  When you are 
satisfied that all 
questions are 
worded well and of 
the right type, order 
them.
It is often better to leave 
sensitive questions to the 
end.
Q
8.  Write out 
instructions to be 
included on the 
questionnaire.
Respondents must be clear 
about how they are to answer 
questions (ticks in boxes, 
circling items, yes/no?).
Q
9.  Instructions 
must be clearly 
presented (perhaps 
in a different font 
and displayed 
in a prominent 
position?). Decide 
whether you need a 
right-hand margin 
for coding.
Consult Chapter 13 about 
coding and possible ways 
of analysing responses 
before you finally decide 
on the wording, content 
and structure of your 
questionnaire.
Q
10.  Consider layout 
and appearance. A 
scrappy appearance 
will not encourage 
respondents to take 
it seriously.
If using Survey Monkey 
or a similar online survey 
tool, use the design tools to 
make sure it looks attractive 
on the screen. If designing 
a questionnaire in Word, 
take time to format the 
questionnaire attractively 
and check that it prints 
neatly.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Designing and Administering Questionnaires
173
11.  Decide on your 
sample.
Try to select a sample that 
is as close to your final 
population as possible. If 
you have to make do with an 
opportunity sample, say why 
in your report.
Q
12.  Always pilot your 
questionnaire, no 
matter how pushed 
for time you are.
Ideally, it should be sent 
to people who are similar 
to your selected sample. 
However, if that is not 
possible, ask friends, family 
or colleagues to help.
Q
13.  Try out your 
methods of 
analysis. Again, 
read Chapter 13 
before you decide 
finally on your 
format.
Even with only five 
or six completed pilot 
questionnaires, you will 
be able to see whether any 
problems are likely to arise 
when you analyse the main 
returns.
Q
14.  Make any 
adjustments to 
the questionnaire 
in the light of 
pilot respondents’ 
comments and 
your preliminary 
analysis.
Consider timing. If it took 
your volunteers too long to 
complete, decide whether 
any items might be removed 
or reworded. Eliminate any 
items that are not directly 
related to your topic. Check 
again that nothing is included 
merely because it might come 
in handy at some future 
stage.
Q
15.  Decide how the 
questionnaire is 
to be distributed. 
But before you 
distribute, check 
(yet again) that 
you know what you 
mean by anonymity 
By internal mail? To 
respondents’ personal 
email addresses? Directing 
respondents to a URL in 
an online survey by email? 
By post? By personally 
delivering questionnaires to 
respondents? Also 
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
174
       and confiden­
tiality – and that 
you make your 
definitions clear 
to respondents.
include a letter and a 
statement of conditions 
and guarantees explaining 
respondents’ rights and your 
responsibilities.
16.  Don’t forget to say 
when you would 
like questionnaires 
to be submitted or 
returned, if possible. 
Give the preferred 
day and date.
Keep a record of when 
questionnaires were 
distributed and when 
submitted or returned.
Q
17.  Decide what you are 
going to do about 
non-respondents 
and ‘bounce backs’, 
where your email 
is returned because 
the address is 
incorrect, before 
you distribute the 
questionnaires.
Remember that you will 
not be able to send out 
reminders if all responses are 
guaranteed to be anonymous. 
A returned unread email 
is not the same as a non-
response and therefore these 
categories have to be coded 
separately for data analysis.
Q
18.  Begin to record 
responses as soon 
as completed 
questionnaires are 
received. In online 
questionnaires, 
such as Survey 
Monkey, the 
software compiles 
the results for you.
You do not have time to wait 
for stragglers before you 
begin your analysis of the 
data. Do this as you go along.
Q
19.  Do not get involved 
with complicated 
statistics unless 
you know what you 
are doing. Use the 
It is perfectly possible to 
produce a good report 
without extensive statistical 
knowledge, as long as the 
structure of the 
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Designing and Administering Questionnaires
175
tools in your online 
survey platform 
or IBM SPSS 
Statistics to create 
graphs or tables 
but ensure that you 
understand how to 
present the data 
you have gathered 
accurately.
questionnaire is well thought 
out.
Further reading
Most books dealing with research methods will have a chapter on the 
design of questionnaires and so the only items listed here are standard 
texts, most of which should be available in libraries. All provide good 
advice and will provide a sound foundation if you plan to design a ques-
tionnaire as part of your investigation.
Bell, J. and Woolner, P. (2012) Developing and using question-
naires’, in A.R.J. Briggs, M. Coleman and M. Morrison (eds) 
Research Methods in Educational Leadership and Management 
(3rd edn). London: Sage.
Blaxter, L., Hughes, C. and Tight, M. (2010) How to Research (4th 
edn). Maidenhead: Open University Press. 
Pages 170–2 provide useful advice about sampling.
Bowling, A. (2009) Research Methods in Health: Investigating 
Health and Health Services (3rd edn). Maidenhead: Open 
University Press. 
Chapter 7 concentrates on methods of sampling. Chapters 11 and 12 
consider aspects of questionnaire design such as planning, piloting, 
questionnaire layout, the covering letter, order of wording and checking 
the accuracy of responses. Chapter 14 introduces issues relating to the 
preparation of quantitative data for coding and analysis, all of which is 
useful.
Cohen, L., Manion, L. and Morrison, K. (2011) Case studies, in 
Research Methods in Education (7th edn). Abingdon: Routledge. 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
176
Chapter 8 (Sampling) and Chapter 10 (Validity and reliability) are well 
worth consulting.
Denscombe, M. (2010) The Good Research Guide for Small-scale 
Social Research Projects (4th edn). Maidenhead: Open University 
Press. 
Chapter 9 (Questionnaires) provides almost 20 pages of useful informa-
tion, including Internet questionnaires and a checklist for the produc-
tion of a questionnaire. Denscombe writes well and is invariably worth 
consulting.
Fogelman, K. and Comber, C. (2007) Surveys and sampling, 
in A.R.J. Briggs and M. Coleman (eds) Research Methods in 
Educational Leadership and Management (2nd edn). London: 
Sage. 
The authors discuss methods of sampling, including probability, ran-
dom, systematic, stratified, dimensional and snowball sampling.
Oppenheim, A.N. (1992) Questionnaire Design, Interviewing and 
Attitude Measurement. London: Continuum. 
Chapters 1, 2 and 3 provide guidance about survey design and Chapters 
7, 8 and 9 cover questionnaire planning, question wording, basic meas-
urement theory – and much more.
Youngman, M.B. (1994) Designing and analysing interviews, in  
N. Bennett, R. Glatter and R. Levac´icˇ (eds) Improving Educational 
Management through Research and Consultancy. London: Paul 
Chapman. 
The author covers the importance of planning, question specification, 
questionnaire design, distribution and return. This is an excellent chap-
ter and worth keeping as a permanent record and checklist.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

177
Key terms
Structured interview
179
Unstructured interview
181
Focus group
182
INTRODUCTION
This chapter examines the important tool of the research interview in detail, 
equipping you with an understanding of how to plan, conduct and record inter-
views for a research project. This chapter covers:
•	The important ethical considerations you need to be aware of before interview-
ing.
•	Assessment of whether the interview is the right tool for your research by 
understanding its advantages and disadvantages.
•	How to word questions and how to use the different styles of interview, includ-
ing structured and unstructured interviews, group interviews and focus groups.
•	How to record interviews so that the information you obtain is relevant and 
significant to your research.
•	Using technologies such as Skype and Google Hangouts to conduct interviews 
online.
•	Being aware of bias and other ethical and practical considerations.
Planning and 
Conducting 
Interviews
10
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
178
Advantages and disadvantages 
of the interview
One major advantage of the interview is its adaptability. A skilful 
interviewer can follow up ideas, probe responses and investigate 
motives and feelings, which the questionnaire can never do. The way 
in which a response is made (the tone of voice, facial expression, hesi-
tation, and so on) can provide information that a written response 
would conceal. Questionnaire responses have to be taken at face 
value, but a response in an interview can be developed and clarified.
There are problems, of course. Interviews are time-consuming, 
and so in a 100-hour project you will be able to interview only a rela-
tively small number of people. It is a highly subjective technique and 
therefore there is always the danger of bias. Analysing responses can 
present problems, and wording the questions is almost as demanding 
for interviews as it is for questionnaires. Even so, the interview can 
yield rich material and can often put flesh on the bones of question-
naire responses.
Moser and Kalton (1971: 271) describe the survey interview as ‘a 
conversation between interviewer and respondent with the purpose 
of eliciting certain information from the respondent’. This, they con-
tinue, might appear a straightforward matter, but the attainment of 
a successful interview is much more complex than this statement 
might suggest.
Preparation for interviews follows much the same procedures as 
for questionnaires. Topics need to be selected, questions devised, 
methods of analysis considered and a schedule prepared and piloted.
The ethics of conducting interviews
In Chapter 3, I spoke about codes of practice, contracts and protocols, 
which require researchers to ensure that participants are fully aware 
of the purpose of the research and that they understand their rights. It 
will be helpful if you refer to the ‘ethical guidelines and protocols’ sec-
tion in Chapter 3 before you get too far in planning your interviews, 
because you should not proceed without respondents’ consent to par-
ticipate. If you are researching in a hospital or in fact in any health-
related area, for example, I should be very surprised if you were not 
required to produce a written protocol. Conditions vary and so it’s 
essential that you find out what the requirements are at an early stage.
Obtaining informed consent may not be as easy as it sounds, and if 
you are working on a 100-hour project, you will have little time to pre-
pare and trial the sort of protocol required in a major study. However, 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Planning and Conducting Interviews
179
whatever the size of the project, you will still have a responsibility 
to explain to respondents as fully as possible what the research is 
about, why you wish to interview them, what will be involved and 
what you will do with the information you obtain. I personally feel 
that this should not be presented verbally at the start of an inter-
view, but sent beforehand so that respondents have an opportunity 
to query the meaning and implications of any statements – and even 
to withdraw at that stage. Better for participants to withdraw at the 
start rather than halfway through or after the interview.
In case you are coming to the conclusion that this is just one more 
bureaucratic and unnecessary procedure, I would ask you to remem-
ber that it not only ensures that your respondents know about their 
rights and your responsibilities but it is also protects your own position 
from accusations that interviewees were coerced into participating.
Question wording
Although question wording is important, it is not quite as important 
to be precise about the use of certain terms as for questionnaires, 
though of course the language you use must be understandable to the 
respondents. In the chapter on questionnaire design, I gave the exam-
ple of students having been asked how much time they spent studying, 
and suggested that ‘a great deal’, ‘a certain amount’ and ‘not much’ 
would mean different things to different people. In an interview, it 
would be possible to ask ‘How much time do you spend studying?’ and 
then to follow with a prompt along the lines of ‘For example ...’.
Follow the rules laid down for questionnaire design (no leading, 
presumptive or offensive questions, etc.). Consider the issues you wish 
to cover and the order in which you might put your questions. The 
order may be important in establishing an easy relationship with the 
interviewee. The manner in which you ask questions certainly will be.
Try out question wording and, when you are as satisfied as you 
can be, write the questions and/or prompts on cards or on separate 
pieces of paper or in a document on a tablet so you can scroll up to 
the next question.
The interview schedule
Structured and semi-structured interviews
If you decide to use a structured or semi-structured format, 
which allows you to tick or circle responses on your previously pre-
pared schedule, you should be able to leave the interview with a set 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
180
of responses that can be fairly easily recorded, summarized and 
analysed. It’s not quite so easy if you have decided on an unstruc-
tured format but you will still need to prepare a list of items you wish 
to discuss and a few prompts or probes to remind you about the par-
ticular issues you wish to cover. Say you are carrying out a survey 
of staff participation in a company’s in-house French language pro-
gramme. Company headquarters are in Paris and it was felt that the 
language programme would be a good idea. However, take-up was 
disappointing, possibly because although half an hour of work time 
was allowed, participants had to give a further half-hour of their 
own time.
You think it might be useful to know whether there was any differ-
ence between male and female participants; the length of time staff 
had worked for the company; whether they had spent time at the 
Paris headquarters; their seniority in the firm and (an issue which 
had unexpectedly cropped up during the pilot interviews) whether 
attendance brought any increase in salary or even promotion; and, 
of course, the extent of employees’ participation in the French lan-
guage programme.
It’s fairly easy to circle numbers on your checklist, but not so easy 
to write down what people say. The last thing you want to do is to 
write furiously throughout the interview, so the more items you can 
surreptitiously circle, the better. You need to record whether your 
respondent is male or female but you don’t need to ask. You can see, 
so circle the M or F at the start of your schedule. Recording the inter-
view makes writing notes during it less urgent but remember to ask 
permission to do so and inform participants of what will happen to 
the recordings afterwards. Recording equipment can fail, so carry 
out a test before you start by asking a question, recording an answer 
and then replaying it.
You might prepare the draft schedule along the following lines. 
Try it out with your pilot study volunteers and if it does not work, 
then redraft until you are satisfied it serves your purpose.
Title: Survey of staff participation in the French 
language programme
Date of interview:	
Venue:
Name/number of interviewee:	 M or F
Q1: To what extent have you participated in the French 
language programme?
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Planning and Conducting Interviews
181
You might then wish to probe further.
After the interview, all the circled numbers can be entered into 
your summary sheet and the process of analysing responses has 
begun. Some people add a summary column on the right-hand side 
of the schedule; others prefer to work on a separate sheet.
Questions and coding can be developed during the course of pilot 
interviews. There may be changes as you go on. What seemed to be 
a good idea at the start may not be appropriate as you proceed. Code 
numbers do not need to be indicated on the schedule. Unless you 
plan to key your numbers into a spreadsheet or software package, 
there is no reason why you should work with numbers. You could use 
letters, which will immediately give you the key to the question item. 
If the majority of your data collection is to be via interviews, you are 
unlikely to accumulate very large numbers and, if you are coding by 
hand, the letters have considerable advantages over numbers. So, on 
your summary sheet, you would have headings of M and F and the 
numbers of participants who were male or female would be listed 
under the appropriate heading. Easy.
Unstructured interviews
Unstructured interviews centred round a topic may, and in skilled 
hands do, produce a wealth of valuable data but such interviews 
require a great deal of expertise to control and a great deal of time 
to analyse. Conversation about a topic may be interesting and may 
produce useful insights into a problem, but it has to be remembered 
that an interview is more than just an interesting conversation. It is 
a conversation with a purpose; you are seeking information that will 
enable you to gather data to address your research question or topic.
Preliminary interviews can probably be placed at the ‘completely 
unstructured’ end of the continuum of formality. This is the stage 
when you are trying to find out which areas or topics are important 
Prompt: 6-week basic programme	
1	
2	
3
	
12-week improvers’ programme	
1	
2	
3
	
1-year advanced programme	
1	
2	
3
	
2-year bilingual oral programme	
1	
2	
3
1 = not at all (any particular reasons?)
2 = to a certain extent (ask for examples)
3 = a great deal (ask for examples).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
182
and when people directly concerned with the topic are encouraged 
to talk about what is of central significance to them. You are looking 
for clues as to which areas should be explored and which left out. 
Interviews of this kind require only the minimum of note-taking, and 
as long as your notes are clear enough to enable you to extract points 
of interest, and topics for inclusion in the study, they will suffice.
Most interviews carried out in the main data collection stage of 
the research will come somewhere between the completely struc-
tured and the completely unstructured point on the continuum. 
Freedom to allow the respondents to talk about what is of central 
significance to them rather than to the interviewer is clearly impor-
tant, but some flexible structure to ensure all topics considered cru-
cial to the study are covered does eliminate some of the problems 
of entirely unstructured interviews. The guided or focused inter-
view fulfils these requirements. No questionnaire or checklist is 
used, but a framework is established by selecting topics on which the 
interview is guided. The respondent is allowed a considerable degree 
of latitude within the framework. Certain questions are asked, but 
respondents are allowed the freedom to talk about the topic and give 
their views in their own time. The interviewer needs to have the skill 
to ask questions and, if necessary, to probe at the right time, but if 
the interviewee moves freely from one topic to another, the conver-
sation can flow without interruption.
The advantage of a focused interview is that a framework is 
established beforehand and so recording and analysis are greatly 
simplified. This is important for any research, but particularly so for 
limited-time studies.
Group interviews and focus groups
One-to-one interviewing is not the only way of meeting respondents 
and in some cases you might feel it would be more useful to consider 
group interviewing. There is nothing new about group interview-
ing, although focus groups in particular are popular, especially in 
social science and health research. As their name indicates, the pur-
pose of focus groups is to focus discussion on a particular issue. 
They can be structured, where there are pre-prepared questions 
and checklists, or completely unstructured, where the intervention 
of the researcher is minimal. It all depends on the purpose of the 
interview. They can be formal or informal gatherings of a varied 
group of people who may not know each other, but who might be 
thought to have a shared interest, concern or experience in issues 
like treatment in hospital or vandalism in their area. They may all 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Planning and Conducting Interviews
183
have had similar experiences, or are known to have a professional 
concern about, and knowledge of, the issues involved. The intention 
is that participants will interact with each other, will be willing to 
listen to all views, perhaps to reach consensus about some aspects 
of the topic or to disagree about others, and to give a good airing to 
the issues which seem to be interesting or important to them. The 
researcher becomes less of an interviewer, more of a moderator or 
facilitator.
Focus groups are undoubtedly valuable when in-depth informa-
tion is needed ‘about how people think about an issue – their reason-
ing about why things are as they are, why they hold the views they 
do’ (Laws 2013: 205). However, there can sometimes be problems. 
Hayes warns us that:
“
Groups have to be carefully balanced in relation to the age, sex and 
ethnic status of respondents: for example, if young people, women, or 
people in ethnic minority groups are in disproportionately fewer 
numbers in the group they may feel socially constrained and not 
contribute freely to the discussion. It may sometimes be necessary to 
have single sex groups in similar age ranges in order for the atmosphere 
to be permissive and relaxed.”
(Hayes 2000: 395)
With experience, researchers will devise their own techniques of 
keeping the strong personalities in line and of drawing the silent 
members into the group. Laws (2013: 207) suggests that one way 
might be to make a periodic check in order to discover whether all 
group members are in agreement with statements being made, along 
the lines of ‘Is that what everyone thinks?’ or ‘Does everyone agree 
with xyz?’ and that seems to be a reasonable approach.
There appear to be many views about the ‘right’ and the ‘wrong’ 
way to manage group – particularly focus group – interviews. Some 
people consider a checklist, topic guide and prepared questions are 
essential; others disagree and feel that such a structure would be 
too directive to achieve the required exploration of respondents’ 
beliefs, interpretations and understanding of issues. All I can say, as 
I always do, is that we all have our own ways of doing things, so suit 
yourself, select the approach that is right for your purpose and call 
it what you will. As long as you remember that the ethics of research 
always have to be adhered to, that consent has to be given, full infor-
mation provided about the purpose of the research and guarantees 
given about your definition of anonymity and confidentiality, all will 
be well.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
184
Recording interviews
It is always difficult to decipher who said what in group interviews, 
but in one-to-one interviews, audio- or video-recording can be use-
ful to check the wording of any statement you might wish to quote, 
to allow you keep eye contact with your interviewee, to help you 
look interested – and to make sure that what you write is accurate. 
Recording can be especially helpful if you are undertaking any form 
of content analysis, in that you can listen several times to identify 
categories, but perhaps it is most useful because it allows you to 
code, summarize and to note comments that are of particular inter-
est without having to try to write them down during the course of 
the interview (see Chapter 7 for Brendan Duffy’s discussion of con-
tent analysis).
However, you cannot assume that all your respondents will be will-
ing for their comments to be recorded. Audio- and video-recording 
can sometimes inhibit honest responses. Interviewees will, rightly, 
wish to know what you propose to do with the recording, who is to 
have access to it and how long it will be kept. You also need to be 
prepared for a refusal. Even if respondents had agreed previously to 
be recorded, they may change their mind when the time comes and 
so you have to do all the necessary preliminary preparation of ques-
tions, prompts and probes in order to ensure, or try to ensure, that 
all the main issues you wish to explore have been covered – and you 
will need a checklist or schedule and a summary sheet.
Your difficulties are not at an end even if respondents do agree 
to be recorded. Many experienced researchers and supervisors feel 
strongly (and in fact state categorically) that all recordings must be 
transcribed. They make the point that if a transcription is not made 
and made available for scrutiny if required, then interviewers can say 
what they like, even going so far as to suggest that they might even 
make up ‘quotations’ that suit their purpose. However, if you have 
to do the transcribing yourself, you can count on at least 4–5 hours’ 
work for every hour of interview even if you are skilful and quick on 
the keyboard, but significantly more if you are not. In a short project, 
it is questionable whether you have the time for transcription, but in 
case anybody wishes to check any particular point, make sure you 
keep the recording until after the report has been examined – and 
until you are sure that no corrections or rewriting are required.
If respondents do not agree for the interview to be recorded, all is 
certainly not lost. We all learn to devise our own shorthand system 
for noting responses, but as soon as the interview is over, do your 
utmost to write up as much as you can remember. If your interview 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Planning and Conducting Interviews
185
guide or schedule has been well-planned and piloted, your questions, 
items and headings will help you not only to record responses but 
also to remind you of what was said under each heading. Prompts 
listed on the schedule may never need to be used as prompts, but 
they will still serve as sub-headings and will provide the beginnings 
of a structure for your report. Whenever possible, statements that 
will be quoted in the report should be verified with the respondent. 
The last thing you want is for a statement to be challenged at the 
report stage.
One other thing. Sometimes, and particularly if they enjoyed the 
interview, respondents may ask if you will let them know how the 
research goes. There can be time and money costs here, so take care 
not to promise too much. (Remember the problems Stephen Waters 
faced in Chapter 3!) However, your interviewees will have given you 
their time for free, so if you can manage it, it would be a courtesy to 
agree to let them have a very brief summary of findings – as long as 
such findings are not confidential. Once the summary is produced, 
it can be presented, if required, at meetings of research committees, 
ethics committees, departmental meetings, governing bodies, and to 
those who were involved in piloting your data collection instruments.
Remember to ask permission from your interview-
ees to make a recording well in advance. Offer 
them a copy of the recording, and the transcript 
if you make one. They may decline but they will 
appreciate your offer.
Skype and Google Hangouts
When conducting empirical research on the use of social media 
by early career researchers, Minocha and Petros (2012) found that 
face-to-face interactions with supervisors, fellow researchers and 
participants are key in research dialogues. In the past, researchers 
who wished to interview participants had to limit their geographi-
cal location or brace themselves to pay for travel costs to reach 
their interviewees. With Skype and Google Hangouts, calls between 
account holders are free and both platforms can be used for confer-
ence calls. Skype is free to download and to speak with or video-call 
another Skype user via the Internet, wherever they are in the world. 
Skype uses your computer’s in-built microphone or camera or, if your 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
186
device doesn’t have one, your webcam. It enables you to interview 
participants who it would be difficult or impossible to meet face- 
to-face and saves travelling time and costs, as well as being more con-
venient for the interviewee. Once you have set up a Skype account, 
you need to invite your interviewee to accept you as a contact by 
sending them a message from within Skype itself. Once they accept 
your invitation, either party can contact the other.
Ensure that you have secured agreement from your participant to 
be interviewed and that they are happy for you to send them an invi-
tation on Skype to add you as a contact, otherwise your invitation 
will come out of the blue – not the ideal way to get your interviewee 
on your side. While some interviewees may be happy to use video 
calling, others may be self-conscious about doing so and may prefer 
you to interview them using audio only. If you are going to record 
the interview by using a separate recording device or, better still, by 
adding an application such as ‘Call Recorder’ to Skype, make sure 
that your interviewee is aware of this and has given their permission 
for you to do so. Call Recorder is very useful for professional discus-
sions and interviews with research participants and enables you to 
give your full attention to the conversation and to replay it after-
wards, rather than trying to concentrate on what the other person is 
saying while taking notes at the same time. Offer your interviewee a 
copy of the recording and the transcript if you make one – they may 
be able to use it for their own professional purposes and, even if they 
decline your offer, they will appreciate it being made.
Meetings with your supervisor can also be held over Skype and 
via Google Hangouts, saving both time and expense.
Bias – the old enemy
There is always the danger of bias creeping into interviews, largely 
because interviewers and the way they interact may have an impact 
on the interviewee. Where a team of interviewers is employed, seri-
ous bias may show up in data analysis, but if one researcher conducts 
a set of interviews, the bias may be consistent and therefore go unno-
ticed. Dictionary definitions of bias generally centre on the notion 
of distortion of judgement, prejudiced outlook and unfair influence. 
That sounds obvious enough but there can be problems over inter-
pretation because one person’s ‘fair and unbiased point of view’ may 
well be judged to be ‘prejudice’ by another (Bell and Opie 2002: 233).
Many factors can result in bias and there are always dangers in 
research carried out by individual researchers, particularly those who 
have strong views about the topic they are researching. It can occur in 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Planning and Conducting Interviews
187
many ways, deliberately or unwittingly. It is very easy to fall into the 
bias trap, for example by selecting only those items in the literature 
review that support your point of view, using inappropriate language 
that might indicate strength of feeling in one direction, and permit-
ting value judgements to influence the way research findings are 
interpreted. In her doctoral study of truancy in Western Australian 
schools, Jan Gray (2000) was very conscious of the fact that she was 
researching a topic in which she had a keen interest and about which 
she held strong views. She recalls that it was her constant questioning 
of practice and her critical attitude towards the interpretation of data 
that helped her to recognize signs of bias – and it is this kind of disci-
pline that is required. Miles and Huberman remind us that:
“
We have moments of illumination. Things ‘come together’. The 
problem is that we could be wrong. A near-library of research evidence 
shows that people (researchers included) habitually tend to overweight 
facts they believe in or depend on, to ignore or forget data not going in 
the direction of their reasoning and to see confirming instances far 
more easily than disconfirming instances (Nisbet and Ross 1980). We do 
this by differentially weighting information, and by looking at part of 
the data, not all of them.”
(Miles and Huberman 1994: 253–4)
Gray called her ‘moments of illumination’ when things came together 
as ‘the process of enlightenment’. She still had to ask herself whether 
she had overweighted any facts because of her personal beliefs. 
Perhaps one of her main strengths was that she knew what the dan-
gers were. She was constantly on the lookout for signs of bias and she 
placed great emphasis on reflection, on practice and on triangulation. 
(For a discussion of Gray’s research, see Bell and Opie 2002: 129–70.)
So, we must be wise and vigilant, critical of our interpretation 
of the data, regularly question our practice and wherever possible 
triangulate. A supervisor who is familiar with the literature relating 
to your subject will quickly remind you if you have placed too much 
emphasis on x or y or have ignored a or b, and it’s always wise to 
listen to what supervisors have to say. If you don’t agree, that’s up 
to you and as long as you make your own strong case, based on the 
available evidence and not merely on your opinions, you will be safe.
Remember!
People who agree to be interviewed deserve consideration and so 
you will need to fit in with their plans, however inconvenient that 
may be for you. Try to fix a venue at a time when you will not be 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
188
disturbed. Trying to interview when your mobile is constantly ring-
ing or people are knocking at the door will destroy any chance of 
continuity.
Before you make the appointment, make sure official channels, 
if any, have been cleared. A letter from your supervisor, head of 
department, principal or research officer, saying what you are doing 
and why, will always help. Of course, your statement about guar-
antees, anonymity and confidentiality issues should have been sent 
before the interview takes place.
It is difficult to lay down rules for the conduct of an interview. 
Common sense and normal good manners will, as always, take 
you a long way. You should always introduce yourself and ask if 
the respondent has any queries. When you make the appointment, 
say how long you anticipate the interview will take. Ask if that is 
acceptable and if the respondent says it is too long, you will have 
to try and discuss your main issues early on. You’re not in charge: 
the respondents are and you need them more than they need you. 
Interviews are very time-consuming. If you allow one hour maxi-
mum for the actual interview, there is also travelling time and time 
lost through any one of numerous mishaps (respondent late home, 
sudden crisis with children which causes delay, unexpected visi-
tor who interrupts the interview, and so on). Then there is the time 
needed to consider what has been said during the interview, to go 
through notes and to extend and clarify points that may have been 
hastily jotted down. If you are working full-time, you are unlikely to 
be able to carry out more than one interview in an evening and, even 
if you are able to devote yourself full-time to the task, it is difficult 
to cope with more than two or three interviews during the course 
of a day. Your original project plan should take account of the time 
required for planning and conducting interviews, for coping with 
cancelled arrangements, second visits and finding replacements for 
people who drop out.
Interviewing is not easy and many researchers have found it dif-
ficult to strike the balance between complete objectivity and trying 
to put the interviewee at ease. It is difficult to know how these dif-
ficulties can be overcome, although honesty about the purpose of 
the research and integrity in the conduct of the interview will help. 
Daphne Johnson, a very experienced researcher and skilful supervi-
sor, makes the point that it is the responsibility of the interviewer, 
not the interviewee, to end an interview. She writes:
“
It may have been difficult to negotiate access and to get in in the first 
place, but the interviewer who, once in, stays until he is thrown out, is 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Planning and Conducting Interviews
189
working in the style of investigative journalism rather than social 
research . . . If an interview takes two or three times as long as the 
interviewer said it would, the respondent, whose other work or social 
activities have been accordingly delayed, will be irritated in retrospect, 
however enjoyable the experience may have been at the time. This sort 
of practice breaks one of the ethics of professional social research, which 
is that the field should not be left more difficult for subsequent 
investigators to explore by disenchanting respondents with the whole 
notion of research participation.”
(Johnson 1984: 14–15)
Apart from these specific guidelines, most of the advice and pro-
tocols detailed in this chapter about interviewing face-to-face also 
apply to interviewing over the Internet. If you are using audio only, 
don’t cut corners simply because your interviewee can’t see you! 
Ensure your preparation, documentation and methods of making 
a written record of the interview as you proceed, as well as after-
wards, are as thorough as if you were meeting the participant 
face-to-face.
Planning and Conducting Interviews 
Checklist
1.  Decide what you 
need to know.
List all the items about which 
information is required.
Q
2.  Ask yourself why 
you need this 
information.
Examine your list and remove 
any item that is not directly 
associated with the task.
Q
3.  Is an interview 
the best way of 
obtaining this 
information?
Consider alternatives.
Q
4.  If it is, begin to 
devise questions in 
outline.
The final form of questions 
will depend on the type of 
interview.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
190
5.  Decide on the type 
of interview.
A structured interview will 
produce structured responses. 
Is this what you want, or is a 
more open approach required?
Q
6.  Refine the 
questions.
Write questions on cards or 
in a Word document on a 
tablet. Check wording (see 
questionnaire checklist).
Q
7.  Consider how 
questions will be 
analysed.
Consult Chapter 13 before 
deciding finally about question 
type and question wording.
Q
8.  Prepare an 
interview schedule 
or guide and draft 
a summary sheet.
Consider the order of 
questions. Prepare prompts in 
case the respondent does not 
provide essential information 
freely – but don’t push your 
own point of view.
Q
9.  Pilot your schedule 
and summary 
sheet.
Both need to be tested, and you 
need practice in asking questions 
and recording responses.
Q
10.  Review the 
schedule, if 
necessary.
Take account of pilot 
respondents’ comments.
Q
11.  Watch for bias.
If you have strong views about 
some aspect of the topic, 
be particularly vigilant. If 
someone else asked the same 
question, would they get the 
same answer?
Q
12.  Select who to 
interview.
Interviews take time. Try to 
select a representative sample. 
Decide what to do if selected 
people are not willing or able to 
give an interview. Be realistic 
about the number of interviews 
that can be conducted in the 
time available.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Planning and Conducting Interviews
191
13.  Try to fix a time 
and place where 
you will not be 
disturbed.
Switch mobiles off. If you are 
using Skype, turn off audible 
notifications of email, Twitter 
or Facebook messages. Ask 
your interviewee to do the 
same.
Q
14.  Make sure official 
channels have 
been cleared, and 
let interviewees 
see any protocol 
documents 
beforehand.
A letter from your supervisor, 
head or principal explaining 
the purpose of the research 
may be helpful.
Q
15.  Introduce 
yourself and give 
interviewees the 
opportunity to ask 
for any necessary 
clarification. You 
will, of course, 
have already 
contacted them to 
explain the purpose 
of the research.
Say what will happen to the 
information provided by 
the interviewee. Clarify the 
meaning of anonymity in the 
context of the study.
Q
16.  Agree with the 
interviewee how 
long the interview 
will last.
Do your utmost not to exceed 
the time limit.
Q
17.  Try to check 
the accuracy of 
your notes with 
interviewees.
But don’t promise to check 
with respondents after the 
interview if this is likely to 
prove difficult.
Q
18.  If you wish 
to record the 
interview, you 
must obtain 
permission from 
the interviewee.
Remember that it takes a long 
time to transcribe a recorded 
interview, if this is what you 
intend to do. Write up as you 
go along. Don’t wait until all 
interviews are completed.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
192
19.  Honesty and 
integrity are 
important.
Make no promises that 
cannot be fulfilled. Respect 
respondents’ views about 
anonymity. If you know a 
respondent has been indiscreet 
in revealing confidential 
information, never take 
advantage.
Q
20.  Common sense 
and good manners 
will take you a 
long way.
People who agree to be 
interviewed are doing you 
a favour. They deserve 
consideration.
Q
21.  Don’t leave the 
research field 
more difficult for 
future researchers 
by disenchanting 
respondents 
with the whole 
notion of research 
participation.
There are many ways in which 
participants can become 
disenchanted: appointments 
not kept or the interviewer 
arriving late; taking longer 
than promised; promising a 
summary of findings but not 
delivering; conducting the 
interview in a hostile manner – 
and failing to thank the 
interviewee.
Q
22.  Thank 
interviewees by 
email or via social 
networks or send 
them a card or 
letter.
Q
Further reading
Barbour, R. (2008) Doing Focus Groups. London: Sage. 
The author discusses uses and abuses of focus groups, sampling, prac-
ticalities of planning and running groups, ethics, making sense of and 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Planning and Conducting Interviews
193
analysing group data, and the advantages and limitations of using 
focus group discussion.
Bowling, A. (2009) Research Methods in Health: Investigating 
Health and Health Services (3rd edn). Maidenhead: Open 
University Press. 
Chapters 11 and 13 in Section IV discuss interviews and their response 
rates in quantitative research, including techniques of survey inter-
viewing. Chapter 16 in Section V deals with unstructured interviews 
and focus groups in qualitative research.
Darlington, Y. and Scott, D. (2002) Qualitative Research in 
Practice: Stories from the Field. Buckingham: Open University 
Press. 
Chapter 3 considers the various stages of in-depth interviewing. It is 
perhaps unlikely you will have the time to become involved in such 
interviews but time is not the only precondition. As Darlington and Scott 
make clear, considerable skill, experience and training are required. If 
you have these attributes and feel you would be interested in consider-
ing this approach, it would be advisable to consult your supervisor and 
to read this chapter before making up your mind.
Denscombe, M. (2010) The Good Research Guide for Small-scale 
Social Research Projects (4th edn). Maidenhead: Open University 
Press. 
Chapter 10, ‘Interviews’, is an excellent read, covering the advantages 
and disadvantages of interviews, ‘When is it appropriate to use inter-
views’, ‘Types of research interview’, ‘Internet interviews’ and ‘The 
validity of interview data: how do you know the informant is telling the 
truth?’
Gillham, B. (2005) Research Interviewing: A Practical Guide. 
Maidenhead: Open University Press. 
Gillham addresses what research interviewing is, what techniques are 
used and how interview data is analysed and written up.
Hayes, N. (2000) Doing Psychological Research: Gathering and 
Analysing Data. Buckingham: Open University Press. 
Chapter 7 deals with interviewer effects, conducting interviews, stages 
of interview research and ethical issues in interview research.
Keats, D. (2000) Interviewing: A Practical Guide for Students 
and Professionals. Buckingham: Open University Press. 
Keats considers the use of interviews in research and, in particular, 
issues involved in interviewing young children, the elderly and people 
from ethnic communities.
Kvale, S. (2008) Interviews: An Introduction to Qualitative 
Research Interviewing (2nd edn). London: Sage. 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
194
This book addresses the seven stages of an interview investigation. 
Also includes a discussion of newer developments in qualitative inter-
viewing, such as narrative, discursive and conversational analyses.
May, T. (2011) Social Research: Issues, Methods and Process 
(4th edn). Maidenhead: Open University Press. 
This is a useful book, particularly Chapter 6, ‘Interviewing: methods 
and process’, which provides a review of different types of interview in 
social research, issues in interviewing and the analysis of interviews.
Oliver, P. (2003) The Student’s Guide to Research Ethics. 
Maidenhead: Open University Press. 
Pages 12–16 discuss informed consent and situations where engaging 
in research may be ethically undesirable. Chapter 3, ‘Research and the 
respondent: ethical issues during the research’, considers the ethics 
of tape-recording interviews and the right of respondents to end their 
involvement in the research.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

195
11
Diaries, 
Logs, Critical 
Incidents and 
Blogs
INTRODUCTION
Another research method for collecting data is to ask respondents to complete 
diaries, logs or blogs of events over a period of time. These personal accounts can 
provide useful insights into aspects of their lives or behaviour, for example their 
day-to-day tasks or their practices in a particular environment such as a school, 
hospital, university or workplace setting. Similarly, blogs can provide useful, and 
sometimes more personal, sources of information. This chapter covers:
•	The pros and cons of using blogs as part of a research project, including the 
ethical aspect of using blogs in research that were originally written for differ-
ent, sometimes personal, purposes.
•	A review of the diary method – what it can discover, how to set up a diary 
research task, how to write your instructions and other considerations.
•	Five case studies of diaries in different settings, including a primary school, 
individual patient care and further education. These examples will provide 
ideas for how you might use diaries as a research tool for your own project.
Key terms
Diaries
196
Logs
196
Blogs
196
Critical incidents
196
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
196
Although there is some overlap between them, it is helpful to define 
what we mean by the terms diary, log and critical incident. According 
to Isabel Santafe’s excellent description:
“
A diary study involves asking . .. people to record their experiences 
related to a particular subject over a period of time. It is a useful tool to 
help learn about user behaviour as it provides a record of thoughts and 
actions in context.”
(Santafe 2013, emphasis in original)
Alaszewski (2006) defines a diary as ‘a document created by an 
individual who has maintained a regular, personal and contem-
poraneous record’, and which ‘is organized around a sequence of 
regular and dated entries over a period of time during which the 
diarist keeps or maintains the diary’ (p. 2). He includes ‘logs’ in 
his diary definition, the simplest form being ‘the log that contains 
a record of activities or events without including personal com-
ments on such events’ (p. 2). Whereas diaries are usually personal 
reflections or private records, logs are often intended to be read 
more widely by a group of people requiring a permanent record of 
events. So, a diary might be kept by someone on a cruise to capture 
not only where the cruise liner went, but personal thoughts and 
emotions related to the journey. The ship’s log, on the other hand, 
would document only facts such as the ship’s speed, its course and 
wind direction.
As defined in Chapter 8, a blog (short for weblog) is one or more 
articles or personal reflections on a subject that are ‘posted’ on the 
web, either on the writer’s website or on a site set up to host blogs, 
such as Blogger or WordPress. If the writer or blogger posts more 
than one blog, they will be arranged in reverse date order, with the 
most recent ‘post’ at the top of the page.
A critical incident, as described by Flanagan, who devised the 
Critical Incident Technique (CIT) of research, is:
“
any specifiable human activity that is sufficiently complete in itself to 
permit inferences and predictions to be made about the person 
performing the act. To be critical the incident must occur in a situation 
where the purpose or intent of the act seems fairly clear to the observer 
and where its consequences are sufficiently definite to leave little doubt 
concerning its effects.”
(Flanagan 1954: 327)
Oxtoby describes a critical incident as being a task or an incident 
event which makes the difference between success and failure in 
carrying out important parts of the job and which is:
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Diaries, Logs, Critical Incidents and Blogs
197
“
an attempt to identify the most ‘noteworthy’ aspects of job behaviour 
[which are] based on the assumption that jobs are composed of critical 
and non-critical tasks . . . The idea is to collect reports as to what people 
do that is particularly effective in contributing to good performance and 
then to scale the incidents in order of difficulty, frequency and importance 
to the job as a whole.”
(Oxtoby 1979: 230)
Despite its name, a critical incident does not have to be a dramatic or 
unusual event to be considered worthy of investigation. One example 
would be how nurses conduct the ‘handover’ from the night staff to 
the day staff – a routine daily procedure. A researcher might observe 
the process and report back the behaviour and actions of the two 
teams. The analysis of this critical incident might lead to changes 
in procedure to make the handover more efficient and to reduce the 
length of time it takes.
On the face of it, diaries, logs, critical incidents and blogs are 
attractive ways of gathering information about the way individuals 
spend their time, each of which is selected with a view to obtaining 
different types of information. Each approach might provide valu-
able information about work patterns and activities, provided that 
the researcher is clear about what information is needed and the 
participants are similarly clear about what they are being asked to 
do – and why.
All three approaches almost always cover an agreed time span – 
a day, a week, a month or, occasionally, longer – depending on what 
information is required. At certain specified times, ‘on the spot’ or 
retrospectively, respondents are asked to say what they did and, in 
some cases, why. Instructions need to be explicit. Do you really want 
to know that someone made a cup of tea, paid a bill or had a bath? 
Well, in some cases, perhaps you might, but only if you are interested 
specifically in activities of daily living.
Completing diary forms can be time-consuming and irritating 
for a busy person who has to keep stopping work to make an entry, 
and if respondents are not completely sympathetic with the task, or 
have been coerced into filling in diary forms, they will probably not 
complete them thoroughly, if at all. The task might be less onerous if 
they can make a recording, for example by using a Smartphone, but 
you would need to decide a strategy for how they should save each 
recording and send you a copy.
As in all research activities, it is essential to contact – and pref-
erably to meet – the people who will be giving up their time, so 
that you can explain the purpose of the exercise fully, discuss any 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
198
possible difficulties and, if possible, resolve them. Reluctant diarists 
will rarely provide usable data, so preliminary consultation is of the 
utmost importance. As with any other form of data collection, some 
form of check with diary-keepers is often desirable and sometimes 
essential if interest is to be maintained.
Representativeness
In any diary exercise, there can be problems regarding representa-
tiveness. Was this day of the week typical of others or is Monday 
always the crisis day? Is this week exceptional? Oppenheim draws 
attention to this problem and reminds us that:
“
The respondents’ interest in writing up the diary will cause them to 
modify the very behaviour we wish them to record. If, for instance, they 
are completing a week’s diary of their television viewing behaviour, this 
may cause them to engage in ‘duty viewing’ in order to ‘have something 
to record’, or they may view ‘better’ types of programmes in order to 
create a more favourable impression.”
(Oppenheim 1992: 252)
This may well be true, but many other methods of data collection 
can also have an influence on normal behaviour, as many research-
ers have discovered during the course of their investigations.
The diary-interview method
There are many different ways in which diaries are used. They can 
be stand-alone methods of data collection or be part of a larger study 
incorporating interviews, questionnaires and observation. In 1977, 
Zimmerman and Wieder used diaries in their ethnographic study of 
the counter-culture in the USA as a preliminary to interviewing in 
cases where it was not at first clear what were the right questions to 
ask. In an article on their diary-interview method, they discussed the 
role of diaries as ‘an observational log maintained by subjects which 
can then be used as a basis for intensive interviewing’ (Zimmerman 
and Wieder 1977: 481).
The potential for diaries as question-generating devices is clear, 
but Zimmerman and Wieder took this process a step further. They 
viewed the use of a diary, in conjunction with the diary interview, as 
an approximation to the method of participant observation, includ-
ing: the length of time involved; the fact that any observer, even a 
participant, may have an effect on normal behaviour; and, in some 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Diaries, Logs, Critical Incidents and Blogs
199
studies, moral, legal or ethical constraints. They proposed the use 
of the diary-interview method ‘for those situations where the prob-
lems of direct observation resist solution, or where further or more 
extended observation strains available resources’ (Zimmerman and 
Wieder 1977: 481).
Zimmerman and Wieder asked their respondents to record in 
chronological order the activities in which they engaged over a seven-
day period, following the formula what/when/where/how? The ‘what?’ 
involved a description of the activity or discussion recorded in the dia-
rists’ own categories. The ‘when?’ involved reference to the time and 
timing of the activity, with special attention to recording the actual 
sequence of events. The ‘where?’ involved a designation of the location 
of the activity, suitably coded to prevent identification of individuals 
or places. The ‘how?’ involved a description of whatever logistics were 
entailed by the activity (Zimmerman and Wieder 1977: 486).
Clearly, diarists must be of a certain educational level to under-
stand the instructions, let alone complete the diary. They must also 
have time. If you are asking colleagues to cooperate by completing 
diaries, be clear that the diary is the best way of obtaining the infor-
mation you need and that you can convince your diarists that what 
they are doing is likely to be of some use.
Piloting returns forms and instructions 
to participants
No matter how pressed for time you are, it’s essential that you pilot 
your returns forms and the instructions to respondents. If you can’t 
get hold of trial respondents similar to those you hope to be able to 
include in the real diary exercise, ask, cajole or even bribe (!) anyone 
who is willing to give you time to complete a few days of the selected 
diary. Decide what the instructions should include – and you can 
be confident that friends and family will make it quite clear if your 
instructions are incomprehensible, insufficient, badly written or 
generally useless. That’s what friends and family are for. However, 
before you begin to distribute draft returns documents and instruc-
tions to your pilot group, there is work to be done.
As in every research exercise, do nothing until you have decided 
exactly what information (or enlightenment) you need from your 
respondents. It might be something vague like ‘wanting to find out 
what people do at work’. But do you mean everything, from the time 
people hang up their coat when they arrive to when they switch off 
the lights as they leave? Well, could be, but perhaps not for someone 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
200
working on a limited-time project. So, begin to make the move from 
the general to the specific.
If you decide to follow Zimmerman and Wieder’s (1977) ‘what/
when/where/how?’ approach, start with the ‘what’ – what are you 
hoping to learn from respondents? Write down everything you can 
think of that might come into the ‘what’ category. Then do the same 
with ‘when’ and ‘where’. Do you need to know the time and place 
when respondents made their entries? This might be important if you 
want to know what time of day they took certain medication. And 
it might sometimes be important to know where they took it – in a 
meeting, on the bus, when they woke up, at a fixed time every day, 
any old time? Leave the ‘how’ until you’re sure you have dealt with 
the what, when and where because only then can you decide which 
type of data collection instrument will suit your purposes best. It 
might be a diary in which entries will ‘record what an individual 
considers relevant and important and may include events, activities, 
interactions, impressions and feelings’ (Alaszewski 2006: 2). Is that 
what you want? If you are only interested in a record of what hap-
pened on a certain day at a certain time, without any comments, 
would a log suffice? But if you need to know what critical incidents, 
if any, occur during working days, you will need to be quite sure that 
your and your participants’ understanding of what a critical incident 
is are the same – and that might be harder than it at first seems.
When all this preparatory work is completed, give or send your 
instructions and recording forms to your volunteers, and perhaps 
suggest a possible date for returns. When all (or at least almost all) 
are returned to you, take note of what they say about the design of 
your form and the clarity (or lack of clarity) of your instructions, 
redesign both and then give some thought to how you will be able 
to analyse future returns and present the data in your final report.
There are many variations in the way diaries are structured, 
the time over which they are conducted and the detail required, so 
before you begin your diary exercise, take time to read the following 
five short extracts from diary studies conducted by five experienced 
researchers. They give some interesting insights into the approaches 
they adopted.
Five case studies
The primary pupils’ food diary
Burgess (2002) incorporated diaries as a method of data collection 
in many of the research projects he conducted over the years. In his 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Diaries, Logs, Critical Incidents and Blogs
201
chapter ‘On diaries and diary keeping’ (1994), he discusses two very 
different diary studies: the first, by Morrison and Burgess (1993), 
and the second, by Burgess and Morrison (1993), both related to a 
food diary study of primary pupils. They adopted Zimmerman and 
Wieder’s (1977) ‘what/when/where/how?’ approach and the pupils 
were asked:
“
What did you eat and drink today?
When did you eat and drink today?
Where did you eat and drink today? (at school, home, somewhere 
else?)”
(Burgess and Morrison 1993: Appendix)
Other items were added, namely, whether they had enjoyed a cel-
ebration, like a birthday, on any day and whether they liked what 
they had eaten or had to drink. As the diary was to be completed by 
children, a specific approach had to be devised:
“
First, it was important to talk with pupils to explain what it is that 
had to be done. Secondly, the time period over which a diary would be 
kept was limited to one week including a weekend ... Inside the diary 
there were a series of instructions which were included in a covering 
letter addressed to each pupil.”
(Burgess 1994: 304)
The supply teachers’ diary and time log
In the second study, Burgess worked on a very different and far more 
detailed diary study concerning the experience of and relationship 
among teachers, supply teachers and pupils when regular teachers 
were unable to take a timetabled class. A three-column grid was 
devised, with ‘time’ in the first column, ‘main activities’ in the second 
column, and ‘other’ in the third column. The purpose of this time grid 
or time log was to provide a framework within which supply teach-
ers could record what happened and when, but which also gave them 
freedom to develop their ideas. The researchers felt that this format 
allowed the diary writers to ‘place limits on the extent to which they 
give access to their world and their work’ (Burgess 1994: 308).
The general practitioners’ time log
Sutherland and Cooper also used a time log as part of their investi-
gation into ill-health and job dissatisfaction among general practi-
tioners (GPs) working in the UK. GPs were asked to complete what 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
202
amounted to a detailed record of how they spent their day, in order 
to identify the amount of time spent on various activities, the neces-
sity (or otherwise) and purpose of those activities. The log consisted 
of six columns, with the headings of ‘start time’, ‘duration’, ‘activity’, 
‘time problem (who/what/why?)’, ‘outcome’ and ‘feelings/reaction/
further action’ (Sutherland and Cooper 2003: 184). After three or four 
days of entries, or when the log was completed, the doctors were 
asked to rank the importance of the activities, which could well have 
been the most difficult part of the log exercise for professionals who 
might have found everything they did important.
Busy doctors were being asked to complete full-day records 
of their activities, to include reasons for any time problems, what 
happened as a result of time delays, how they felt about the delays 
(angry/frustrated/pleased?) and what action was taken. It had to be a 
log that could be ‘easily completed with minimum effort’ (Sutherland 
and Cooper 2003: 66) and no doubt the diarists had to be convinced 
there was some purpose to the exercise. In fact, the diary exercise 
was designed to: ‘highlight interruptions, failure to delegate, and the 
ways in which other people disrupted your schedule. Ultimately, it 
should be possible to use your time log to identify the source of dis-
ruptions and enable you to prioritize key activities’ (Sutherland and 
Cooper 2003: 67). It was anticipated that identification of problem 
areas would enable doctors to produce an action plan to improve 
their time management behaviour and to learn how to ‘work smarter 
not harder’ (p. 69). Perhaps at least some stressed GPs might feel that 
the possibility of an improved, less stressful professional life would 
be worth the effort of completing the log.
The asthma treatment diary
Bowling reports on two interesting but different diary studies con-
ducted by Hyland and Crocker (1995) and by Hyland (1996), who car-
ried out diary-with-questionnaire studies into the impact of asthma 
treatment on patients. Patients were asked to complete ‘quality of 
life’ diaries over a six-month period but in short time slots. The first 
asked patients to complete daily diaries over a two-week period. 
This was followed by a request to produce a diary for the first week 
of every month for six months, before finally the researchers distrib-
uted questionnaires three and six months after treatment. They con-
cluded that ‘the diaries proved to be better longitudinal correlations 
with the physiology of the respondents in comparison with the ques-
tionnaires, while the questionnaires had better cross-correlations 
with physiology’ (Bowling 2002: 426).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Diaries, Logs, Critical Incidents and Blogs
203
So, as always, the selection of data collection instruments depends 
on the purpose of the study, the type of information needed, and the 
willingness of respondents to spend the necessary time completing 
diaries, logs, questionnaires or being interviewed.
The heads of department critical incidents 
and problem-portfolio logs
In many ways, the critical incidents technique adopts the same – 
or similar – processes used by Burgess in his supply teachers’ study 
and by Sutherland and Cooper in their GP time log. Both stud-
ies attempted to identify essential and important aspects of work 
behaviour and both were concerned with which tasks were ‘critical’ 
and which were ‘non-critical’. Oxtoby also used a job diary/log in his 
study of how heads of department (HoDs) in further education col-
leges in England and Wales spent their time, and initially considered 
asking diarists to identify ‘critical incidents’ in their working day. He 
defined a critical incident as being a task or an incident that makes 
the difference between success and failure in carrying out important 
parts of the job. He wrote:
“
The idea is to collect reports as to what people do that is particularly 
effective in contributing to good performance and then to scale the 
incidents in order of difficulty, frequency and importance to the job as a 
whole. The technique scores over the use of diaries in that it is centred on 
specific happenings and on what is judged to be effective behaviour. But 
it is still laborious and does not lend itself to objective quantification.”
(Oxtoby 1979: 239–40)
The use of job diaries/logs is perhaps the most simple and widely 
accepted way of finding out how time is spent in any group or insti-
tution, but as Oxtoby discovered:
“
Self-recording can be inaccurate – many of the shorter episodes tend 
to get omitted – and compiling a detailed diary is usually a tiresome and 
onerous business. Although it is undoubtedly valuable in terms of 
enabling people to make more effective use of their time, a diary does 
not provide much reliable information about the skills or qualities 
developed. Moreover, the prospect of using diaries to compare differences 
between large numbers of staff and their jobs is extremely daunting, if 
only because of the difficulties in handling the data. There are snags, 
therefore, in employing job diaries to analyse the diversity of HoD 
activities.”
(Oxtoby 1979: 240)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
204
Eventually, Oxtoby decided on a problem portfolio approach 
originally advocated by Marples (1967) in which respondents were 
asked to record information about how each problem arose, methods 
used to solve it, difficulties encountered, and so on.
As will be apparent from the above, there can be problems in the 
use of diaries as a method of gathering evidence, not least the time 
respondents need to complete the forms. However, diaries can pro-
duce a wealth of interesting data and are relatively simple to admin-
ister – at least if there are only a few diarists. Analysis of completed 
forms is not so simple, however, so, as always, you will need to con-
sider how responses will be analysed before your respondents begin 
filling in the diaries. If you are considering using diaries as part of 
your project, you may wish to consult the checklist at the end of this 
chapter before you distribute them.
The ethics of diary use
Burgess expresses concern about the extent of intrusion into diary 
writers’ lives and urges researchers to be aware of this. For exam-
ple, in the food diary, he asked researchers to consider the extent to 
which the exercise constituted intrusion into the lives of the children 
and their families before selecting the diary approach. He draws our 
attention to the fact that if the purpose of the supply teacher diary 
is ‘to gain access to material that would otherwise be hidden from 
the researchers’ view ... to what extent is such a device intrusive 
on the lives and work of teachers?’ (Burgess 1994: 308). I suppose it 
can equally be said that interviews, questionnaires and observations 
can also intrude. Researchers frequently use diaries as one of several 
methods of data collection in their investigations. All I can say is that 
the impact of our research on the respondents must always be con-
sidered before decisions are made about which approach to adopt 
and that the same ethical considerations should apply to diary stud-
ies as for any other method or technique.
A final word of warning
Before you make a final decision about whether or not to select a 
diary approach, it might be useful to consider Alan Alaszewski’s 
admirable summary of the advantages and disadvantages of diaries 
as one method of data collection. He writes:
“
Diaries are flexible: they can form part of a variety of research 
designs, including experimental and survey designs, historical research 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Diaries, Logs, Critical Incidents and Blogs
205
and ethnographic or naturalistic research, and can be used in 
combination with other methods of data collection. They are particularly 
effective in accessing information which is difficult to access in other 
ways. However, it is also important to note that diaries have limitations. 
They can be expensive to use and they may introduce a selection bias 
into the research. They need to be used with care.”
(Alaszewski 2006: 115)
A friendly word of warning!
The impact of your research on the respondents 
must always be considered. The same ethical con-
siderations should apply to diary studies as for 
any other method or research technique.
Blogs
Helene Snee, drawing on an excellent article by Hookway (2008), 
explains that social researchers have used blogs both as a source of 
data, including content analysis of gender and language use, and as 
a focus for research in ethnographic studies of why, how and when 
blogs are used by communities (http://www.methods.manchester.
ac.uk/methods/blog-analysis/index.shtml). In a video on the web-
site, Snee describes her own research study, which explored travel 
blogs as a documentary resource. She raises some methodological 
and ethical issues that can arise when researchers are considering 
analysing blogs. She raises the following questions:
•	As blogs are self-published and are usually open access, are they 
‘fair game’ for researchers to analyse or should permission be 
sought from the author?
•	How can we guarantee authorship of a blog? Have other people 
contributed to it?
•	What is public information and what information should be treated 
sensitively? For example, people have written blogs about their 
terminal illness, wanting to leave a record of how they coped with 
their impending death for their family and other sufferers so that 
they might learn from and understand their experience. Although 
these blogs are accessible by anyone searching the Internet, you 
might take the view that the content is so sensitive and personal 
that it should not be discussed or analysed in public.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
206
Less common are accounts of blogs being used as a diary or 
log to record everyday experience from which the researcher can 
extract information as a primary resource, as described below. 
This is because the kind of diary research participants are asked 
to keep is normally private and anonymous whereas blogs are pub-
lic and their authorship acknowledged. There is no reason why one 
of your research participants shouldn’t keep a blog to provide you 
with data, but all the safeguards about permission, confidentiality 
and anonymity raised in Chapter 3 should be observed. My advice is 
simple and straightforward: if you are in doubt whether you can use 
unpublished data, whether public or otherwise, ask the author. He or 
she can only say no – if so, you shouldn’t have been using the data 
without permission anyway.
Diaries, Logs, Critical Incidents and 
Blogs Checklist
 
1.  Make sure you are 
clear about the 
purpose of your 
diary study.
Consider precisely what you 
wish to find out and which 
diary format will be likely to 
give you the information you 
need.
Q
2.  Decide whether a 
diary, log or critical 
incidents checklist 
is the best way 
of obtaining the 
information.
But before you get too 
enthusiastic about carrying 
out a diary exercise, 
remember to get permission to 
approach your diarists. Never 
assume ‘it will be all right’. It 
might not be.
Q
3.  No matter how busy 
you are, you must 
pilot your diary. If 
you are as confident 
as you can be that
Make sure all your 
respondents will be able to 
understand what is required 
and allow time at the planning 
stage to discuss what is
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Diaries, Logs, Critical Incidents and Blogs
207
  the diary approach 
will be appropriate 
for your purposes, 
ask friends, family 
and/or colleagues to 
act as guinea pigs 
by completing the 
form/checklist for a 
few days.
involved. Instructions must be 
precise – and don’t use jargon. 
Ask them to comment on the 
design of the response form. 
Was there enough space, or 
too much? Would another 
format be better? Ask how 
long it took them to complete 
the form. Did anyone think 
some of your questions were 
offensive?
Q
4.  When you have 
looked at the 
returned forms from 
your ‘volunteer’ 
respondents, you 
will have a good 
idea about what 
changes, if any, will 
need to be made to 
your instructions 
and to your 
response form.
Pilot respondents 
(particularly family members) 
will certainly let you know 
if your instructions are 
confused, inadequate or 
even incomprehensible. Even 
though you will have received 
only a few returns, begin to 
think about how responses 
from a much larger group 
might be analysed.
Q
5.  Redesign your 
returns form(s) and, 
if necessary, reword 
your instructions.
Contact your main diarists 
and agree dates for the receipt 
and return of completed 
forms. Decide what you will 
do with non-returners before 
you distribute the documents 
to your respondents.
Q
6.  Remember that 
the same ethical 
considerations 
should apply to 
diary studies as for 
any other method or 
technique.
Diary completion will be an 
intrusion into the diarists’ 
lives. If some entries give 
very personal insights into 
their daily lives, never divulge 
information you know to be 
indiscrete.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
208
7.  Make sure 
respondents know 
why they are being 
asked to carry out 
this chore and what 
you plan to do with 
the information.
Will responses be destroyed 
when the project is completed? 
Who will see them? Will they 
be anonymous? And will your 
understanding of ‘anonymous’ 
be the same as that of your 
respondents’?
Q
8.  Try to find time 
to check progress 
with the diarists.
If you are asking people to 
carry out this task for more 
than one day, evidence seems 
to indicate that a solicitous 
inquiry about how things are 
going may help them to keep 
on with the task.
Q
9.  Write up your 
findings as soon as 
you can.
If you have only a small 
number of respondents, it 
may be all right to wait until 
all the returns are with you. 
However, if you have more 
than 20 respondents, I would 
start writing under possible 
headings as soon as the first 
arrive. However, that’s just 
me, so decide whether you are 
a writer or a waiter. Whatever 
suits you best.
Q
10.  Completing a diary 
is a chore. Don’t 
forget to thank 
your respondents.
Give them feedback if you 
can, but don’t promise 
anything if you are unlikely to 
have time to do it.
Q
Further reading
Alaszewski, A. (2006) Using Diaries for Social Research. London: 
Sage. 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Diaries, Logs, Critical Incidents and Blogs
209
Alaszewski gives us detailed discussions of a wide range of diary use in 
experimental, survey and many other research designs and strategies. 
He discusses the development and use of diaries, how to get started, 
finding diarists, collecting the data, analysing diaries and, finally, 
exploiting the potential of research diaries.
Bowling, A. (2009) Research Methods in Health: Investigating 
Health and Health Services (3rd edn). Maidenhead: Open 
University Press. 
Ann Bowling, writing about the use of diaries with patients, refers to 
two major diary exercises relating to a trial of asthma treatments. See 
Hyland, M.E. and Crocker, G.R. (1995) Validation of an asthma quality 
of life diary in a clinical trial, Thorax, 50: 724–30. See also Hyland, M.E. 
(1996) Diary assessments of quality of life, Quality of Life Newsletter, 
16: 8–9.
Burgess, R.G. (1994) On diaries and diary keeping, in N. 
Bennett, R. Glatter and R. Levac´icˇ (eds) Improving Educational 
Management through Research and Consultancy. London: Paul 
Chapman, in association with the Open University. 
In this chapter, Burgess discusses the use of logs, diaries and journals, 
and includes examples of the supply teacher project considered there 
as well as an interactive video use diary. He includes ethical questions 
relating to intrusion into the lives of respondents.
Hart, E. and Bond, M. (1995) Action Research for Health and 
Social Care: A Guide to Practice. Buckingham: Open University 
Press. 
On pages 201–4, there are two extracts from diary studies, one relating 
to outpatients’ clinic experiences, the other an extract from a log.
Hayes, N. (2000) Doing Psychological Research: Gathering and 
Analysing Data. Buckingham: Open University Press. 
Chapter 9, ‘Analysing documents’ (pp. 147–55), provides useful guid-
ance about the advantages, disadvantages, design and analysis of diary 
studies.
Morrison, M. (2007) Using diaries in research, in A.R.J. Briggs and 
M. Coleman (eds) Research Methods in Educational Leadership 
and Management (2nd edn). London: Sage. 
This chapter provides examples of extracts from several diaries and 
includes sections on researchers’ and research informants’ diaries, the 
design and analysis of diaries, and combining diaries with interviews.
Sutherland, V. and Cooper, C.L. (2003) De-stressing Doctors: A 
Self-management Guide. London: Butterworth Heinemann.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

210
Key terms
Unstructured observation 
212
Participant observation
212
Structured observation 
214
Observation schedule
214
12
Observation
INTRODUCTION
This chapter provides an overview of observation as a data-gathering technique. 
Put simply, observation is the process of watching someone carry out a task or 
series of actions in order to gather data about specific aspects of behaviour, con-
tent, processes or interactions. This could be observing students in a learning 
environment such as a classroom, observing engineers on a construction site, or 
nurses in a healthcare setting. It can be used to better understand individuals or 
groups in any setting that is relevant to your research topic. There are, however, 
certain criteria you should follow to ensure your findings are reliable and valid. 
This chapter addresses:
•	What observation is, how it can be used effectively, what its limitations are and 
the risks involved as a data-gathering technique.
•	The differences between unstructured observation, structured observation 
and participant observation.
•	How to create observation schedules or grids for recording what you observe.
•	How to ensure your observations are well-run and that your valuable research 
time is used efficiently.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Observation
211
No doubt you will think it unnecessary to remind you, once again, 
that before you begin to consider observation as one of your data 
collection techniques, you need first to decide what you wish to 
observe, what your main areas of interest are and why you think 
observation will produce the information you need. Is it to be one 
of several data-gathering methods or the only one? Are you consid-
ering observation as a form of validating other evidence? Do you 
really need evidence from observation, because considerable skill 
is required. Careful planning and piloting are essential, and it takes 
practice to get the most out of this technique. However, once mas-
tered, it can reveal characteristics of groups or individuals that 
would be impossible to discover by other means. Interviews, as 
Nisbet and Watt (1978: 13) point out, provide important data, but they 
reveal only how people perceive what happens, not necessarily what 
actually happens. Observation can be useful in discovering whether 
people do what they say they do, or behave in the way they claim to 
behave. However, observation also depends on the way people per-
ceive what is being said or done.
On occasions, I have been to meetings and after discussing what 
happened with colleagues, I have begun to wonder whether I was at 
the same meeting. We had very different recollections of who said 
what and what decisions were made. If three or four people stand 
at a window overlooking a busy street, observing what is going on 
for five minutes or so, and then write up what they have seen, the 
accounts are likely to vary. The observers will have their own focus 
and will interpret significant events in their own way. As observers, 
we ‘filter’ the material we obtain from observation, which can lead 
us to impose our own interpretations on what is observed and so fail 
to understand ‘what an activity means for those who are involved in 
it’ (Darlington and Scott 2002: 75–6).
The fact that we are all fallible does not mean there is little point 
in including observation as one of our data collection techniques, 
but it does mean that we have to be particularly aware of the dan-
gers, do our best to eliminate preconceived ideas and prejudices, and 
constantly look out for possible signs of bias.
Solo observers are always in danger of accusations of bias or 
misinterpretation and especially if you are researching in your 
own professional area, try to persuade a friend, colleague or fel-
low student to join you for as many observation sessions as possi-
ble. Observation can be structured or unstructured, participant or 
non-participant. Each approach has some advantages but also dis-
advantages. All require a degree of expertise but if you have, after 
careful thought, decided to include observation as one of your data 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
212
collection instruments, then you will need to decide which approach 
to adopt – and why.
Unstructured observation
Researchers who decide to adopt an unstructured approach to 
observation generally do so because although they may have a 
clear idea of the purpose of the observation, they may not be so clear 
about the detail. The researcher:
“
does not use predetermined categories and classifications but makes 
observations in a more natural open-ended way ... The logic here is that 
categories and concepts for describing and analysing the observational 
data will emerge later in the research, during the analysis, rather than be 
brought to the research, or imposed on the data, from the start.”
(Punch 2005: 179–80)
As in grounded theory, the researcher will ‘postpone definitions and 
structures until a pattern has been observed . . . and then continues 
with the fieldwork in order to elaborate these while the data are still 
available for access’ (Bowling 2002: 367).
Unstructured observation can be useful to generate hypotheses, 
but it is not easy to manage. If the nature of your research points you 
in the direction of unstructured observation, read as widely as you 
can, ask colleagues and friends if they know of anyone who success-
fully adopted this approach, and consult your supervisor before you 
commit yourself to this – or for that matter any other – approach.
Participant observation
Some of the disadvantages of unstructured observation may also 
apply to participant observation, which involves the researcher 
participating in the daily life of an individual, group or community 
and listening, observing, questioning and understanding (or trying 
to understand) the life of the individuals concerned. In some cases, 
researchers may have been involved for months or even years in a 
community in order to become generally accepted as part of the 
group.
Cohen and colleagues draw attention to some of the criticisms 
levelled at participant observation:
“
The accounts that typically emerge from participant observations 
echo the criticisms of qualitative data ... being described as subjective, 
biased, impressionistic, idiosyncratic and lacking in the precise 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Observation
213
quantifiable measures that are the hallmark of survey research and 
experimentation. While it is probably true that nothing can give better 
insight into the life of a gang of juvenile delinquents than going to live 
with them for an extended period of time, critics of participant observation 
will point to the dangers of ‘going native’ as a result of playing a role 
within such a group.”
(Cohen et al. 2011: 468).
Experienced participant observers are well aware of the danger of 
bias but it is difficult to stand back and adopt the role of objective 
observer when all the members of the group or organization are 
known to you. If you are researching in your own organization, you 
will be familiar with the personalities, strengths and weaknesses of 
colleagues, and this familiarity may cause you to overlook aspects 
of behaviour that would be immediately apparent to a non-partici-
pant observer seeing the situation for the first time.
Bias is not the only danger in participant observation, particu-
larly if ‘total’ participation is attempted. Denscombe draws our 
attention to the fact that ‘those being studied will not be aware of the 
research or their role in it. They can hardly give informed consent’ 
(Denscombe 2010a: 209). However, he considers that:
“
First, if it can be demonstrated that none of those who were studied 
suffered as a result of being observed, the researcher can argue that 
certain ethical standards were maintained. Second, and linked, if the 
researcher can argue that the identities of those involved were never 
disclosed, again there is a reasonable case for saying that the participant 
observation was conducted in an ethical manner.”
(Denscombe 2010a: 209)
In spite of the difficulties and criticisms, participant observation 
can yield valuable data. Researchers are able to observe changes 
over time. Rather than having to depend on one-off observations or 
at best observations carried out over a limited period of time, the 
participant observer is able to share in the lives and activities of 
other people; to learn their language and interpret their meanings; 
to remember actions and speech; and to interact with people in their 
own environment (Burgess 1982: 45). By listening and experiencing, 
‘impressions are formed and theories considered, reflected upon, 
developed and modified’ (May 2011: 189).
May, however, acknowledges that:
“
participant observation is not an easy method to perform, or to 
analyse, but despite the arguments of its critics, it is a systematic 
and  disciplined study which, if performed well, greatly assists in 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
214
understanding human actions and brings with it new ways of viewing 
the social world.”
(May 2011: 189)
I agree, but in 100-hour projects, it might be unwise to undertake par-
ticipant or unstructured observation unless you are already expe-
rienced, have the time and are very familiar with the techniques 
involved. To derive worthwhile information from the data, you will 
probably need to adopt a more structured approach and devise 
some form of coding in order to identify aspects of behaviour that 
you have determined beforehand as being of likely relevance to the 
research. More of this later in the chapter.
Structured observation and keeping records
The structured approach to observation can also be criticized as 
being subjective and biased: you have decided on the focus rather 
than allowing the focus to emerge. However, you will already have 
formulated a hypothesis or identified the objectives of your study 
and the importance of observing some aspect of behaviour will have 
become apparent.
Whether your observation is structured or unstructured and 
whether you are observing as a participant or a non-participant, 
your role is to observe and record in as objective a way as possi-
ble. The fact that different observers can, and do, produce differ-
ent accounts of situations is worrying for all researchers who hope 
to include observation as one of their means of data collection. In 
Denscombe’s opinion:
“
It is precisely this problem which is addressed by systematic 
observation and its use of an observation schedule. The whole purpose 
of the schedule is to minimize, possibly eliminate, the variations that 
will arise from data based on individual perceptions of events and 
situations. Its aim is to provide a framework for observation which all 
observers will use.”
(Denscombe 2010a: 199; emphasis in original)
Observation schedules can take the form of a checklist, a diary, 
chart, time or critical incidents log – or whatever approach suits 
your purpose. Spradley (1980), Williams (1994), Denscombe (2010a) 
and Bowling (2009) all provide examples of charts, grids, catego-
ries and other methods of recording that will give you a range of 
useful ideas for devising schemes of your own. The sad fact is that, 
despite all the tried and tested methods that have been employed 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Observation
215
by researchers over the years, there never seems to be an example 
that is quite right for a particular task. Inevitably, you will find you 
have to adapt or to devise a completely new approach, and all new 
systems need careful piloting and refining in the light of experience. 
If you have access to only one group or one meeting, you must be 
quite sure that your selected method of recording is going to work. 
You will probably need to devise your own system of shorthand sym-
bols and these will have to be memorized because you can’t always 
be consulting your notes during the course of a meeting or obser-
vation of a group. You will need to decide beforehand how often to 
record what is happening (all the time?, every three seconds?, every 
five minutes?, every twenty minutes?) and with whom (the group?, 
individuals?).
Preparation is all-important. Charts and seating plans have to be 
prepared. You will need to discuss with whoever is in charge where it 
would be best to sit. Opinions vary. In a lecture room, there is some 
merit in sitting where the students can see you. At least that way 
they are not always turning round to see what you are doing, but if 
participants have other views, listen – and conform. An observer can 
never pass entirely unnoticed, but the aim is to be as unobtrusive as 
possible so that observed behaviour is as close to normal as possible.
It is impossible to record everything, so you need to be clear 
whether you are interested in the content or process of a group or 
meeting, in interaction between individuals, in the nature of con-
tributions or in some specific aspect such as the effectiveness of 
questioning techniques. Once you have decided what you wish to 
find out and have satisfied yourself that you need this information to 
further your research, then you will be in a position to consider what 
methods of recording will best suit your purposes.
Recording behaviour
One common method of recording behaviour is based on a system of 
interaction-process analysis originally devised by R.F. Bales in 1950. 
He devised a method of classifying or coding under one of twelve 
headings, which enabled the observer to make a record of the behav-
iour of individuals in groups. Examples of his categories of behav-
iour include ‘shows tension release’, for which he then identified 
indicators of tension release (jokes, laughs, shows satisfaction), and 
‘shows antagonism’ (deflates others’ status, defends or asserts self).
Since 1950, many different types of approach have been devised, 
some relatively simple and others extremely complicated. The Flanders 
system, which was derived from the Bales method of classifying 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
216
behaviour, is one of the best known. Flanders (1970) devised ten cate-
gories of teacher/student behaviour (the Flanders Interaction Analysis 
Categories), which the observer used as a basis for categorizing and 
recording what took place in the classroom. Observers were required 
to record what was happening every three seconds and to enter the 
appropriate category number on a prepared chart. The problem about 
Flanders-type systems is that the categories are quite complex, have 
many sub-sections and inevitably involve the observer making some 
value judgements as to which category is closest to the particular 
types of behaviour.
The requirement to record every three seconds means that the 
observer has to be fully conversant with categories and criteria 
and to recall instantly the number assigned to particular aspects of 
behaviour. This takes a considerable amount of practice. The more 
complicated (and so more thorough) the system of categories, the 
harder it is to manage.
I have to confess that the one time I tried to use the ‘every three 
seconds’ approach was a miserable failure. Trying to keep track of 
the time and at the same time observing and classifying activities 
under Flanders-type headings became impossible and so a simpler 
system had to be devised. I had to go back to basics and to ask myself 
again why I was observing the meeting. What exactly did I want to 
find out? What was feasible to record? And only then was I able to 
eliminate any irrelevances and begin to simplify the categories.
Most researchers I know have devised their own system of cat-
egories, and limited them to about three or four. Are you interested 
in who is aggressive, time-wasting, positive in moving forward the 
business of the meeting, disagreeing about much (or all) that is being 
proposed – or none of those things? Ask yourself whether you are 
more concerned with the behaviour of individuals or the content of 
what is being said. Or perhaps you might be interested only in how 
long each individual speaks and who is silent throughout. If one of 
your categories happened to be ‘disagreement’, participants may not 
need to speak. A lot can be deduced from facial expressions, nods, 
scowls or signs of dissent from the ‘silent’ individuals. It’s up to you 
to decide on your categories and, once having decided, to devise 
ways of recording.
The way in which observations are recorded is a matter of per-
sonal preference. If you are observing a meeting, it is helpful to have 
a table plan before the meeting starts, as shown in Figure 12.1. Each 
of the categories is given a number and you will know which number 
applies to which category. In Figure 12.1, if category number 1 deals 
with aggressive behaviour, you would put ‘1’ underneath or at the 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Observation
217
Figure 12.2  Chart recording total number of entries  
for each category
Participants
Categories
1
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
QQ
2
3
3
4
5
6
Totals
Chairman (Mick)
Secretary (Fred)
Judith
Brendan
lan
Stephen
Sandy
Totals
3
4
2
3
3
2
2
2
7
1
4
4
Figure 12.1  Table plan recording individual behaviour 
according to categories
Brendan
Stephen
Sandy
Mick
(Chairman)
lan
5, 4
4, 4, 6
1, 1, 1
3, 3, 1, 2
2, 3, 1
3, 4, 1
6, 1
Judith
Fred (secretary)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
218
side of each participant for each indication of such behaviour. Or 
you could record behaviour in a chart, as in Figure 12.2.
Contributions might also be plotted on a graph or presented in 
some way that clearly illustrates the nature of the contributions 
made. And always bear in mind that it will not be enough merely 
to present the information as observed. Commentary on the signifi-
cance (or lack of significance) will also be necessary.
Content
The analysis of the content of a meeting or group discussion may be 
rather more straightforward. If the main interest is in who makes 
most contributions and spends most time speaking (not necessarily 
the same thing), then a simple chart along the lines of that shown 
in Figure 12.3 might be constructed. In this case, a vertical line 
would indicate that the named person spoke for a set time (say half 
Figure 12.3  Example of a chart recording speaking 
contributions of individuals
Participants
Mick
Fred
Judith
Brendan
lan
Stephen
Sandy
Multiple speaking
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Observation
219
a minute or less). A following horizontal line would indicate that the 
same person continued to speak for longer than the set period.
The above examples appear to be fairly simple to manage and 
should produce useful, though limited, information. If all you need 
to know is who spoke most or which topics took up most time, then 
they will suffice, and adaptations to these charts have been used 
to good effect in many different situations. However, if you wish to 
find out who says most about what, then a more complex system is 
needed, and it may be best to make fuller notes during the course of 
the observation and then transfer them to a summary chart.
Do your best to get some observation practice to try out your 
recording skills. If you have the opportunity (and obtain permission) 
to attend a formal meeting as an observer, ask if you might see an 
agenda beforehand. Sometimes this will be granted, sometimes not. 
It’s a great help if you are able to see what items are to be considered, 
so it’s worth asking.
If you are unable to attend any meetings, group sessions or 
classes, try out your recording skills on a television programme. 
Political discussions are good, because they often degenerate into 
arguments, with everyone speaking at the same time. Select no more 
than three categories, such as ‘dissent’, ‘aggression’ and ‘agreement’, 
but make sure you are clear about how you define each of these cat-
egories. What are the indicators of ‘aggression’ (shouting, pointing 
of a finger, sneering, what else?). Devise your own chart and see if 
you can record the contributions. Ten minutes should be enough to 
show you how complex recording can be, even when your catego-
ries seem to be perfectly clear. You may discover that categories can 
sometimes overlap, contributions to the discussion can come thick 
and fast and you have to concentrate, to look at contributors’ expres-
sions, to listen for mixed messages and to put your number in the 
right place at the right time. Your first shot at a chart may not suit 
you and so you will need to devise one or two different designs to 
see which you find easiest for recording, analysis and interpretation 
after the event.
A few words of warning – again
At the beginning of this chapter, I said that observation can often 
reveal characteristics of groups or individuals that would be impossi-
ble to discover by other means. This has been demonstrated in many 
research studies that made extensive use of observation techniques, 
but the greatest care has to be taken to ensure that you get the most 
out of your periods of observation. You are unlikely to have three 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
220
years in which to begin an investigation with an entirely open mind 
and to evolve hypotheses and methods as you go along. It is likely 
you will only have one opportunity to observe a meeting, group or 
class and so you will need to be quite clear about the purpose of your 
observation and why you are observing that particular group or 
individual. You may discover that unforeseen and interesting infor-
mation emerges during the course of your observation, but you will 
be mainly dependent on the decisions taken before you begin your 
period of observation for the type of data you eventually gather. If 
you make a decision before a meeting that your main interest is the 
content of the meeting, then charts, grids or checklists have to be 
devised with that aim in mind. It will be too late to record interac-
tions. If your main interest is process, then other methods will have 
to be found to record how a class or a meeting is conducted. As you 
select and refine your methods, keep constantly in mind the same 
old questions: What do I need to know? Why do I need to know it? 
And what shall I do with this information when I have it?
Pilot exercises and practice in recording will answer some of 
these questions and will point to weaknesses in technique. When you 
begin your one-off observation exercise, you need to be as sure as 
you can that you are prepared and ready.
You only have one shot at any observation. Avoid 
trying to make a record of too many aspects of the 
behaviour you are observing.
After the event
The task is not complete when the observation has taken place and 
records have been made. If you were observing a meeting and felt at 
the end of it that it was rather ineffectual, you would need to analyse 
the reasons. Was the process altogether too formal? Did the chair (or 
someone else) speak for 80 per cent of the time? Were contributions 
from some people dismissed? Some forms of interaction analysis 
can help you to classify process and content, but whatever methods 
of recording you have selected, it is essential to consider the event 
as a whole, as soon after the event as you can. Review in your mind 
what took place and decide whether any conclusions can be drawn 
that might be of interest in your study.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Observation
221
Observation Checklist
1.  Decide exactly what 
you need to know.
List all topics/aspects about 
which information is required. Q
2.  Consider why you 
need this information.
Examine your list and remove 
any item that is not directly 
associated with the task.
Q
3.  Is observation the best 
way of obtaining the 
information you need?
Consider alternatives.
Q
4.  Decide which 
aspects you need to 
investigate.
Are you particularly 
interested in content, process, 
interaction, intervention – or 
something else?
Q
5.  Request permission to 
observe.
Clear official channels and 
discuss what is involved with 
the individuals concerned.
Q
6.  Devise a suitable grid, 
checklist or chart.
Consult published examples, 
adapt where necessary – and 
acknowledge the source. 
Decide on your categories.
Q
7.  Consider what you 
will do with the 
information.
Is it likely to produce anything 
of interest? Will the data 
be sufficiently complete to 
enable you to come to any 
conclusions?
Q
8.  Pilot your method and 
revise if necessary, 
and invite someone 
to observe with 
you. Compare notes 
afterwards to see if 
you saw the same 
things.
Memorize categories. Devise 
your own system of shorthand 
(symbols, letters, etc.). 
Practise recording until you 
are confident you can cope.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
222
9.  Prepare carefully 
before the 
observation.
Draw a plan of the 
room, indicating seating 
arrangements and layout. 
Make sure you have enough 
copies of grids or checklists. 
Consult minutes of previous 
meetings, agendas, schemes 
of work, and so on.
Q
10.  Discuss where you 
will sit with whoever 
is in charge and with 
the people who will 
be observed.
You want to be as unobtrusive 
as possible. Exactly where 
you sit will depend on your 
own preferences and the 
views of participants.
Q
11.  Remember that no 
grid, no matter how 
sophisticated, will 
tell the full story.
Try to place the event in 
its organizational context. 
Obtain as much information 
about the organization/
institution/committee or 
group before the observation.
Q
12.  Always write up 
field notes as you 
go along, add items 
to your summary 
sheet and write 
your thoughts down 
about significant 
events.
If you wait until later, you will 
forget important items.
Q 
13.  Analyse and 
interpret the data. 
Do your best to 
eliminate bias or 
misinterpretation.
Statements about what has 
been observed are only part 
of the task. Consider what 
the facts indicate or imply. 
Make quite sure that none of 
the individuals you observe 
will suffer as a result of being 
observed, and make equally 
sure that their identities will 
never be disclosed.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Observation
223
Useful though grids, forms and checklists are, they all have limi-
tations. They cannot take account of emotions, micropolitical pro-
cesses behind some of the interactions, the influence of certain key 
members of the group, and the effect they can have on the way meet-
ings and discussions are conducted and decisions reached.
The work that goes into recording and adding up the numbers of 
committee or group members who showed aggression, agreement, 
dissent or who spoke for a specified period of time is important, but 
it is even more important to place what you observe in its organiza-
tional and/or curricular context, to look beyond the event itself and 
to be able to identify important moments in the interaction.
Further reading
Bowling, A. (2009) Research Methods in Health: Investigating 
Health and Health Services (3rd edn). Maidenhead: Open 
University Press. 
Chapter 15, ‘Unstructured and structured observational studies’, pro-
vides useful information about participant observation, gaining access, 
establishing validity and reliability (reducing observer bias), structured 
and unstructured observations, and analysis and categorization of data.
Darlington, Y. and Scott, D. (2002) Qualitative Research in 
Practice: Stories from the Field. Buckingham: Open University 
Press. 
Chapter 4, ‘Observation’, is helpful and well worth consulting. The 
authors provide guidance about the observation process, including use-
ful reminders about the ethics of observation.
Denscombe, M. (2010) The Good Research Guide for Small-scale 
Social Research Projects (4th edn). Maidenhead: Open University 
Press. 
Chapter 11, ‘Observation’, in this excellent book is well worth a read. 
Denscombe covers the advantages and disadvantages of systematic 
14.  Don’t forget to thank 
the people who 
have allowed you to 
observe.
You may need their help 
again!
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
224
observation; observation schedules; types of events and behaviour to 
be recorded; suitability for observation; the advantages and disadvan-
tages of participant observation; making field notes (and the dangers of 
fieldwork), and ethics.
Jorgensen, D.L. (2008) Participant Observation: A Methodology 
for Human Studies (2nd edn). London: Sage.
Moyles, J. (2002) Observation as a research tool, in M. Coleman 
and A.R.J. Briggs (eds) Research Methods in Educational 
Leadership and Management London: Sage.
Punch, K.F. (2005) Introduction to Social Research: Quantitative 
and Qualitative Approaches (2nd edn). London: Sage. 
Pages 178–84 consider structured and unstructured approaches to 
observation, recording observational data and participant observation.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Plan your project
schedule and scope
(Ch 2)
Understand ethics, privacy,
anonymity and
confidentiality (Ch 3)
Refine your
research question
(Ch 2)
Read, take notes and
write up as you go
along (Ch 4)
Conduct a
literature search
(Ch 5)
If required, do a
literature review
(Ch 6)
Choose your
research tools
(Ch 7–12)
Conduct your research
and collect the data
(Ch 7–12)
Start: do your
groundwork
(Ch 1)
Meet your supervisor,
understand requirements,
brainstorm for topics
(Ch 2)
Compile, analyse
and interpret your
data (Ch 13)
Write a first draft
of your report
(Ch 14)
Read, redraft and
proof your report
(Ch 14)
Submit your research
project on time and
to requirements
(Ch 14)
SUCCESS!
You did it!
Well done. 
YOU ARE HERE
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Part III
Interpreting the 
Evidence and 
Reporting the 
Findings
Data collected by means of 
questionnaires, interviews, dia-
ries or any other method mean 
very little until they are ana-
lysed and evaluated. Gathering 
large amounts of information in the hope that something will emerge 
is not to be recommended in any small or smallish investigation, 
especially not for new researchers. As I said in the introduction to 
this book, those of you who have a limited statistical background 
cannot attempt highly complex surveys involving advanced statisti-
cal techniques, but that does not mean that a worthwhile study can-
not be carried out. It is all a case of working within your level of 
expertise, selecting research methods which are suitable for the task 
and which can be readily analysed, interpreted and presented.
If at some stage you decide to carry out a large quantitative study, 
then you will need to get to grips with statistical procedures and, if 
Key term
Generalization
228
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
228
appropriate, with statistical analysis software. Every institution of 
higher education will have specialists to advise you. Make use of 
them. They will keep you on the straight and narrow and will ensure 
you do not waste valuable time following false trails.
In many projects and theses, it will be sufficient to understand 
simple arithmetical procedures such as averages and percentages. 
If your data collection instruments are well devised and have been 
well-piloted, you will have already done the groundwork for the col-
lection, analysis and presentation of information.
Before you begin your study of the next two chapters, there are 
a number of issues that already have been raised but which need 
to be reiterated. In Chapter 1, I briefly discussed the question of 
generalization. Bassey (1981: 85–6) drew attention to the problems 
of generalizing from insufficient data, and made a strong case for 
individual researchers working to a limited timescale to produce 
research structured in response to an existing or potential problem 
so that the results might be of use to the institution. Such research, 
he felt, might go some way to solving a particular problem or lead 
to informed discussion of how a particular problem might be tack-
led. He commended the descriptive and evaluative study of single 
pedagogic events and (writing about education case-study methods) 
concluded that:
“
An important criterion for judging the merit of a case study is the 
extent to which the details are sufficient and appropriate for a teacher 
working in a similar situation to relate his decision-making to that 
described in the case study. The relatability of a case study is more 
important than its generalizability.”
(Bassey 1981: 85)
I raise this issue again here because in the analysis, interpretation 
and presentation of data, care has to be taken not to claim more for 
the results than is warranted, and equally care has to be taken not 
to attempt generalizations based on insufficient data. In relatively 
small projects, generalization may be unlikely, but relatability may 
be entirely possible. Well-prepared, small-scale studies may inform, 
illuminate and provide a basis for policy decisions. As such, they can 
be invaluable. There is no need to apologize about inability to gener-
alize, but there would be every need to apologize if data was manipu-
lated in an attempt to prove more than could reasonably be claimed.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

229
Key terms
Arithmetic mean
233
Median
234
Mode
234
Range
234
Interquartile range
234
Standard deviation
235
Coding
239
Ordinal scale
241
Grids
242
Scales
243
13
Interpreting 
the Evidence 
and Reporting 
the Findings
INTRODUCTION
This chapter takes a detailed look at a critical stage in your research. Now you 
have gathered all your data, what do you do with it? This chapter examines how 
you should analyse your data, and provides some important tools for dealing 
with quantitative information and presenting data clearly in your findings. In this 
chapter, you will learn:
•	How to compile summary sheets of data from your responses.
•	How to calculate mean and median values and deal with dispersion of data in 
measures such as interquartile range and standard deviation.
•	How to present your data in tables, bar charts, pie charts and histograms.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
230
Raw data taken from questionnaires, interview schedules, check-
lists, and so on need to be recorded, analysed and interpreted. A hun-
dred separate pieces of interesting information will mean nothing to 
a researcher or to a reader unless they have been categorized and 
interpreted. We are constantly looking for similarities and differ-
ences, for groupings, patterns and items of particular significance.
You may have ideas about categories before the data are col-
lected. Your informed hunch tells you that the likelihood is that 
responses will tend to fall into any one of six or seven main catego-
ries. There can be dangers in placing too much reliance on precon-
ceived ideas, not least the possibility that your line of questioning 
may direct respondents to reply in certain ways. However, assuming 
you have been able to eliminate bias of this kind, your first-thoughts 
categories will give you a start in the process of collating the find-
ings. Others will undoubtedly emerge as your research proceeds but 
start with broad categories, and only move to more detailed exam-
ples when it becomes apparent that they merit a label of their own.
In Chapter 9, we saw that Michael Youngman (1982, 1994) sug-
gested that in questionnaires, it is helpful to identify question types 
and to work out ways in which responses can be analysed and pre-
sented. You will recall that he listed seven question types (list, cat-
egory, quantity, ranking, grid, scale and verbal). In this chapter, 
some of these question types will be used to illustrate ways in which 
responses might be interpreted and presented.
List questions
Let us say you wish to find out what qualifications your mature stu-
dents possessed before they registered for a course. You produce a 
list that invites respondents to tick appropriate boxes. They may well 
tick more than one box and so you will need to be ready to deal with 
multiple responses. In Question 13.1, categories have already been 
selected (None, Professional qualification, Successful completion of 
Access or Return to Study course, A level or equivalent, and Other).
You may have been using an online survey tool such as Survey 
Monkey for your questionnaire, in which case it is likely that the 
respondents’ data has been collated for you. By using the reporting 
tab, you can access the raw data or use the functions in the survey 
tool to create tables or graphs. It is important, however, when relying 
on these tools that you understand how to analyse the data it pro-
duces and what the data reveals. It is not enough to copy and paste 
the graphs from Survey Monkey into your report without explaining 
what the data means in relation to the research question or issue you 
are attempting to address. We will therefore run through the process 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Interpreting the Evidence and Reporting the Findings
231
of analysing and presenting data manually, using some research 
examples.
If you are collating survey data by hand, a summary sheet needs 
to be prepared for all items before questionnaires are distributed, 
so that returns can be entered as they come in. We all have our own 
ways of recording returns, but if you decide to record question by 
question, the following is probably as simple a way as any.
Summary sheet for Question 13.1: Qualifications 
before entry
None
Professional
Access/Return 
to Study
A level
Other
1111
1111
1111
1111
1111
1
1111
1111
1111
1111
1111
1111
11
1111
1111
1111
1
1111
1111
111
1111
11
6
28
32
12
16
Once the summary sheet is complete, you will begin to have a pic-
ture of the types of qualifications the students had before beginning 
their degree course. The information can be presented in a variety of 
Question 13.1: Qualifications before entry
What qualifications did you have before you started your degree 
course?
None	
	
Professional qualification*	
Successful completion of 	
	
A level or equivalent*	
Access or Return to Study  
course
Other*	
Please specify*
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
232
ways. A simple table followed by commentary highlighting any items 
of interest is one option (see Table 13.1).
The full list of ‘Other’ qualifications will need to be recorded on 
a separate sheet and if sufficient recurring types of qualifications 
emerge, then reference can be made to them in the commentary.
A vertical bar chart would be another option (see Figure 13.1). 
The variable (qualification/s) would be on the horizontal axis and 
the frequency (number of students) on the vertical axis. (Note that 
n = number of participants in the study.)
Which of the two is clearer – the table or the bar chart? Any data 
that tells you nothing of significance may as well be abandoned, but 
Table 13.1  Qualifications of mature students before entry 
to their course
None
A level
Professional
Access/Return to Study
Other
6
12
28
32
16
Figure 13.1  Qualifications of students before entry to their 
degree course
35
30
25
20
15
Number of students (n = 50)
10
5
0
6
None
A level
Professional
qualification
Qualifications
Access/
Return to
study
Other
12
28
32
16
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Interpreting the Evidence and Reporting the Findings
233
there are interesting features here. Thirty-two of the 50 students in 
our sample (64%) took Access/Return to Study courses, whereas only 
12 (24%) had A levels or equivalent. It might be interesting to dis-
cover which group performed better in examinations. Six students 
(12%) had no qualifications at all on entry. How, then, had they pre-
pared themselves for their undergraduate studies? Are they coping? 
It might be useful to follow up these and similar issues in interviews.
Quantity and category questions
What Michael Youngman described as quantity and category ques-
tions are, at first sight, simpler to deal with. They require one 
answer only. The response to a quantity question is a number (exact 
or approximate), giving the amount of some characteristics. The 
response to a category question is one only of a given set of catego-
ries. For example, if age categories are provided (20–29, 30–39, and 
so on), the respondents can only fit into one category.
In the mature students’ study, you will probably need to know 
students’ ages. If you have spent time on question wording and have 
refined the focus of each question, you will have decided whether 
you want to know students’ ages at the time they registered, at the 
time they completed the questionnaire or at some other stage. You 
decide to ask a straight question.
Question 13.2: Age distribution of students 
at initial registration
How old were you when you first registered for your degree 
course?
What will you do with responses? What exactly do you want to 
know? The average age of students? If so, you will need to decide 
what sort of average (or measure of central tendency) will suit your 
purpose – the arithmetic mean, the median or the mode.
Measures of central tendency
The arithmetic mean is simple – it is obtained by adding together 
each item (or value) and dividing by the total number of items (val-
ues). So, if we take 12 respondents (Group A) whose ages are 26, 26, 
27, 28, 29, 30, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34 and 34, and add those values together, 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
234
we get 360. Divide 360 by 12. The mean is 30. Another group of 12 
(Group B) might have a different range of ages, for example 21, 22, 
24, 25, 25, 29, 31, 31, 32, 35, 40 and 45. The mean is also 30 but, in these 
two cases, there is a clear difference in the dispersion (measures of 
spread) of the results.
The median allows us to find the middle value. This is particu-
larly useful when there are extremes at both ends or at either end of 
the range that may affect the mean to a significant extent. To find 
the median, values must be listed in order – which in this case has 
already been done. If we had an odd number of values, the middle 
value would be the median. Where we have an even number, as in 
Group A, the average of the two middle values (30 + 30) is taken 
and so the median is 30. The fact that in this case the mean and the 
median are the same is because there are no extreme values at either 
end. There is an age progression, but if the ages were 21, 22, 29, 29, 
30, 30, 33, 33, 33, 36, 39 and 84, then the differences would become 
apparent. The mean of these values is 34.9, whereas the median (i.e. 
the average of the middle points) is 31.5. You would need to decide 
which of the median and mean provides a more realistic picture.
The mode, which is not often used in small studies, relates to the 
most frequently occurring value. In this last example, the modal 
score is 33.
Each of these measures of central tendency has different uses. As 
always, it depends on what you need to know and why.
Look at the Group A and Group B examples again. The two groups 
have a very different spread of age. In Group A, the range is from 26 
to 34 and so ages are close to the mean and the median. In Group B, 
they range from 21 to 45 and so are not clustered around the mean 
age. Is that worthy of comment? If so, ways have to be found of deal-
ing with dispersion. Commonly used measures are the range, inter-
quartile range and standard deviation.
The range is simply the difference between the highest and low-
est values measured. For Group A, the range is 8 years, but for Group 
B it is 24 years. The range is not a particularly good measure of dis-
persion, as it can be influenced by one high and/or one low value and 
takes no account of the numbers of responses in the middle of the 
group.
The interquartile range gives a more accurate picture and 
reduces the importance of the extreme ends of the range. It is derived 
from the median. The highest and the lowest quarter of the measures 
are omitted and the interquartile range of the middle 50 per cent 
of the values is quoted. For Group A, the top three values (34, 34 
and 33 – one-quarter of the twelve values) are omitted, as are the 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Interpreting the Evidence and Reporting the Findings
235
lowest three values (26, 26 and 27). This gives an interquartile range 
of 28–32, or 4 years. For Group B, the values 45, 40 and 35 are omit-
ted, as are 21, 22 and 24. This gives an interquartile range of 25–32, 
which is 7 years. Is that worth commenting on? In some cases, it cer-
tainly will be. If the median has been selected as providing the best 
indication of the average of a set of data, then the interquartile range 
will indicate the extent to which data vary.
If the mean has been selected, then the standard deviation has to 
be used to summarize dispersion:
“
In statistics and probability theory, standard deviation ... shows how 
much variation or dispersion exists from the average (mean), or expected 
value. A low standard deviation indicates that the data points tend to be 
very close to the mean; a high standard deviation indicates that the data 
points are spread out over a large range of values.”
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_deviation
Standard deviation uses values for the group as a whole rather 
than for a section, whereas other measures do not. Any book on sta-
tistics will give the mathematical expression for standard deviation 
and how it can be calculated. Carrying out the calculations by hand 
can be tedious, particularly for a large group. However, the calcula-
tion is written into most computer programs so that the standard 
deviation is automatically produced in association with the mean. In 
our example, the standard deviation for Group A is 2.8 and for Group 
B it is 7.
In the case of these two groups, all the measures – the range, 
interquartile range and standard deviation – indicate that Group B 
has a wider spread than Group A. Used on their own, means and 
medians may not be sufficiently descriptive to provide a complete 
picture of the data. You will need to decide whether one of these 
measures of dispersion is also necessary when you analyse and 
interpret your data.
It was a straightforward matter to determine the mean and the 
median of data derived from Question 13.2. However, you might 
decide you do not wish to ask participants to say how old they are. 
Perhaps you consider it would be more sensitive to ask them to tick 
a box or circle a number to indicate the age category into which they 
fit. Decide whether you wish to have categories (or class intervals) 
of five (20–24, 25–29) or ten (20–29, 30–39). How important is it to 
have the groups of five? If the answer is ‘not very’, then take the 
wider span. It will be easier to manage.
Make sure your instructions are clear. In the Alternative Question 
13.2, respondents would be asked to circle the number (1–5) under 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
236
the appropriate age category. A respondent of 32 would circle the 
number 2 underneath the 30–39 age category. Take particular care to 
ensure that the likely full age range of your respondents is provided.
Alternative Question 13.2: Age when you first 
registered for your degree
20–29	
30–39	
40–49	
50–59	
60+ 
1	
	
2	
3	
4	
5
If you wished to find the arithmetic means of respondents’ ages from 
the class intervals, this is still straightforward. Take the mid-point 
of each class interval and multiply that age by the number in each 
class. That is, mid-point × frequency, as in Table 13.2.
Dividing 1495 by the number of respondents (50) gives a mean 
of 29.9. The first class interval (20–29) includes those who entered 
higher education on their twentieth birthday and also those who 
entered the day before their thirtieth birthday. The interval there-
fore covers almost 10 years, with the exception of the final class (60). 
Usually, it is anticipated that only a small number of responses will 
fall into the final class. In the above example, the one respondent 
could be any age from 60 upwards and so it is necessary to assign 
an arbitrary mid-point. For the purpose of this exercise, the age 60 
was selected.
You would then need to decide how to present the information in a 
way that best illustrates the age balance of the sample. You have sev-
eral options. You could provide a simple chart (Figure 13.2) derived 
straight from your summary sheet (Table 13.3).
Table 13.2  Arithmetic mean of respondents’ ages
Age
Frequency
Mid-point
Frequency × Mid-point
20–29
34
25
850
30–39
10
35
350
40–49
4
45
180
50–59
1
55
55
60+ 
1
60
60
Total
50
1495
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Interpreting the Evidence and Reporting the Findings
237
The same data could be represented by a histogram. A histogram 
is the same as a bar chart, but in the case of a histogram the bars 
touch, to reflect the continuous nature of the variable, which in this 
case is ‘age’.
Figure 13.2  Age distribution of mature students at initial 
registration
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
20–29
34
10
4
1
1
30–39
40–49
Age
Number of students
50–59
60+
Table 13.3  Age distribution of students at initial 
registration
Age
Number of students
20–29
34
30–39
10
40–49
4
50–59
1
60+ 
1
Total
50
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
238
Alternatively, you might decide a pie chart would represent a 
clearer (or different) picture. Pie charts are useful, particularly if 
you wish to illustrate the proportion of students who fall into the dif-
ferent age groups. In this case, frequencies are changed to percent-
ages. The 30–39 age range accounts for 20% of the total sample. The 
circumference of a circle is 360° and so 1% will be 3.6°. Multiplying 20 
by 3.6 gives an angle of 72°. It becomes immediately apparent from 
Figure 13.3 that if numbers are small, percentages can be mislead-
ing, so if at all possible, include numbers with the percentages.
Do the table, histogram or pie chart provide any interesting find-
ings? You might comment on the skewed age distribution, to the effect 
that few students over the age of 39 had committed themselves to the 
three-year full-time undergraduate course. But why would that be 
interesting? Subsequent interviews might provide further informa-
tion about motives. Would you have expected the age distribution to 
be weighted at the younger end? When you examine the university 
records for the full mature student population (assuming you have 
permission to access the records), does your sample follow the same 
pattern, or is it different? If it is significantly different, then that 
Figure 13.3  Age distribution of students at the start of their 
course
20–29
68%
30–39
20%
40–49
8%
50–59
2%
60+
2%
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Interpreting the Evidence and Reporting the Findings
239
might indicate that further study is needed to try to find out why. Do 
university records indicate a gradual (or sudden) change in the age 
profile of students? What about the balance of women to men?
Would it be helpful to know whether most of the younger students 
are women? If you have asked students to indicate whether they are 
male or female, you would be able to find that out, but if you have 
not, it will be too late once the questionnaires are returned. Your 
pilot and trial collation and presentation of data should give you 
clues as to which information is likely to be of interest and at that 
stage there is still time to make adjustments to your data collection 
instruments. The trials will also allow you to prepare the types of 
summary sheets that will suit your purpose – and for that, you may 
need to code your data.
Coding
Writing about qualitative data analysis, Miles and Huberman state 
that:
“
Codes are tags or labels for assigning units of meaning to the 
descriptive or inferential information compiled during a study. Codes 
are usually attached to ‘chunks’ of varying size – words, phrases, 
sentences or whole paragraphs, connected or unconnected to a specific 
setting.”
(Miles and Huberman 1994: 56)
They take the view that it is not the words themselves that matter, 
but their meaning.
“
Codes are used to retrieve and organize the chunks ... The organizing 
part will entail some system for categorizing the various chunks, so 
the  researcher can quickly find, pull out, and cluster the segments 
relating to a particular research question, hypothesis, construct, or 
theme. Clustering, and . . . display of condensed chunks then sets the 
stage for drawing conclusions.”
(Miles and Huberman 1994: 57)
So, coding allows you to ‘cluster’ key issues in your data and take 
steps towards ‘drawing conclusions’. The data you have collected 
mean very little until you have identified your clusters and can begin 
to understand what it all means.
If you plan to enter your data directly into a software package, 
you will need to use numerical labels, as in:
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
240
Question 13.1: Qualifications before entry
None	
1
Professional qualifications	
2
Access/Return to Study	
3
A level or equivalent	
4
Other	
5
No reply	
9
You might decide to break down the ‘Professional qualifications’ 
returns, if you have sufficient items, and possibly to indicate ‘degree 
in another subject’, ‘nursing qualification’, ‘engineering qualification’ 
or ‘forestry management qualification’.
In Alternative Question 13.2, codes for ‘age’ could be allocated 
in the same way:
20–29	
1
30–39	
2
40–49	
3
50–59	
4
60+ 	
5
No response	
9
These numbers are nominal scales that have no numerical signifi-
cance and so any numbers could have been used. Remember that 
there must be no overlapping categories. This may be obvious with 
the age example because a respondent could not be classified as 
being in the 20–29 and the 30–39 category, but especially when deal-
ing with open or verbal responses and invariably with qualitative 
rather than quantitative analysis, it can be quite difficult to select 
guaranteed non-overlapping categories.
If you are involved in a very small project and only need basic 
information, such as additions or percentages, you may decide you 
don’t need to go to the lengths of using statistical analysis software, 
unless you are using the exercise as a trial for a larger investigation. 
However, you will still need to prepare a coding frame, which is your 
classification system, and your key. In questionnaires, you will have 
a good idea of many, or even most, of the categories and so will be 
able to plan your coding frame at the same time as you design your 
questionnaire. Even so, it’s unlikely you will have covered all pos-
sibilities, so wait until you have returns from your pilot studies, and 
again after a number of returns from the main distribution, before 
you begin to complete your coding frame. It’s irritating if you find 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Interpreting the Evidence and Reporting the Findings
241
you were wrong originally and you have to adjust codes and to go 
through all the returns again.
Open questions may well produce unexpected items. Collate all 
the responses and then try to identify any recurring items. They 
will form the basis of your coding system, but remember that quite 
often two or three identical – or similar – responses may give you 
too many categories. Particularly in a small project, there is likely 
to be a limit to how many are reasonable. You will always need an 
‘odds and ends’ category and remember to allow for a ‘no response’ 
category. The number ‘9’ is often used for ‘no response’ and if this 
number suits you, keep it for all ‘no response’ items. If you don’t need 
numerical codes, then use ‘NR’ because there is considerable merit 
in adopting letters, or even words, instead of numbers. Letters and 
words are easily identified, whereas numbers have to be checked 
against your coding frame.
As described in Chapter 9, you can use an ordinal scale, such as 
a Likert scale (named after the man who devised it in 1932 – Rensis 
Likert). Likert scales ask respondents to indicate strength of agree-
ment or disagreement with a given statement or series of statements, 
generally over a 5-point or 7-point range, by circling the appropri-
ate number. Answers are then scored, generally from 1 (‘strongly 
disagree’) to 5 or 7 (‘strongly agree’) and a measure of respondents’ 
feelings can be produced. The coding frame would follow the same 
numerical approach, namely:
Strongly disagree	
Disagree	
Neutral	
Agree	
Strongly agree
1	
2	
3	
4	
5
Of course, if you are not entering the data into a statistical software 
program, you could equally well decide to use the easily recognized 
letters SD, D, N, A and SA. At least with the letters you are not con-
stantly referring back to the coding frame to make sure you have the 
right number.
There are no set ways of coding. It is a case of deciding on a sys-
tem that will suit your data and your way of managing it. Try out 
different summary sheets and coding frames. Keep things as simple 
as possible. If you are concerned mainly with a quantitative study 
and wish to make use of software to analyse your returns, prepare 
as well as you can before you finalize your data collection instru-
ments. As I’ve said before (but it’s sufficiently important to repeat 
here), find out if there is anyone in your department or institution 
whose job it is to help students to organize and code data and to 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
242
select suitable software that is within your level of expertise. I hope 
that long before you have reached this stage of interpreting the evi-
dence and reporting the findings, you will have attended courses 
offered by your faculty, IT department or library. Try out imaginary 
returns from your questionnaire and see if your program can cope 
with them. Better to find out you asked the questions in the wrong 
way as soon as possible, rather than when all returns are received.
Time to move on to grids, scales and verbal questions.
Grids
The simple types of response questions such as list, quantity and 
category are relatively easy to deal with. Grids require a little more 
care. A grid (or table) question will ask students to provide answers 
to two or more questions at the same time.
Go back to the question about students’ qualifications before 
they started their degree course. Instead of merely asking whether 
they had ‘no qualifications’, a ‘professional qualification’, ‘A level or 
equivalent’, ‘successful completion of an Access or Return to Study 
course’ or ‘other’ qualification, you might decide it would be more 
useful to learn about study carried out after the age of 18. If so, a 
grid question could be devised (Question 13.3). Here there are two 
dimensions – years of study and type of study. Students might have 
spent one year on an Access course, two years on an A level course, 
four on a professional qualification, three on some other course. In 
that case, ticks would be placed in three of the boxes.
Question 13.3: Since the age of 18, how many 
years have you spent on the following? (Ignore 
periods of less than one academic year.)
1–2 years
3–4 years
5–6 years
More than 6 years
Professional 
qualification
GCE A Level 
or equivalent
Access/
Return to 
Study course
Other (please 
specify)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Interpreting the Evidence and Reporting the Findings
243
The returns could be presented in table form in much the same style 
as the original question, but it would also be possible to produce a 
compound bar chart that compares numbers of students with years 
of study spent on different courses (see Figure 13.4).
Scales
Scales are devices to discover strength of feeling or attitude. There 
are many different types of scale, including the Likert scale, some of 
which require quite complex construction and analysis. Thurstone 
(Thurstone and Chave 1929) and Guttman (1950) scales in particular 
require careful handling.
A simplified Likert scale might be used with Question 13.4.
Question 13.4: I consider my chances of doing 
well in finals are good
Strongly disagree	
Disagree	
Neutral	
Agree	
Strongly agree
1	
2	
3	
4	
5
Figure 13.4  Years spent on study since the age of 18
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
6
8
3
2
13
32
4
0
Professional
qualification
GCE A level
Access course
Study type
Number of students
1 to 2 years of
study
3 to 4 years of
study
5 to 6 years of
study
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
244
Responses could be presented as shown in Table 13.4. A bar chart 
would also illustrate the range of responses, as in Figure 13.5. It is 
clear from Table 13.4 and from the bar chart (Figure 13.5) that more 
than half the students (54%) are optimistic about their results, but 
what about the rest? Will these percentages be influenced by the fac-
ulty to which students belong? It would be interesting to find out.
Early findings from the pilot study may have alerted you to the 
likely importance of the faculty dimension. If so, you would have 
been able to ask students to complete a combined Likert scale/grid 
question, which might produce the results shown in Table 13.5.
Table 13.4  Levels of agreement among mature students 
that chances of success in finals are good
Strongly 
disagree
Disagree
Undecided
Agree
Strongly 
agree
Totals
10 
(20%)
7 
(14%)
6 
(12%)
16 
(32%)
11 
(22%)
50 
(100%)
Figure 13.5  Levels of agreement among mature students 
(n = 50) that chances of success in finals are good
18
16
14
12
10
10
7
6
16
11
8
6
4
2
0
Strongly
disagree
Number of students
Strongly
agree
Disagree
Agree
Undecided
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Interpreting the Evidence and Reporting the Findings
245
Presenting this data in tabular form is perfectly acceptable, but 
ask yourself whether other methods of presentation would illustrate 
the position more clearly. In this case, numbers may not present 
the same picture as would percentages, although as I’ve pointed 
out before, in small studies it is dangerous to use percentages with-
out the associated numbers. They can be misleading and give the 
impression that the sample is bigger than it in fact is. However, if 
you decide it is likely to be important to discover the proportion of 
students who disagree or agree with the statement by faculty, then 
frequencies can be converted to percentages and a percentage com-
ponent bar chart produced (Figure 13.6).
Does Figure 13.6 illustrate the position better? You will need to 
decide. What does emerge is that the table and the bar chart make 
it clear that there are major differences in the perceptions of Maths 
and Science students compared with Social Science and Humanities. 
The percentage component bar chart demonstrates the extent of the 
differences. So, what is happening in Maths and Science? Were the 
students inadequately prepared? Are there lessons to be learnt from 
this data? Or are the students unnecessarily pessimistic about their 
prospects? All these questions could be followed up in interviews 
with students and with tutors.
The table and bar chart illustrate the extent to which there is a 
relationship between the faculty’s and the students’ perceptions of 
chances of success in finals. Data plotted onto a scattergram (or 
scattergraph) may also indicate a relationship between two vari-
ables. As part of your investigation, you may have hypothesized 
that first-year coursework scores will be the same as the first-year 
Table 13.5  Levels of agreement among mature students that 
chances of success, by faculty, are good
Faculty
Strongly 
disagree
Disagree
Undecided
Agree
Strongly 
agree
Total
Maths
4
0
0
0
0
4
Science
6
6
2
0
0
14
Social 
Science
0
0
4
16
0
20
Humanities
0
1
0
0
11
12
Totals
10
7
6
16
11
50
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
246
examination scores. Unlikely though that would be, let’s say that the 
results support your hypothesis. You discover that first-year exami-
nation scores are indeed the same as coursework scores. If you pro-
duce the figures in a table, they will be the same as in Table 13.6.
Figure 13.6  Percentage of students by faculty who feel their 
chances of doing well in finals are good
Humanities
Social
Science
Science
Maths
Faculty
0
10
20
30
40
50
Percentage in each faculty
60
70
80
90
100
Strongly disagree/disagree
Undecided
Agree/strongly agree
Table 13.6  First-year examination and coursework scores
Student number
Examination score
Coursework score
1
30
30
2
35
35
3
40
40
4
45
45
5
50
50
6
55
55
7
60
60
8
65
65
9
70
70
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Interpreting the Evidence and Reporting the Findings
247
It is clear that the values of the two scores match exactly, 
although I imagine a few questions might be asked at examination 
board meetings if such results were produced! However, never mind. 
These figures are merely used to illustrate how a ‘perfect’ positive 
correlation, which is what we have here, might be presented. Ask.
com explains a correlation as ‘... a relation that exists between two 
things or mathematical values that tend to vary or occur together in a 
way not expected on the basis of chance. For example, there is a cor-
relation between working hard in school and entering college.’ Thus 
in Table 13.6, there is a 100% correlation between the scores of first-
year students and their coursework marks, as the two are identical.
If these data were to be plotted on a graph, with the examina-
tion score on the horizontal axis and the coursework score on the 
vertical axis, then a perfect straight line would be produced, as in 
Figure 13.7.
Another sample might produce different data, as in Table 13.7. 
This data, transferred on to a graph (Figure 13.8), demonstrates 
once more that the correlation is ‘perfect’, but this time, as the exam-
ination score increases, the coursework decreases, and vice versa. 
There is therefore a negative relationship between the two variables. 
In reality, such relationships are rare. More realistic data might be  
in the third example (Table 13.8).
Figure 13.7  Positive relationship between examination and 
coursework scores
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
20
30
40
50
Coursework score
Examination score
60
70
80
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
248
Table 13.7  First-year examination and coursework scores
Student number
Examination score
Coursework score
1
30
70
2
35
65
3
40
60
4
45
55
5
50
50
6
55
45
7
60
40
8
65
35
9
70
30
Figure 13.8  Negative relationship between examination and 
coursework scores
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
20
30
40
50
Coursework score
Examination score
60
70
80
When the points are plotted on the graph, the resulting figure 
(Figure 13.9) shows whether there is a general trend in the results and 
indicates the scatter of results. In this case, since the general trend is 
for an increase in examination score associated with an increase in 
coursework score, a positive relationship exists, but it is not perfect. 
(The line drawn here is merely to illustrate the extent to which the 
scatter points relate to the perfect relationship.)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Interpreting the Evidence and Reporting the Findings
249
Some data, when plotted on a scattergram, may be completely 
random, with no discernible pattern. In this case, it is reasonable to 
assume that there is little or no relationship between variables. In 
other cases, there may be clusters, or groups of points on the scat-
tergram, suggesting that within the total sample there are smaller 
groups within which the individuals have similar characteristics. 
Take care though. Unless calculations for correlation coefficients 
Table 13.8  First-year examination and coursework scores
Student number
Examination score
Coursework score
1
37
45
2
42
40
3
46
44
4
53
68
5
54
60
6
59
50
7
63
55
8
72
85
9
74
75
Figure 13.9  Positive (though not perfect) relationship 
between examination and coursework scores
80
90
70
60
50
40
30
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
Coursework score
Examination score
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
250
are carried out, only inferences can be drawn – not direct causal rela-
tionships. A question and answer page on Yahoo at http://answers.
yahoo.com/question/index?qid=20090912141927AArnxbc defines a 
correlation coefficient as
“
a number between +1 and −1 that describes the type of relationship 
an independent variable has with a dependent variable. A coefficient of 
+1 means a perfect positive relationship, a coefficient of 0 means no 
correlation, and a coefficient of −1 means a perfect negative correlation. 
For example, if a study was performed on the effects of exercise on 
people’s happiness and there was a correlation coefficient of +0.8, it 
would mean that exercise is a good indicator of people’s happiness.”
If you feel correlation coefficients are required, then you will have 
to become familiar with the necessary statistical techniques or to 
make use of software such as IBM’s SPSS Statistics or whatever 
package your supervisor suggests.
Verbal questions
A study of responses to verbal (or open) questions will often provide 
useful pointers to the types of issues it may be worthwhile follow-
ing up in interviews. These questions are often included on ques-
tionnaires to allow respondents to draw attention to anything about 
which they feel strongly. Referring to such responses is often a way 
of starting an interview.
The usual practice is to write or type each response on a separate 
sheet. This allows all items to be organized to see whether there are 
any recurring themes. If you are interested in discovering whether 
students identify any barriers to learning, you will be looking in par-
ticular for statements that relate to problems with study, tutor sup-
port, and so on. Some of the responses will probably provide useful 
quotations to illustrate certain points in the report – although the 
temptation to give greater emphasis to statements that happen to 
support your particular point of view has to be resisted.
Some form of content analysis may be necessary to deal with such 
material. If so, follow the same content analysis procedures as would 
be applied for the study of documents (see Chapter 7). As always, you 
will be looking for categories and for common criteria, if any.
Conclusions
Only the simplest methods of presentation have been considered in 
this chapter. They provide a starting point. The tables and charts are 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Interpreting the Evidence and Reporting the Findings
251
easy to manage. You may be able to devise different question types 
and different methods of analysis and presentation. The advantage 
of familiarizing yourself with a range of question types is that, once 
you have experimented with different formats and know how to pro-
duce tables, charts and graphs, you will be able to draw on whichever 
format suits the data and the purpose. A diagram can often simplify 
quite complex data that could take a paragraph or more to explain.
When you move on to larger and more complex investigations, 
you will need to familiarize yourself with more complex methods of 
analysis and with the use of statistical software programs. Try out 
some of the programs, using data with which you are familiar, pos-
sibly data that has been collated, analysed and presented ‘by hand’ 
in connection with one of your 100-hour projects. This will allow you 
to understand the principles and get to grips with the practicalities 
of the software.
Decide what data you need to collect for your 
research topic before deciding how you will pre-
sent the findings, rather than choosing to collect 
data that will fit a method of presentation.
Interpreting the Evidence and Reporting 
the Findings Checklist
1.  Data must be 
recorded as soon as 
it is available.
Make sure you prepare and 
pilot summary sheets before 
the main data collection 
begins.
Q
2.  Look for similarities, 
groupings, clusters, 
categories and 
items of particular 
significance.
100 separate pieces of 
interesting information will 
mean nothing to a researcher 
or a reader until they are 
analysed and interpreted.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
252
3.  First-thoughts 
categories will be a 
start in the process 
of collating findings.
You may find you have to 
amend them after your pilot 
studies and when your data is 
assembled.
Q
4.  Prepare final 
summary sheets.
Your pilot studies will 
show you whether they 
are appropriate for your 
purposes.
Q
5.  Experiment with 
different ways of 
presenting findings. 
Tables, bar charts, 
histograms. Other 
diagrams or graphs?
If you plan to use computer 
statistical packages, find out 
what help is available before 
you begin your pilot studies 
and try out possible packages.
Q
6.  If you need to 
discover the average 
of certain values, 
decide whether the 
mean, median or 
mode is the most 
suitable.
Remember that each of these 
measures of central tendency 
has different uses.
Q
7.  Used on their 
own, means and 
medians may not 
be sufficiently 
descriptive to 
provide a complete 
picture of the data.
A measure of dispersion 
may be required – range, 
interquartile range or 
standard deviation.
Q
8.  Try out codes for 
your data. If you 
plan to use computer 
statistical packages, 
you will require 
numerical codes. 
If not, letters will 
suffice.
Do not attempt complex 
statistical techniques unless 
you have the expertise to 
cope. It is perfectly possible 
to produce a worthwhile 
investigation without an 
in-depth knowledge of 
statistics. However, if you 
can familiarize yourself 
sufficiently well with 
statistical software packages, 
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Interpreting the Evidence and Reporting the Findings
253
Further reading
There are many good books that deal with basic statistical techniques. 
However, if you consider yourself to be statistically challenged and 
that you need to learn more, ask your supervisor and the library staff 
for information about courses dealing with statistical techniques and 
computer analysis – and make sure you attend. If any of the following 
are on your library shelves, you might wish to consult the introduction, 
contents pages and indexes of one or more of them to see whether your 
understanding of ‘basic’ is the same as that of the authors.
Alaszewski, A. (2006) Using Diaries for Social Research. London: 
Sage. 
If you have selected diaries as one type of data collection, then Chapter 
5 of this book is useful. Alaszewski addresses the analysis of narrative, 
conversational, and other qualitative research; identifying themes in 
text – and coding (converting data into numbers).
Bryman, A. and Cramer, D. (2011) Quantitative Data Analysis 
with IBM SPSS 17, 18 and 19: A Guide for Social Scientists. 
London: Routledge.
Cramer, D. (2003) Advanced Quantitative Data Analysis. 
Buckingham: Open University Press. 
This book considers a variety of techniques used to analyse quantita-
tive data. Useful examples are provided, together with a glossary of key 
concepts. Some previous basic statistical knowledge would be helpful.
they can save you many hours 
and produce good-looking 
charts, tables and figures – 
once you know how.
9.  All data requires 
interpretation.
It is not enough only to 
describe.
Q
10.  Don’t claim more for 
your research than 
your evidence will 
support.
And watch out for possible 
bias.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
254
Denscombe, M. (2010) Ground Rules for Good Research: 
Guidelines for Good Practice (2nd edn). Maidenhead: Open 
University Press. 
Chapter 10 of this very readable book deals with issues relating to 
generalization, including criteria for the selection of samples and case 
studies, generalizability and transferability, and guidelines for good 
practice.
Gibbs, G.R. (2008) Analysing Qualitative Data. London: Sage. 
Gibbs outlines how to select the most appropriate tool for analysing 
data, and reminds us of various challenges in interpreting data gener-
ated in qualitative research.
Hardy, M.A. and Bryman, A. (eds) (2004) Handbook of Data 
Analysis. London: Sage. 
This is a very good guide to basic issues in data analysis.
Miles, M.B. and Huberman, A.M. (1994) Qualitative Data Analysis 
(2nd edn). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
This book has since been updated but everything in this second edition 
is worth reading and noting. I particularly like Chapter 3, ‘Focussing 
and bounding the collection of data’, which includes ‘Linking qualitative 
and quantitative data’, ‘Management issues bearing on analysis’ and 
‘Data management’, and in Chapter 4, ‘Early steps in analysis’, which 
considers issues relating to codes and coding – and, of course, much 
more.
Opie, C. (ed.) (2004) Doing Educational Research: A Guide for 
First-time Researchers. London: Sage. 
Chapter 7 by Clive Opie considers the statistical analysis of quantita-
tive and qualitative data. Chapter 8 by Ann-Marie Bathmaker outlines 
the use of the NUD-IST (Non-Numerical, Unstructured Data Indexing, 
Searching and Theorising) software for analysing qualitative data. 
Chapter 9 by Michael Pomerantz discusses the ATLAS.ti computer soft-
ware application, which allows the user to study and analyse interview 
transcripts. Opie ends the book with a glossary of terms used in quan-
titative analysis.
Pallant, J. (2013) SPSS Survival Manual: A Step by Step Guide 
to Data Analysis using IBM SPSS (5th edn). Maidenhead: Open 
University Press. 
Pallant provides examples of ways of choosing the right data analysis 
techniques, formulating the right questions, analysing data and report-
ing results, using IBM SPSS Statistics.
Punch, K.F. (2014) Introduction to Social Research: Quantitative 
and Qualitative Approaches (3rd edn). London: Sage. 
Chapter 7 deals with the analysis of qualitative data and Chapter 10 
discusses the analysis of quantitative data.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Interpreting the Evidence and Reporting the Findings
255
Rugg, G. (2007) Using Statistics: A Gentle Introduction. 
Maidenhead: Open University Press. 
This very readable book guides the reader gently through the field of 
statistics, with few calculations and fewer equations.
Ten Have, P. (2007) Doing Conversation Analysis (2nd edn). 
London: Sage. 
This book provides researchers with practical suggestions for conduct-
ing conversation analysis research.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

256
Key term
The abstract
260
Writing the 
Report
14
INTRODUCTION
This chapter covers the final stage of your research project – the writing of the 
report itself. After all your hard work planning your research topic, using research 
tools to gather information and analysing your data, you now need to shape this 
into a written report that summarizes your findings and does justice to your 
efforts. This can seem daunting. This final chapter shows you how to approach 
the task of writing your report step-by-step and includes:
•	Advice on the practicalities of writing – getting into good habits, finding a pro-
ductive time and place for you to focus, and devising an approach to writing 
that works best for you.
•	How to structure the report – step-by-step guides to its key components from 
title page to appendices, including advice on the main sections such as the 
abstract, analysis, discussion, and the all-important summary and conclusion.
•	Working through drafts, anticipating the number of revisions, taking a critical 
view of your research and knowing when to stop.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Writing the Report
257
Getting started
When all the hard work of gathering and analysing evidence is com-
plete, you will need to write the final report. Bodgan and Biklen, 
writing about the problems of getting started, offer the following 
advice:
“
Many writers are big procrastinators. We find countless reasons not 
to get started. Even when we finally get ourselves seated at our desks, 
we always seem to find diversions: make the coffee, sharpen the pencil, 
go to the bathroom, thumb through more literature, sometimes even get 
up and return to the field. Remember that you are never ‘ready’ to write; 
writing is something you must make a conscious decision to do and then 
discipline yourself to follow through.” (Bogdan and Biklen 2003: 205)
But this is easier said than done. However, remember that a study 
is not finished until it is written up and, in your original planning I 
hope you allowed time for writing – and rewriting. I always have a 
sense of impending doom when a student says, ‘All I have to do now 
is to write the project report/dissertation/thesis and I should be able 
to finish it in a week or two.’ However, enough doom! I’m confident 
you will have followed some of the earlier advice in this book, that 
your bibliographical records, and back-up copies, will be in good 
order, with notes and useful quotations to guide your writing. I’m 
similarly confident that you will not have started your project unless 
your objectives were clear (though you may have amended them 
as your investigation developed). If you adopted the principle of 
‘writing-as-you-go’ throughout your research, you will already have 
some drafts; and even if they are rough, it’s always better to face 
badly written and incomplete drafts than a blank page or screen.
The final writing task
Writing requires discipline, and even the most experienced of 
researchers need to impose some sort of self-control to ensure that 
the writing task is completed on time. There are no hard and fast 
rules about when and how to write. We all have different ways of 
working and what suits one person may not suit another. Some col-
leagues are firm that it is best to write according to a strict schedule 
(always between 8 and 10 p.m. on weekdays; always between 6 and 
8 a.m. every day). I’ve tried to do that, but I just don’t seem able to 
keep to such a regular pattern. Things, and sometimes people, get 
in my way. Ideally, I have to be quiet and alone to write, with all 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
258
my source material around me. Other people say they can’t write in 
silence. They need the radio or music in the background, while oth-
ers are unable to concentrate without the use of headphones.
Some writers and researchers are convinced it’s a good idea to 
aim for a certain number of words in every writing session, and I 
did know one person who could produce 1000 words of good quality 
writing most days, but only one. I’ve never managed to achieve that, 
although I do make plans to complete particular sections or even 
paragraphs at one sitting. And if I’m in the middle of a good writing 
session and come across an incomplete reference, I now don’t stop 
to look it up. I make a note or highlight it, and then return to it later. 
If I try to correct it immediately, the time it takes might break my 
concentration. I might then feel I need a break anyway and that it is 
absolutely the right time to make a cup of tea, tidy up the kitchen, 
do some cleaning. On second thoughts, abandon the cleaning and let 
somebody else tidy up the kitchen. One job might lead to another – 
and then that’s the end of the writing session.
As far as I can, I try to work to an agenda and if I can achieve 
more than one item, I feel full of virtue and have even been known 
to give myself time off for such good behaviour. We all have to have 
our little treats in life.
I try to set aside writing days or half days when I know I can be 
more or less alone and free from distractions, but I only write for 
two hours at a time. I’ve learnt that if I press on hour after hour, I 
begin to write rubbish. I don’t know it’s rubbish at the time but when 
I read it after it has ‘gone cold’ the next day or next week, then I most 
certainly do. After two hours or so, assuming I’ve reached a stage 
from which it will be easy to move on, I can then have a cup of tea (or 
even something stronger), wander around, check my messages, deal 
with that irritating, incomplete reference, take the dog for a walk – 
anything to give myself a break before I move on to the next stage.
I’m regularly told by colleagues that I have bad writing habits 
and perhaps I do. However, I am quite disciplined in a number of 
ways. My index and reference systems are generally quite good, so 
I can find what I need most of the time. Bitter experience has taught 
me that keeping notes, transcripts, references and rough drafts in 
what Miles and Huberman (1994: 56) describe as an ‘alpine collec-
tion of information’ is a thoroughly bad idea. Experience has also 
taught me to print on one side of the paper only, and in the early 
drafts, to try to keep to one or two paragraphs to a page. And yes, 
I know researchers who still handwrite all drafts. That approach 
suits them and that’s fine. I know that my early drafts won’t be good 
enough, so I need to be able to move paragraphs and even sentences 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Writing the Report
259
around – and so I find it better to use Word from the start. We all 
have our own ways of doing things and that’s good, as long as we 
each have some system and plan of our own that enables us to 
write to and keep to an agenda (more or less).
Just one more thing (or, to be more precise, one or two more 
things) before I move on to the structure of your report. Never throw 
away or delete early drafts. Open a junk file. Call it what you like – a 
dump, junk or something-else file. Tidy up before you make a start 
on your final writing task. Make sure you name and date each item 
before you dump it. You never know what might come in handy at 
some later stage. I have found that saving a draft of my writing at 
the end of each day in a folder named with the title or topic of my 
research and dating it is invaluable. While it means that I amass a 
number of files of the report in date order, I can go back to an earlier 
draft if necessary, for example to retrieve a reference I have acciden-
tally deleted or to re-read a section that I have altered and have had 
second thoughts about.
Structuring the report
Institutions and departments almost always provide guidelines 
about the way the final report should be presented and, if they do, it 
goes without saying that they should be followed to the letter. If for 
any reason they are not provided, something on the following lines 
will generally be acceptable.
1 Title page
Include the title of your study, your name and the date. The title 
should accurately reflect the nature of your study and should be 
brief and to the point. A subtitle may be provided if it clarifies the 
purposes of the study.
2 Acknowledgements
You may (or may not) wish to acknowledge the help given to you 
throughout your research. If you do, then acknowledgements and 
thanks generally come after the title page.
3 Contents
The contents page will be produced when your report is completed.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
260
4 The abstract
In most cases, an abstract will be required, though practices vary, 
so consult the ‘house’ rules. It is quite difficult to say in a few words 
what your investigation set out to do, the methods employed and 
what conclusions were reached. The following example is one way 
in which the task might be approached:
“
This project attempts to identify effective teaching and learning 
strategies and any barriers to learning as perceived by mature students 
at Bramhope University. Data were gathered from questionnaires, 
interviews and observation of, and participation in, lectures, seminars 
and tutorials. The report concludes that there is scope for consideration 
of more varied approaches to the delivery of the curriculum and for 
consultations with mature students about ways in which changes might 
be introduced.”
If you are allowed more space, you will be able to develop this 
abstract to provide the reader with more information, but for short 
reports, something along the above lines will generally suffice. Get 
into the habit of looking at abstracts usually placed at the beginning 
of journal articles. Ask yourself whether they give a good idea of 
what the article is about, how data were collected and what conclu-
sions were reached.
5 Aims and purpose of the study
This should be a brief explanation of the purpose of the research. 
Explain the research problem in a few sentences. State aims/objec-
tives/hypotheses. Provide any background to the study in order to 
place it in its context.
Draw attention to any limitations of the study at this stage. An 
individual researcher with only 100 hours or so to complete a project 
can neither hope to become involved in complex sampling techniques 
nor to interview hundreds of people. You cannot do everything in a 
small study, and your supervisor will know that, but in this section 
you should make it clear that you know what the limitations of the 
study are. Be honest.
6 Review of the literature
Not all reports will require a review of previous research, though for 
Master’s and Doctoral studies a review will normally be expected. 
In a short project, and subject to your supervisor’s agreement, you 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Writing the Report
261
may have decided to use your reading mainly to support or to reject 
arguments throughout the report, but the value of a review to the 
reader is that it explains the context and background of the study. 
Remember Haywood and Wragg’s warning in Chapter 6, that critical 
reviews can too often turn out to be uncritical reviews – ‘the fur-
niture sale catalogue, in which everything merits a one-paragraph 
entry no matter how skilfully it has been conducted’ (Haywood and 
Wragg 1982: 2). A selection has to be made, and only books and arti-
cles that relate directly to the topic should be included.
The review, if required, can be written first and, if you have man-
aged to discipline yourself sufficiently well to write up sections and 
sub-sections as you have completed them, much of the work of this 
section will be ready for revision before you begin to collect data. 
You may find that you need to adapt your original version, but you 
should not need to start from the beginning by reading through notes 
to decide what should be included and what left out.
7 Methods of data collection
An alternative heading might be ‘Some considerations of method’ – or 
any other title that in your view describes the content of the section 
well. This section explains how the problem was investigated and 
why particular methods and techniques were employed. Accounts 
of the procedure, size of sample, method of selection, choice of vari-
ables and controls, and tests of measurement and statistical analy-
sis, if any, should be provided. Consult your supervisor about how 
much detail is required. Point out that it is unnecessary to describe 
in detail any tests or procedures that are well known and frequently 
used, but if you have devised any of your own systems of measure-
ment, it is likely that full information will be needed.
Important terms should be defined precisely and any deficiencies 
in the methods mentioned. It is important to bear in mind that, in 
certain kinds of investigation, the research needs to be repeatable, 
and a fellow researcher should be able to obtain enough information 
from this section to make this possible.
8 Statement of results
This is the heart of the report and will consist of text and, if neces-
sary, tables or figures, depending on the nature of the project. The 
way results are presented is important. Tables, charts, graphs and 
other figures should illustrate and illuminate the text. If they do 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
262
not, then there is no point in them taking up space. The text, which 
should be written after the results are prepared, should not duplicate 
information in the tables and figures but should highlight significant 
aspects of the findings so that all relevant facts are presented in a 
way that draws attention to what is most important. It is quite an art 
to achieve this balance, and you may find you need several drafts 
before you are satisfied.
All tables and figures should be numbered, given a title and care-
fully checked before you submit your report. Tables are generally 
numerical presentations in lists or columns, though there can be 
tables of names or other items. Figures are other types of presenta-
tion of data. It is customary for the number and title of a table to 
appear above the table, and those for a figure below the figure. It is 
quite a good idea to look at the way other students have presented 
them – and take care to follow any institutional guidelines.
9 Analysis and discussion
It is often best to start this section with a restatement of the prob-
lem before discussing how the results affect existing knowledge 
of the subject. If your research aimed to test certain hypotheses, 
then this section should demonstrate whether they were or were not 
supported by the evidence. Any deficiencies in the research design 
should be mentioned, with suggestions about other approaches that 
perhaps might have been more appropriate.
Most researchers find it best to write sections 6, 7 and 8 in 
sequence to ensure continuity and logical progression. It is quite fea-
sible to write some sections as discrete units at different times, but 
these three sections need to be considered as a whole. If you have 
to take a break from writing, make sure you re-read everything that 
has gone before when you return, in order to ensure a smooth con-
tinuation – and to avoid repetition.
10 Summary and conclusions
The main conclusions of the report that have been discussed in sec-
tion 8 should be summarized here, briefly and simply. Only conclu-
sions that can be justifiably drawn from the findings should be made. 
That sounds (and is) obvious, but there is often a great temptation to 
include an opinion for which no evidence is provided in the report. 
Take care or you may spoil a good report by including an unsubstan-
tiated comment.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Writing the Report
263
Before you write this section, read through the whole report and 
make a note of key points. Readers who want a quick idea of what 
your research is about will look at the abstract, possibly the intro-
duction and almost certainly at the summary and conclusions. This 
final section should be sufficiently succinct and clearly expressed to 
enable readers to understand quite clearly what research has been 
done and the conclusions that have been drawn from the evidence.
11 List of references
It is worthwhile at this stage in your writing to refer to Blaxter and 
colleagues’ guidance on the use and abuse of references. They write 
that references should not be included to ‘impress your readers with 
the scope of your reading’, or to ‘replace the need for you to express 
your own thoughts’ but they should be used to:
•	‘justify and support your arguments
•	allow you to make comparisons with other research . . .
•	demonstrate your familiarity with your field of work.’
(Blaxter et al. 2010: 130).
You are not in the business of producing the longest list of refer-
ences ever known and it would be a pity to spoil a good report with 
irrelevant references, so check carefully that each one is there for a 
purpose.
Opinions vary as to whether a full bibliography or a list of refer-
ences, or both, should be included. My view is that only items that 
have been cited in the report should be included. However, some 
institutions also require a bibliography, which includes all sources 
consulted during the preparation of the investigation. You will need 
to consult your supervisor about institutional practice.
If you adopted the Harvard method of referencing, which I have 
recommended in this book, then references will appear in alpha-
betical order, which simplifies the process and avoids overlap. The 
amount of time it takes you to produce a bibliography, list of refer-
ences, or both, will depend on how meticulous you were when you 
first recorded your sources. This is the time when all your hard work 
and systematic recording will really pay off.
12 Appendices
Copies of any data collection instruments (questionnaires, interview 
schedules, and so on) that have been used should be included in an 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
264
appendix, unless you have been instructed otherwise. Your tutor will 
not wish to receive all the completed questionnaires but one copy of 
any data collection instrument that has been used is generally required.
13 Length
Your supervisor will offer you guidance on length and many institu-
tions have their own rules about this. If you have not been told what 
length is expected, then ask. If a maximum number of words is stipu-
lated, try not to exceed that number. You may have plus or minus 10 
per cent of the word count to play with. Ensure you keep within the 
limits or you may be penalized. I confess that, sometimes against 
institutional rules, I was not willing to mark down an outstanding 
piece of work because it was too long. My view was that outstanding 
work was outstanding work, whatever the length. However, best to 
ignore me. Just make sure you know what your department/institu-
tion/supervisor require and do your best to conform.
14 Quotations
All quotations must, of course, be acknowledged. Remember that 
your tutor has probably read the same books, so is likely to recog-
nize the source. As I said in Chapter 4, if you are quoting only a few 
words or one sentence, it will be sufficient to indicate this by using 
inverted commas in the main text, with the source in brackets. For 
example: As Laws (2013: 306) says, ‘The title should be of immediate 
interest to the reader, as with a newspaper headline.’
If the quotation is longer, indent it, with the author, date of publi-
cation and page number at the end, as in the following:
“
Your style should be determined by your own natural way of 
expressing yourself and the needs of your audience. However, while 
some audiences might be impressed by a complex way of writing, the 
main purpose of the exercise is to convey information ... Clear and 
simple expression will help people to make sense of the material you 
present, and therefore to act on it.”
(Laws 2013: 288)
As I’m sure you know, the three full stops (ellipsis) indicate an 
omission.
15 Presentation
Reports are generally typed using double line spacing. Pages should 
be numbered. Print on one side of the page only, leaving a left-hand 
margin of one and a half inches.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Writing the Report
265
Check your institution’s rules about presentation. For a short pro-
ject report, it will generally be enough to provide a title page but 
rules will vary significantly for dissertations and theses. Some insti-
tutions require them to be bound; others do not, so once again, check 
what is required.
The need for revision
I’ve never known anyone who has been able to produce a perfect 
first draft, so don’t convince yourself that you will be the exception. 
You won’t. You may find you need two, three or even more drafts 
before you are satisfied with the final result, so time must be set 
aside for this writing and refining process.
One problem about spending so much time on drafts is that 
parts of them may seem right, simply because you have read them 
so often. Another is that you may be so familiar with the subject 
that you assume something is understandable to the reader when 
it is not. Time will give you a better perspective on your writing, 
so you should put the script aside, for several days if you can, so 
that you can return to it with a more critical eye. This will help 
you to identify repetitive passages, errors of expression and lack 
of clarity.
Work through your first draft section by section to ensure its 
sense, accuracy, logical sequencing and soundness of expression. If 
you wrote or typed only one paragraph on one side of each sheet, as 
suggested earlier, this correcting and reordering stage will be rela-
tively straightforward and this will make cutting and pasting much 
easier. Check spelling. Spell checks help, though remember that most 
use American spelling and most do not check spelling in context. So 
homophones (words that sound the same but are spelled differently) 
will go unnoticed (e.g. ‘there’ and ‘their’). Check quotations, punctua-
tion, references, repetition, consistency of tenses and the overuse 
of certain terms. Roget’s Thesaurus of English Words and Phrases 
may help you to find alternative forms of expression.
Remind yourself as you read that whatever structure has been 
selected, your readers will wish to be quite clear why you carried 
out the investigation, how you conducted it, what methods you used 
to gather your evidence and what you found out. It is not enough 
to describe: you will be expected to analyse, to evaluate and, if the 
evidence merits it, to make recommendations.
If research findings are to be put into practice, they have to be 
presented in a way in which practitioners and policy-makers can 
understand them. There is no special academic language that should 
be used in academic papers and as I keep saying, good, clear English 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
266
remains good, clear English, whatever the context. Technical lan-
guage may well save time when you are talking to colleagues with 
a similar background to your own, but it rarely translates well on to 
paper, and your readers (and your examiner) may become irritated 
by too much jargon or obscure language.
The need for revision and rewriting was emphasized in a radio 
interview, when a world-famous economist who had many scholarly 
books to his credit, was complimented by the interviewer on his 
style of writing. ‘It must be a great advantage’, said the interviewer, 
‘to be able to write so freely and so easily. How do you do it?’ The 
economist revealed his secret as follows:
“
First, I produce a draft and then I leave it alone. I go back to it after a 
few days and decide it has been written by an ignoramus, so I throw it 
away. Then I produce a second draft and leave it alone for a few days. I 
read it and decide there are the germs of a few good ideas there but it is 
badly written, so I put it to one side. After a few days, I write a third 
draft. When I read it again, I discover the ideas are developing, that 
there is some coherence to my arguments and that the grammar is not 
too bad. I correct this draft, change paragraphs around, insert new 
thoughts, remove overlapping passages and begin to feel progress is 
being made. After a few days, I read through this fourth draft, make 
final corrections and hand over the fifth draft to the typist. At this stage, 
I find I have usually achieved the degree of spontaneity for which I have 
been striving.”
You may not need five drafts. Three may be enough if you write well, 
but rest assured that no one gets away with one or two – and many 
of us take four or five.
When you have completed the writing to the best of your ability, 
try to enlist the help of someone who will read your draft to look for 
any remaining errors. My partner is particularly good at locating 
errors, repetition, omissions, conclusions from insufficient evidence, 
sections that make no sense and several dozen other sins. Sometimes 
I accept the corrections and sometimes I don’t, but it’s amazing how 
many times I have read a script and never noticed some obvious 
omission or repetition. Another pair of eyes is always helpful, even 
if your reader knows nothing about your specialist area. And if you 
cannot find anyone willing to read and comment on your draft, you 
might read it out loud, though make sure you are alone or your fam-
ily might think the strain has been too much for you! Reading aloud 
is particularly useful for detecting the need for better linking pas-
sages and, perhaps surprisingly, it can sometimes reveal awkward 
wording that you had not noticed before.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Writing the Report
267
You will not be able to write your report first time 
round. Leave time to write several drafts. Before 
you submit your report, leave a few days between 
finishing your final draft and proofreading it. 
That way you are more likely to notice mistakes 
or aspects of your writing that you could improve.
Any possibility of plagiarism?
In Chapter 4, I discussed the issue of plagiarism but this is suffi-
ciently important to repeat here. You are plagiarizing if you copy 
someone else’s words and claim them as your own and you cannot 
use other people’s data or their ideas unless you provide adequate 
acknowledgement. I’m confident your institution will have guide-
lines on plagiarism, so make sure you read them. Excuses such as 
‘Nobody ever told me I couldn’t take assignments or answers to exam 
questions off the Internet without acknowledgement’ or ‘Everybody 
else does it, so why not me?’ are not acceptable, and if it is discov-
ered that you have committed plagiarism, you could be suspended 
or even expelled from your course. So, take great care to ensure that 
you have been meticulous in recording sources, making it clear in 
your notes which are direct quotations, your paraphrasing or merely 
your own thoughts.
There has been sufficient publicity to ensure that all researchers 
know, or should know, what plagiarism means and what the penal-
ties for infringements are. Some unfortunate, well-publicized cases 
have brought discredit to the individuals and the institutions con-
cerned, and this issue is not going to go away. Make sure you are 
absolutely clear about what is permissible and what is not.
Evaluating your own research
There are no universally accepted criteria for judging research 
reports but if you were asked to review a piece of research con-
ducted by someone else, you would need to decide how you would 
judge it. Look at a journal article, or a novel, assuming you have had 
time to read a novel recently, and ask yourself, ‘Is this a good report/
novel?’ If you consider it is good – or bad, try to decide how you 
came to that conclusion. Then, read your own draft. Do you think 
it is good? Are some parts better than others? Why? It’s not easy 
to make such judgements about your own work, but better that you 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
268
should identify areas of weakness yourself, while there is time to 
correct them, rather than leaving it to the examiner. So, before you 
hand over what you hope will be your final draft, ask yourself:
  1	 Is the meaning clear? Are there any obscure passages?
  2	 Is the report well-written? Check tenses, grammar, spelling, 
overlapping passages, punctuation, jargon.
  3	 Is the referencing well done? Are there any omissions? Are any 
references incomplete?
  4	 Does the abstract give the reader a clear idea of what is in the 
report?
  5	 Does the title indicate the nature of the study?
  6	 Are the objectives or purposes of the study stated clearly?
  7	 Are the objectives or purposes of the study fulfilled?
  8	 If hypotheses were postulated, are they proved or not proved?
  9	 Has a sufficient amount of literature relating to the topic been 
studied?
10	 Does the literature review, if any, provide an indication of the 
state of knowledge in the subject? Is your topic placed in the 
context of the area of study as a whole?
11	 Are all terms clearly defined?
12	 Are the selected methods of data collection accurately described? 
Are they suitable for the task? Why were they chosen?
13	 Are any limitations of the study clearly presented?
14	 Have any statistical techniques been used? If so, are they appro-
priate for the task?
15	 Are the data analysed and interpreted or merely described?
16	 Are the results clearly presented? Are tables, diagrams and fig-
ures well-drawn and labelled?
17	 Are conclusions based on evidence? Have any claims been made 
that cannot be substantiated?
18	 Is there any evidence of bias? Any emotive terms or intemperate 
language?
19	 Is the data likely to be reliable? Could another researcher repeat 
the methods used and have a reasonable chance of getting simi-
lar results?
20	 Are recommendations, if any, feasible?
21	 Are there any unnecessary items in the appendix?
22	 Would you give the report a pass if you were the examiner? If 
not, perhaps an overhaul is necessary.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Writing the Report
269
Writing the Report Checklist
1.  Set deadlines.
Allocate provisional dates for 
sections, sub-sections and the 
whole report. You may need 
to make adjustments, but 
the handover date is fixed, 
so work towards it. Keep an 
eye on your schedule. Make a 
note in your diary, put dates 
on the wall of your study or 
somewhere obvious so that 
it will be a regular reminder 
of where you should be on 
certain dates.
Q
2.  Write up sections 
according to your 
time plan, if possible. 
Stop at a point from 
which it is easy to 
resume writing.
Don’t bother too much about 
perfect writing at this stage. 
Better to settle for a rough 
draft rather than run over 
time with constant correction 
and rewriting. There will be 
time for refinement later on.
Q
3.  Create a rhythm 
of work, if at all 
possible.
If your writing is going well, 
or even if it isn’t, don’t stop to 
check references. Highlight or 
underline them or insert stickers 
on sections and/or pages where 
more work is needed and return 
to this task later.
Q
4.  Make a start on your 
literature review.
If you have been sufficiently 
disciplined to write a draft 
literature review when most 
of your main reading was 
complete, then the task of 
literature writing at this stage 
will be – well, not exactly 
easy, but much less difficult.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
270
5.  Leave space for 
revisions, additions 
or good ideas.
Just face the fact that you 
won’t manage a first, perfect 
draft, so make it easy to 
insert (or delete, if necessary). 
Print on one side of the page.
Q
6.  Publicize your plans 
and your timescale.
You may need a little help 
from your family and friends 
to meet deadlines.
Q
7.  Check that all 
essential sections 
have been covered.
Abstract, outline of the 
research, review of previous 
work, statement of the scope 
and aims of the investigation, 
description of procedures, 
statement of results, 
discussion, summary and 
conclusions, and references. 
Anything else?
Q
8.  Check length 
and format meet 
institutional 
requirements.
You don’t want to be failed on 
a technicality.
Q
9.  Don’t forget the 
title page. Does 
your title reflect the 
contents of your 
report?
If you are preparing a 
dissertation or thesis, make 
sure you know what your 
institution’s rules are regarding 
binding or not binding.
Q
10.  Any 
acknowledgements 
and thanks?
If so, they usually come at 
the start of the report, but 
practice varies, so check what 
the local rules say.
Q
11.  Include headings 
where possible and 
where appropriate.
Anything to make it easier for 
readers to follow the structure 
will help. And it helps you to 
ensure you are following a 
logical pattern.
Q
12.  Number tables and 
figures, and provide 
titles.
Put numbers and titles above 
tables, but below figures.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Writing the Report
271
13.  Make sure all 
quotations, authors’ 
good ideas, your 
paraphrases of 
authors’ work, and 
so on are suitably 
acknowledged.
Check that quotations are 
presented in a consistent 
format and omissions 
indicated by ellipsis (...).
Q
14.  Appendices should 
only include items 
that are required for 
reference purposes. 
Do not clutter 
the report with 
irrelevant items.
Unless instructed otherwise, 
one copy of each data 
collection instrument should 
be included.
Q
15.  Provide a list of 
references. Check 
that you have used 
a consistent system 
and that there are 
no incomplete 
references.
Unless instructed otherwise, 
include only items to which 
reference is made in the 
report.
Q
16.  Remember to leave 
sufficient time 
for revision and 
rewriting – even at 
this late stage.
Check that you have written 
in plain but good English and 
without unnecessary jargon.
Q
17.  Try to get someone 
to read your almost-
final draft report.
Fresh eyes will often see 
errors you have overlooked.
Q
18.  Take note of any 
comments from 
your readers.
And thank him/her/them. It 
takes time to read a long, or 
even a short, report.
Q
19.  Read your report 
aloud.
Sometimes, readers are too 
embarrassed to point out 
relatively small errors but 
reading aloud will quite often 
identify any dubious wording, 
punctuation and poor linkages.
Q
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Doing your research project
272
20.  Check through the 
22 questions at the 
end of this chapter 
for a last time. Are 
you sure you have 
dealt with each one 
honestly?
When you are satisfied 
your report is as good as 
you can make it, it’s time 
to type it up. Check that 
you are conforming to any 
departmental/institutional 
rules about format.
Q
Finally, it’s done! Congratulate yourself on an excellent job com-
pleted on time. Hand in your report, dissertation or thesis and give 
yourself a night off! But don’t throw away any drafts until your 
examiner tells you that you have passed with flying colours.
Further reading
Creme, P. and Lea, M.R. (2008) Writing at University: A Guide for 
Students (3rd edn). Maidenhead: Open University Press. 
This is a guide to university writing skills for undergraduates, post-
graduates and for large and small projects. It deals with report and the-
sis writing, journals and the Internet.
Denscombe, M. (2010) The Good Research Guide for Small-scale 
Social Research Projects (4th edn). Maidenhead: Open University 
Press. 
Chapter 15, ‘Writing up the research’, goes through the procedures 
involved, what should be included, style and presentation.
Hall, G. and Longman, J. (2008) The Postgraduate’s Companion. 
London: Sage. 
This book sets out to provide support and guidance for anyone undertak-
ing a research degree. However, much of the guidance applies equally 
to students embarking on a 100-hour research project. It includes the 
supervisory relationship, writing your thesis, research training, com-
pletion and, where appropriate, the Viva.
Hyatt, D. (2004) Writing research, in C. Opie (ed.) Doing 
Educational Research: A Guide to First-time Researchers. London: 
Sage. 
In this chapter, Hyatt discusses what is required for student academic 
writing, academic writing conventions, structuring a research-based 
assignment and ‘Some advice I’ve been given (or wish I’d been given!)’.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Writing the Report
273
Laws, S. with Harper, C. and Marcus, R. (2013) Research for 
Development: A Practical Guide (2nd edn). London: Sage. 
Chapter 14, ‘Writing effectively’, also includes guidance about what 
must be included in a research report (and what must be left out), and 
warnings about common pitfalls.
Levin, P. (2011) Excellent Dissertations! (2nd edn). Maidenhead: 
Open University Press.
A useful guide to doing research – and writing it up.
Maimon, E. and Peritz, J. (2009) A Writer’s Resource: MLA Update. 
Buckingham: Open University Press. 
This interesting book addresses many of the problems facing research-
ers, particularly as they write assignments, research papers, theses – 
and reviewing and editing what has been written. American, so take 
care with differences in spelling and grammar.
Miles, M.B. and Huberman, A.M. (1994) Qualitative Data Analysis 
(2nd edn). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Chapter 12, ‘Producing reports’, provides brief but good advice about 
structuring a report, under the headings of ‘Voices, genres, and stances 
(How do we speak to the reader?)’, ‘Style’, ‘Formats’ and ‘Structures’.
Murray, N. and Hughes, G. (2008) Writing Up Your University 
Assignments and Research Projects. Maidenhead: Open University 
Press. 
A handbook for research students who feel they need help in writing 
essays, dissertations and other research projects. It includes what the 
authors describe as a ‘toolkit’ with help on punctuation, and a glossary 
of key terms.
Murray, R. and Moore, S. (2006) A Handbook of Academic Writing: 
A Fresh Approach. Maidenhead: Open University Press. 
This book is written mainly with Master’s and Doctoral students in 
mind, though the advice given can equally be applied to writing up any 
research project.
Oliver, P. (2014) Writing your Thesis (3rd edn). London: Sage. 
Considers strategies for organizing your work as you write and dis-
cusses techniques of academic writing.
Wolcott, H.F. (2009) Writing Up Qualitative Research (3rd edn). 
London: Sage. 
In Chapter 2, I said that everything Wolcott has written is worth reading 
and this book in particular is excellent. I still go back to it, particularly 
if I am stuck and just can’t get going. His chapter headings are ‘Get 
going’, ‘Keep going’, ‘Linking up’, ‘Tightening up’ and ‘Finishing up’.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

274
Glossary
(The) Abstract A short paragraph that explains concisely what an 
investigation sets out to do, the methods employed, the main conclusions 
reached and recommendations for action as a result of the findings. It 
is usually found on the front of the research report or, if the research is 
presented in a journal article, at the top of the first page.
Academic research community website A location on the web where 
members upload their ideas or research to share their findings and to 
ask fellow academics to comment on their drafts, offer advice or review 
research studies they have completed. The site usually allows members to 
search for relevant research papers that have been uploaded. Belonging 
to a research community is very useful if you are researching alone.
Action research An approach that is appropriate where ‘a problem involving 
people, tasks and procedures cries out for solution, or where some change 
of feature results in a more desirable outcome’ (Cohen et al. 2011: 344). 
It is applied research, carried out by practitioners who have identified a 
need for change or improvement, sometimes with support from outside 
the institution; other times not. The aim is ‘to arrive at recommendations 
for good practice that will tackle a problem or enhance the performance 
of the organization and individuals through changes to the rules and 
procedures within which they operate’ (Denscombe 2010b: 12).
Anonymity ‘Anonymity is a promise that even the researcher will not be 
able to tell which responses came from which respondents’ (Sapsford and 
Abbott 1996: 318–19). Sapsford and Abbott make a distinction between 
anonymity and confidentiality (see definition below).
Arithmetic mean The arithmetic mean is obtained by adding together each 
item (or value) and dividing by the total number of values. So, if we take 
12 respondents (Group A) whose ages are 26, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 30, 31, 32, 
33, 34 and 34 and add those values together, we get 360. Divide 360 by 12. 
The mean is 30.
Bias A careful selection of data to present a particular point of view. A writer 
can set out to deliberately influence or mislead by producing biased 
accounts, or may be unaware that they are presenting a particular 
viewpoint and not providing an objective account.
Blogs The word ‘blog’ is a shortening of ‘web logs’; a blog therefore is a log – 
a kind of diary, record or journal – published on the web. It consists of 
entries (‘posts’), usually of up to 1000 words, published in date order with 
the most recent posts appearing at the top of the page.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Glossary
275
Case study A case is a real-life situation that can be studied. Researchers 
identify an ‘instance’, then evidence on the ‘instance’ is collected 
systematically, the relationship between variables studied (a variable 
being a characteristic or attribute) and the investigation methodically 
planned. Though observation and interviews are most frequently used in 
case study research, no method is excluded. Case studies may be carried 
out to follow up and to put flesh on the bones of a survey. Most, however, 
are carried out as free-standing exercises.
Coding Codes are tags or labels for assigning units of meaning to the 
descriptive or inferential information compiled during a study. Codes are 
usually attached to ‘chunks’ of varying size – words, phrases, sentences 
or whole paragraphs, connected or unconnected to a specific setting. 
To paraphrase Miles and Huberman (1994), codes are used to organize 
the chunks so the researcher can quickly find, pull out and cluster the 
segments relating to a particular research question, hypothesis, construct 
or theme. Coding allows you to ‘cluster’ key issues in your data and 
take steps towards ‘drawing conclusions’. The data you have collected 
mean very little until you have identified your clusters and can begin to 
understand their implications.
Confidentiality Sapsford and Abbott (1996: 318–19) define confidentiality 
as a promise that respondents will not be identified or presented in 
identifiable form. They make a distinction between confidentiality and 
anonymity (see definition above).
Content analysis Stemler (2001) defines content analysis as ‘a systematic, 
replicable technique for compressing many words of text into fewer 
content categories based on explicit rules of coding’. Essentially, it is a 
research tool with which to analyse the frequency and use of words, terms 
or concepts in a document, with the aim of assessing the meaning and 
significance of a source. Content analysis can be used for television, film 
and websites as well as for written documents (Brett Davies 2007: 181–2).
COPAC Consortium of University Research Libraries Online Public Access 
Catalogue. Copac is a free online catalogue that combines most of the 
major university research libraries in the UK and Ireland with other 
specialist libraries, including the British Library. It has over 35 million 
records.
Critical incident A critical incident is a task or an event that makes the 
difference between success and failure in carrying out important parts 
of a job (Oxtoby 1979: 230). Flanagan, who devised the Critical Incident 
Technique (CIT) of research, describes it as follows: ‘any specifiable 
human activity that is sufficiently complete in itself to permit inferences 
and predictions to be made about the person performing the act. To be 
critical the incident must occur in a situation where the purpose or intent 
of the act seems fairly clear to the observer and where its consequences 
are sufficiently definite to leave little doubt concerning its effects’ 
(Flanagan 1954: 327). A critical incident does not have to be a dramatic 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Glossary
276
event to be considered worthy of investigation. One example would be 
the ‘handover’ from the night nursing staff to day staff – a routine daily 
procedure. A researcher might observe the process and report back the 
behaviour and actions of the two teams and the analysis might lead to 
greater efficiencies.
Crowdsourcing One definition of crowdsourcing is as follows: ‘the practice 
of obtaining needed services, ideas, or content by soliciting contributions 
from a large group of people, and especially from an online community, 
rather than from traditional employees or suppliers. This process is often 
used to subdivide tedious work or to fund-raise start-up companies and 
charities, and can also occur offline. It combines the efforts of numerous 
self-identified volunteers or part-time workers, where each contributor 
of their own initiative adds a small portion to the greater result’ (http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crowdsourcing).
Deliberate sources These sources are produced for the attention of future 
researchers. These include autobiographies, memoirs of politicians, 
medical practitioners or educationalists, diaries or letters intended for 
later publication, and documents of self-justification (Elton 2002). They 
involve a deliberate attempt to preserve evidence for the future, possibly 
to ensure that someone is not blamed for events or actions at the time or 
for reputation enhancement.
Diaries These are personal reflections or private records of events. For 
example, someone might keep a diary on a cruise to record not only 
where the cruise liner has been but also personal thoughts and emotions 
related to the journey.
Document ‘Document’ is a general term for an impression left on a physical 
object by a human being. Research can involve the analysis of images, 
films, videos and other non-written sources, all of which can be classed 
as documents, but the most common kinds of documents in educational 
and medical research are written as printed or manuscript sources. 
Increasingly, records are kept in electronic format but the scholarly 
approach to both online and offline documents is the same (see Chapter 7 
by Brendan Duffy).
Ethics committees A group of people appointed by an institution or 
organization to assess the ethics of research. They play an important part 
in ensuring that no badly designed or harmful research is permitted and 
are usually comprised of academic staff from the institution where it is 
proposed that the research be carried out. Darlington and Scott (2002: 
22–3) consider that ethics committees have ‘a duty to consider all possible 
sources of harm and satisfy themselves that the researcher has thought 
through all the relevant issues prior to granting permission to proceed’.
Ethnography Brewer (2000: 6) defines ethnography as ‘the study of people 
in naturally occurring settings or “fields” by means of methods which 
capture their social meanings and ordinary activities, involving the 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Glossary
277
researcher participating directly in the setting, if not also the activities, 
in order to collect data in a systematic manner but without meaning being 
imposed on them externally’ (Brewer 2000: 10).
Experiment An experiment is a scientific procedure undertaken to make a 
discovery, test a hypothesis or demonstrate a known fact. It is undertaken 
in an environment where the researcher has as much control of the 
variables as possible. An experiment in social science research will often 
compare a control group (which is unaffected by the experiment) with a 
group of participants affected by it. The two are compared to assess the 
impact on the participants affected by the experiment.
External criticism External criticism aims to discover whether a document 
is both genuine (not forged) and authentic (it is what it purports to be 
and truthfully reports on its subject) (Barzun and Graff 2003: 69). For 
example, an observer could write a report of a meeting he had never 
attended. His report would be genuine, because he actually wrote it, but it 
would not be authentic because he was not present at the meeting.
Focus group The purpose of a focus group is to concentrate discussion on a 
particular issue. They can be formal or informal gatherings of a varied 
group of people who may not know each other, but who might be thought 
to have a shared interest, concern or experience. Focus groups can be 
structured, where there are pre-prepared questions and checklists, or 
unstructured, where intervention by the researcher is minimal. The 
intention is that participants will interact with each other, will be willing 
to listen to all views, perhaps to reach consensus about some aspects of 
the topic or to disagree about others. The researcher acts as a moderator 
or facilitator.
Framework A theoretical framework is an explanatory device or a means 
of making sense of an idea, which explains the main things to be studied 
and the key factors, variables and presumed relationships between them. 
Polit and Hungler (1999: 110) state that: ‘A framework is the conceptual 
underpinnings of a study . . . In a study based on a theory, the framework 
is referred to as the theoretical framework; in a study that has its 
roots in a specified conceptual model, the framework is often called the 
conceptual framework (although the terms conceptual framework and 
theoretical framework are often used interchangeably).’
Grids A grid (or table) question will ask respondents to provide answers to 
two or more questions at the same time by filling in a table, providing 
a number of answers across columns and rows. See Chapter 9 for more 
about question types.
Grounded theory The grounded theory approach to qualitative data analysis 
was developed by Glaser and Strauss in the 1960s during the course of 
a field observational study of the way hospital staff dealt with dying 
patients (Glaser and Strauss 1965, 1968). Strauss (1987) tells us that a 
piece of grounded theory research is approached ‘without any particular 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Glossary
278
commitment to specific kinds of data, lines of research, or theoretical 
interests’ and as such is a style rather than a specific method. It has a 
number of distinct features, ‘such as theoretical sampling, and certain 
methodological guidelines, such as the making of constant comparisons 
and the use of a coding paradigm, to ensure conceptual development and 
density’ (Strauss 1987: 5). The theory is not pre-specified in the research 
but emerges as the research proceeds. Over the years, there have been 
some adjustments to the original 1960s approach to grounded theory, but 
the principle remains much the same, which is that theory evolves during 
research by means of the analysis of the data. For more on grounded 
theory, see Chapter 1.
Harvard method of referencing A frequently used system in the academic 
community to indicate where ideas, theories, quotes, facts and any other 
evidence and information can be found. It is also known as the Author and 
Date system.
Hypothesis Many research projects begin with the statement of a hypothesis, 
defined by Verma and Beard (1981: 184) as: ‘A tentative proposition which 
is subject to verification through subsequent investigation. It may also 
be seen as the guide to the researcher in that it depicts and describes the 
method to be followed in studying the problem. In many cases, hypotheses 
are hunches that the researcher has about the existence of relationship 
between variables.’
Inadvertent sources Inadvertent sources are sources used by researchers 
for some purpose other than that for which they were originally intended. 
For example, a report by the government on poverty, intended to show 
that fewer people are below the poverty line than five years previously, 
could be used by a researcher to show that the definition of poverty has 
changed, such that it makes the figures meaningless.
Informed consent Consent by an individual to participate in some form of 
research after receiving full and clear information about the research 
and of any risks involved. Full details of the research project and how 
information gained from it will be used and reported should have been 
sent in advance and the participant’s agreement secured in writing. 
This protects the participant and also reduces the legal liability of the 
researcher.
Intellectual property Intellectual property is something you create that is 
unique and can be an idea, concept or physical entity. The creator or their 
organization usually owns the intellectual property. It includes copyright, 
patents, designs and trademarks, and can include new products, their 
design or appearance, brands, logos, written work online or in print, 
photos, illustrations, film or audio recordings, musical compositions or 
software.
Internal criticism Subjecting the contents of a document to rigorous 
analysis. It is more likely to be used in small-scale educational research. 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Glossary
279
It seeks to answer important questions about the document’s origins, 
characteristics and authorship. See Chapter 7 for more on internal 
criticism.
Interquartile range An accurate picture of a range that reduces the 
importance of the extreme ends of the range. It is derived from the 
median. The highest and the lowest quarter of the measures are omitted 
and the interquartile range of the middle 50 per cent of the values is used 
as a measurement.
Keyword A word or phrase that captures what your search is looking for and 
which will be recognized and accepted by a database or search engine. 
Keywords focus on the essential contents of a topic.
Likert scale A device to discover strength of feeling or attitude towards a 
given statement or series of statements. Originally devised by R. Likert 
in 1932, it is most frequently used in questionnaires. The statements are 
usually on a 3-, 5- or 7-point scale and ask respondents to indicate rank 
order of agreement or disagreement by circling the appropriate number. 
Individuals or objects are arranged from the highest to the lowest. For 
more on Likert scales, see the sections on questionnaires in Chapter 9.
Literature review Aveyard (2010: 5) defines a literature review as ‘a 
comprehensive study and interpretation of literature that relates to a 
particular topic. When you undertake a literature review you identify a 
research question, then seek to answer this question by searching for 
and analyzing relevant literature using a systematic approach.’ It aims 
to broaden your understanding of a topic, to identify what work has been 
done in the area and how it has been researched, and helps you identify 
key issues for your own research (Hart 2001: 1). For more on literature 
reviews, see Chapter 6.
Logs Whereas diaries are usually personal reflections or private records of 
events (see above), logs are intended to be read more widely by a group 
of people requiring a permanent and more objective record of events. A 
ship’s log, for example, is a detailed record of the distance travelled, ports 
visited, weather encountered, and so on.
Median The middle value. This is particularly useful when there are extremes 
at both ends or at either end of the range, which may affect the mean to 
a significant extent. To find the median, values must be listed in order. If 
there is an odd number of values, the middle value is the median. Where 
there is an even number of values, the average of the two middle values is 
the median.
Mode The mode, which is not often used in small studies, relates to the most 
frequently occurring number in a range of numbers.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Glossary
280
Model A model is a visual representation of a process or concept. Models 
are often characterized by the use of analogies to give a more graphic 
representation of a particular phenomenon.
Narrative enquiry/stories Narrative enquiry involves the collection and 
development of stories, either as a form of data collection or as a means 
of structuring a research project (Gudmunsdottir 1996: 295). It might 
include autobiography or life stories that add meaning and can illustrate a 
theme developed by the researcher. For more, see Chapter 1.
Observation schedule An Observation schedule is a framework that all 
observers use to ensure consistency in approach to an observation. It 
can take the form of a checklist, a diary, chart, time or critical incidents 
log that you use to ‘minimize, possibly eliminate, the variations that will 
arise from data based on individual perceptions of events and situations’ 
(Denscombe 2010a: 199).
Operationalizable This refers to ‘the rules we use to link the language 
of theory (concepts) to the language of research (indicators)’ (Rose 
and Sullivan 1996: 12–13). An example of this is the concept of social 
class, which is unobservable. If we use the value of a house to act as an 
indicator of social class, we are operationalizing.
Ordinal scale A scale that shows data in order of magnitude since there is 
no standard of measurement of differences. For instance, a squash ladder 
is an ordinal scale since one can say only that one person is better than 
another, but not by how much.
Parameter Factor decided before you carry out a literature search and used 
to define what you include in the search. This could be a keyword, the 
language the source was written in and where and when it was published.
Participant observation Involves the researcher participating in the daily 
life of an individual, group or community and listening, observing, 
questioning and trying to understand the life of that individual, group or 
community. In some cases, researchers have been involved for months or 
even years in a community in order to become generally accepted as one 
of the group.
Plagiarism Plagiarism is using other people’s written words and ideas as if 
they are your own.
Primary sources Documents or evidence that came into existence during the 
period of the research (for example, the minutes of a hospital’s governing 
body).
Problem-oriented approach Investigates what has already been discovered 
about a subject before establishing the focus of the study and then 
researching the relevant primary sources. As the research progresses, 
a much clearer idea of what sources are relevant will emerge and more 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Glossary
281
questions will occur to the researcher as their knowledge of the subject 
deepens (Tosh 2010).
Protocol A carefully structured, written plan to ensure the smooth 
running and successful conclusion of a clinical trial but also to gain the 
compulsory agreement of an ethical committee. An essential part of 
research in a medical setting, the term has also been widely adopted by 
other research disciplines.
Qualitative Researchers adopting a qualitative perspective are more 
concerned to understand individuals’ perceptions of the world. They 
doubt whether social ‘facts’ exist and question whether a ‘scientific’ 
approach can be used when dealing with human beings. Punch (2005: 28) 
draws our attention to an important characteristic of qualitative research, 
in that it ‘not only uses non-numerical and unstructured data but also, 
typically, has research questions and methods which are more general at 
the start, and become more focused as the study progresses’.
Quantitative Quantitative researchers collect facts and study the 
relationship of one set of facts to another. They use ‘numerical data and, 
typically ... structured and predetermined research questions, conceptual 
frameworks and designs’ (Punch 2005: 28). The data is subjected to 
statistical analysis, using techniques that are likely to produce quantified 
and, if possible, generalizable conclusions.
Range The difference between the highest and lowest values measured.
Research diary Written by researchers to record the progress of their 
research, including their personal thoughts and reflections. It is 
invaluable when they are describing the process of their research in their 
final report.
Scales Devices to discover strength of feeling or attitude. There are many 
different types of scale, including the Likert scale (see above), some of 
which require quite complex construction and analysis. The Thurstone 
(Thurstone and Chave 1929) and Guttman (1950) scales in particular 
require careful handling.
Secondary sources Interpretations of events of a period based on primary 
sources. An example is a document relating to the history of a hospital’s 
development (primary source) and the minutes of a discussion between 
clinicians and managers of the future development of the hospital 
(secondary source) based on it.
Social networking The organization of like-minded individuals into specific 
groups. Although social networking occurs in the workplace, universities 
and high schools, it is most popular online due to the ease with which 
individuals who are looking to meet other people can gather and share 
first-hand information and experiences. Social websites function as an 
online community of Internet users where members may share common 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Glossary
282
interests or contacts. Once you are granted access to a social networking 
website you can begin to socialize, reading the profile pages of other 
members and contacting them online.
Source-oriented approach When embarking on a study using documents, 
it is possible to have two different approaches. One has been called the 
source-oriented approach in which the nature of the sources determines 
the research project and helps to generate questions for your research. 
The feasibility of the project is determined by the nature of existing 
sources so that a particularly full collection of material, for example on 
the restructuring of a college or hospital, would lead to an investigation 
of that area. Rather than bringing predetermined questions to the 
sources, the research is led by the material they contain.
Standard deviation ‘In statistics and probability theory, standard deviation 
... shows how much variation or dispersion exists from the average 
(mean), or expected value. A low standard deviation indicates that the 
data points tend to be very close to the mean; a high standard deviation 
indicates that the data points are spread out over a large range of values’ 
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_deviation). Standard deviation 
uses values for the entire group rather than for a section. The calculation 
is written into most statistical software so that the standard deviation is 
automatically produced in association with the mean.
Structured interview A standardized interview that is a quantitative 
research method commonly used in survey research. The aim is to ensure 
that each interview is conducted with exactly the same questions in the 
same order, guaranteeing that answers can be reliably collected and 
that comparisons can be made with confidence between respondents or 
between different survey periods.
Structured observation A systematic method of data collection where there 
is considerable pre-coding. The observation takes the form of recording 
when, how often or for how long the pre-coded behaviours occur. 
Observing usually means both watching and listening, although it may 
entail either watching or listening.
Supervisor A key person in a student researcher’s academic life, the principal 
role of the supervisor is to help students achieve their academic potential. 
The supervisor will provide reasonable commitment, accessibility, 
professionalism, stimulation, guidance, respect and consistent 
encouragement to the student. For more about supervision, see Chapter 2.
Survey A general term meaning to examine or look at something 
comprehensively. In the context of research, it has a number of different 
interpretations, but is most often used to describe the task of asking 
people a series of questions in order to gather information about what 
they do, or how they think about a particular topic. Moser and Kalton 
(1971: 1) make it clear that ‘the term and the methods associated with 
it are applied to an extraordinarily wide variety of investigations’. 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Glossary
283
This could be a census of an entire population or a short opinion poll. For 
more on surveys, see Chapter 1.
Theory Theory has been defined as being ‘a set of interrelated abstract 
propositions about human affairs and the social world that explain their 
regularities and relationships’ (Brewer 2000: 192); or ‘theory at the lowest 
level can be an ad hoc classification system, consisting of categories 
which organise and summarise empirical observations’ (Bowling 2002: 
139). However, theory can be, and often is, merely taken to refer to 
the current state of knowledge in a subject derived from the published 
literature.
Unstructured interview A formally agreed interview where the interviewer 
has a clear plan for the exchange with a goal in mind but no guide or 
set questions. The interviewer instead elicits responses by building a 
rapport with the interviewee, using open questions. It does not offer the 
interviewer the control afforded by a structured interview.
Unstructured observation In unstructured observation, the researcher 
‘does not use predetermined categories and classifications but makes 
observations in a more natural open-ended way . . . The logic here is that 
categories and concepts for describing and analysing the observational 
data will emerge later in the research, during the analysis, rather than be 
brought to the research, or imposed on the data, from the start’ (Punch 
2005: 179–80).
Unwitting evidence Underlying assumptions unintentionally revealed by 
participants in the language they use in a document or account. So, a 
teacher being interviewed by a researcher about misbehaviour in the 
classroom may use the term ‘offenders’, unintentionally comparing 
misbehaving learners to prisoners and thereby revealing the teacher’s 
opinion of the learners.
Witting evidence The information that the original author of the document 
intended to impart. If, for example, a government minister made a speech 
announcing a proposed educational reform, the ‘witting’ evidence would 
be everything that was stated in the speech about the proposed change.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

284
References
Alampi, A. (2012) Social media is more than simply a marketing tool 
for academic research [Online]. Available at http://www.theguardian. 
com/higher-education-network/blog/2012/jul/24/social-media-­
academic-research-tool [Accessed 14 March 2014].
Alaszewski, A. (2006) Using Diaries for Social Research. London: Sage.
Aldridge, A. and Levine, K. (2001) Surveying the Social World: Principles 
and Practice in Survey Research. Buckingham: Open University 
Press.
Arguadiola (2012) Tips for writing a literature review article [Online 
video]. Available at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SfxrrMVz 
XK0 [Accessed 14 March 2014].
Atkinson, P. and Coffey, A. (2011) Analysing documentary realities, in 
D. Silverman (ed.) Qualitative Research (3rd edn). London: Sage.
Aveyard, H. (2010) Doing a Literature Review in Health and Social Care: 
A Practical Guide (2nd edn). Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Bales, R.F. (1950) Interaction Process Analysis: A Method for the Study 
of Small Groups. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. Reprinted 1976 by 
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Baltes, P.B., Dittmann-Kohli, F. and Dixon, R.A. (1984) New perspectives 
on the development of intelligence in adulthood, in P.B. Baltes and 
O.G. Brim, Jr. (eds) Life-span Development and Behavior (Vol. 6). 
Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Barbour, R. (2008) Doing Focus Groups. London: Sage.
Barzun, J. and Graff, H.F. (2003) The Modern Researcher (6th edn). 
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Bassey, M. (1981) Pedagogic research: on the relative merits of the 
search for generalization and study of single events, Oxford Review 
of Education, 7 (1): 73–93.
Bassey, M. (1999) Case Study Research in Educational Settings. 
Buckingham: Open University Press.
Bassey, M. (2007) Case study, in A.R.J. Briggs and M. Coleman (eds) 
Research Methods in Educational Leadership and Management 
(2nd edn). London: Sage.
Bell, J. (1996) An investigation into barriers to completion of post-
graduate research degrees in three universities. Unpublished report 
funded through the Leverhulme Emeritus research fund.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

References
285
Bell, J. and Opie, C. (2002) Learning from Research: Getting More from 
Your Data. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Bell, J. and Woolner, P. (2012) Developing and using questionnaires’, in 
A.R.J. Briggs, M. Coleman and M. Morrison (eds) Research Methods 
in Educational Leadership and Management (3rd edn). London: 
Sage.
Best, J.W. (1970) Research in Education (2nd edn). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall.
Blaxter, L., Hughes, C. and Tight, M. (2006) How to Research (3rd edn). 
Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Blaxter, L., Hughes, C. and Tight, M. (2010) How to Research (4th edn). 
Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Blendtec (2010) Will it blend? [Online video]. Available at http://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=lAl28d6tbko [Accessed 6 January 2014].
Bogdan, R.C. and Biklen, S.K. (2003) Qualitative Research for Education: 
An Introduction to Theory and Methods (4th edn). New York: Pearson.
Bowen, G.A. (2009) Document analysis as a qualitative research method, 
Qualitative Research Journal, 9 (2): pp. 27–40.
Bowling, A. (2002) Research Methods in Health: Investigating Health 
and Health Services (2nd edn). Maidenhead: Open University 
Press.
Bowling, A. (2009) Research Methods in Health: Investigating Health 
and Health Services (3rd edn). Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Brett Davies, M. (2007) Doing a Successful Research Project: Using 
Qualitative or Quantitative Methods. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Brewer, J.D. (2000) Ethnography. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Bruce, R. and Mertens, M. (2013) Academics will need both the physical 
and virtual library for years to come [Online]. Available at http://
www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2013/jun/19/
academic-publishing-print-digital-libraries.
Bryman, A. and Cramer, D. (2011) Quantitative Data Analysis with 
IBM SPSS 17, 18 and 19: A Guide for Social Scientists. London: 
Routledge.
Burgess, R.G. (ed.) (1982) Field Research: A Sourcebook and Field 
Manual. London: George Allen & Unwin.
Burgess, R.G. (1994) On diaries and diary keeping, in N. Bennett, R. 
Glatter and R. Levac´icˇ (eds) Improving Educational Management 
through Research and Consultancy. London: Paul Chapman, in asso-
ciation with the Open University.
Burgess, R. (2002) Biographical Research. Buckingham: Open University 
Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

References
286
Burgess, R.G. and Morrison, M. (1993) Teaching and learning about food 
and nutrition in school, in The Nation’s Diet Programme: The Social 
Science of Food Choice, report to the ESRC.
Burton, N., Brundrett, M. and Jones, M. (2008) Doing Your Education 
Research Project. London: Sage.
Busher, H. and James, N. (2007) Ethics of research in education, in A.R.J. 
Briggs and M. Coleman (eds) Research Methods in Educational 
Leadership and Management (2nd edn). London: Sage.
Caldicott Committee (1997) Report on the Review of Patient-identifiable 
Information. London: Department of Health [Online]. Available at  
http://static.oxfordradcliffe.net/confidential/gems/caldrep.pdf 
[Accessed 14 March 2014].
Cann, A., Dimitriou, K. and Hooley, T. (2011) Social Media: A Guide for 
Researchers. London: Research Information Network.
Charmaz, K. (2008) Grounded theory methods in social justice research, 
in N.K. Denzin and Y.S. Lincoln (eds) Strategies of Qualitative 
Inquiry (3rd edn). London: Sage.
Charmaz, K. (2011) Grounded theory methods in social justice research, 
in N.K. Denzin and Y.S. Lincoln (eds) The Sage Handbook of 
Qualitative Research (4th edn). London: Sage.
Chartered Institute of Public Relations (2011) CIPR Social Media 
(#ciprsm) Best Practice Guide. London: CIPR.
Clandinin, D.J. (2007) Handbook of Narrative Inquiry: Mapping a 
Methodology. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Clough, P. (2002) Narratives and Fictions in Educational Research. 
Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Cohen, L., Manion, L. and Morrison, K. (2000) Research Methods in 
Education (5th edn). London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Cohen, L., Manion, L. and Morrison, K. (2011) Case studies, in Research 
Methods in Education (7th edn). Abingdon: Routledge.
Cramer, D. (2003) Advanced Quantitative Data Analysis. Buckingham: 
Open University Press.
Crang, M. and Cook, I. (2007) Doing Ethnographies. London: Sage.
Creme, P. and Lea, M.R. (2008) Writing at University: A Guide for 
Students (3rd edn). Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Cryer, P. (2006) The Research Student’s Guide to Success (3rd edn). 
Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Darlington, Y. and Scott, D. (2002) Qualitative Research in Practice: 
Stories from the Field. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Data Protection Registrar (1998) The Data Protection Act 1998: An 
Introduction [Online]. Available at http://www.open.gov.uk/dpr/
dprhome.htm [Accessed 14 March 2014].
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

References
287
D’Cruz, H. and Jones, M. (2004) Social Work Research: Ethical and 
Political Contexts. London: Sage.
Delamont, S., Atkinson, P. and Parry, O. (2004) Supervising the 
Doctorate: A Guide to Success. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Denscombe, M. (2010a) The Good Research Guide for Small-scale Social 
Research Projects (4th edn). Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Denscombe, M. (2010b) Ground Rules for Good Research: Guidelines 
for Good Practice (2nd edn). Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Duffy, B. (1998) Late nineteenth-century popular educational conserva-
tism: the work of coalminers on the school boards of the North-East, 
History of Education, 27 (1): 29–38.
Eggleston, J. (1979) The characteristics of educational research: map-
ping the domain, British Educational Research Journal, 5 (1): 1–12.
Eley, A. and Jennings, R. (2005) Effective Postgraduate Supervision: 
Improving the Student–Supervisor Relationship. Maidenhead: Open 
University Press.
Elton, G.R. (2002) The Practice of History (2nd edn). Oxford: Blackwell.
Evans, R.J. (2000) In Defence of History (2nd edn). London: Granta Books.
Fan, G. (1998) An exploratory study of final year diploma in nursing 
students’ perceptions of their nursing education. Unpublished MEd 
dissertation, University of Sheffield.
Farrell, A. (ed.) (2005) Ethical Research with Children. Maidenhead: 
Open University Press.
Field, A. (2013) Discovering Statistics Using IBM SPSS Statistics (5th 
edn). London: Sage.
Fielding, N.G., Lee, R.M. and Blank, G. (2008) The Sage Handbook of 
Online Research Methods. London: Sage.
Flanagan, J.C. (1954) The critical incident technique, Psychological 
Bulletin, 51 (4): 327–58.
Flanders, N.A. (1970) Analysing Teaching Behaviour. Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley.
Fogelman, K. and Comber, C. (2007) Surveys and sampling, in A.R.J. 
Briggs and M. Coleman (eds) Research Methods in Educational 
Leadership and Management (2nd edn). London: Sage.
Francis, V.M., Vesey, P. and Lowe, G. (1994) The closure of a long-stay 
psychiatric hospital: a longitudinal study of patients’ behaviour, 
Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 29 (4): 184–9.
Gerrish, K. and Lacey, A. (2010) The Research Process in Nursing (6th 
edn). Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Gibbs, G.R. (2008) Analysing Qualitative Data. London: Sage.
Gillham, B. (2005) Research Interviewing: A Practical Guide. Maidenhead: 
Open University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

References
288
Glaser, B.G. (1992) Basics of Grounded Theory Analysis. Mill Valley, 
CA: Sociology Press.
Glaser, B.G. and Strauss, A.L. (1965) Awareness of Dying. Chicago, IL: 
Aldine.
Glaser, B.G. and Strauss, A.L. (1968) Time for Dying. Chicago, IL: Aldine.
Goodson, I.F. and Sikes, P. (2001) Life History Research in Educational 
Settings: Learning from Lives. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Gray, C. (2011) Social media: a guide for researchers. London: Research 
Information Network [Online]. Available at http://www.rin.ac.uk/our-
work/communicating-and-disseminating-research/social-media-
guide-researchers [Accessed 10 March 2014].
Gray, J. (1998) Narrative inquiry. Unpublished paper, Edith Cowan 
University, Joondalup, WA.
Gray, J. (2000) The framing of truancy: a study of non-attendance as 
a form of social exclusion within Western Australia. Unpublished 
doctoral thesis, Edith Cowan University, Joondalup, WA.
Gray, J. (2009) Unpublished paper, Edith Cowan University, Joondalup, 
WA.
Green, J. and Thorogood, N. (2004) Qualitative Methods for Health 
Research. London: Sage.
Green, J. and Thorogood, N. (2013) Qualitative Methods for Health 
Research (3rd edn). London: Sage.
Greig, A.D., Taylor, J. and Mackay, T. (2012) Doing Research with 
Children (3rd edn). London: Sage.
Gulliver, K. (2012) 10 commandments of Twitter for academics [Online]. 
Available at http://chronicle.com/article/10-Commandments-of-Twitter-
for/131813/ [Accessed 14 March 2014].
Gutmunsdottir, S. (1996) The teller, the tale, and the one being told: the 
narrative nature of the research interview, Curriculum Inquiry, 
26 (3): 293–306.
Guttman, L. (1950) The basis for scalogram analysis, in S.A. Stouffer  
(ed.) Measurement and Prediction. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Hakim, C. (2000) Research Design: Successful Designs for Social 
Economics Research (2nd edn). London: Routledge.
Hall, G. and Longman, J. (2008) The Postgraduate’s Companion. London: 
Sage.
Hardy, M.A. and Bryman, A. (eds) (2004) Handbook of Data Analysis. 
London: Sage.
Hart, C. (1998) Doing a Literature Review: Releasing the Social Science 
Research Imagination. London: Sage, in association with the Open 
University.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

References
289
Hart, C. (2001) Doing a Literature Search: A Comprehensive Guide for 
the Social Sciences. London: Sage.
Hart, E. and Bond, M. (1995) Action Research for Health and Social 
Care: A Guide to Practice. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Hayes, N. (2000) Doing Psychological Research: Gathering and 
Analysing Data. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Haywood, P. and Wragg, E.D. (1982) Evaluating the Literature, Rediguide 
2. Nottingham: University of Nottingham School of Education.
Holsti, O.R. (1969) Content Analysis for the Social Sciences and 
Humanities. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Hookway, N. (2008) ‘Entering the blogosphere’: some strategies for 
using blogs in social research, Qualitative Research, 8 (1): 91–113.
Hyatt, D. (2004) Writing research, in C. Opie (ed.) Doing Educational 
Research: A Guide to First-time Researchers. London: Sage.
Hyland, M.E. (1996) Diary assessments of quality of life, Quality of Life 
Newsletter, 16: 8–9.
Hyland, M.E. and Crocker, G.R. (1995) Validation of an asthma quality 
of life diary in a clinical trial, Thorax, 50: 724–30.
Johnson, D. (1984) Planning small-scale research, in J. Bell, T. Bush, 
A. Fox, J. Goodey and S. Goulding (eds) Conducting Small-scale 
Investigations in Educational Management. London: Harper & 
Row.
Jorgensen, D.L. (2008) Participant Observation: A Methodology for 
Human Studies (2nd edn). London: Sage.
Keats, D. (2000) Interviewing: A Practical Guide for Students and 
Professionals. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Keeble, H. and Kirk, R. (2007) Exploring the existing body of research, in 
A.R.J. Briggs and M. Coleman (eds) Research Methods in Educational 
Leadership and Management (2nd edn). London: Sage.
Klatzky, R.L. (1988) Theories of information processing and theories 
of aging, in L.L. Light and D.J. Burke (eds) Language, Memory and 
Aging. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Krippendorf, K. (2012) Content Analysis: An Introduction to its 
Methodology (3rd edn). London: Sage.
Kvale, S. (2008) Interviews: An Introduction to Qualitative Research 
Interviewing (2nd edn). London: Sage.
Laws, S. with Harper, C. and Marcus, R. (2013) Research for Development: 
A Practical Guide (2nd edn). London: Sage.
Levin, P. (2011) Excellent Dissertations! (2nd edn). Maidenhead: Open 
University Press.
Likert, R. (1932) A Technique for the Measurement of Attitudes. New 
York: Columbia University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

References
290
Lomax, P. (2007) Action research, in A.R.J. Briggs and M. Coleman (eds) 
Research Methods in Educational Leadership and Management 
(2nd edn). London: Sage.
LSE (2013) Impact of social sciences: maximizing the impact of aca-
demic research [Online]. Available at http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactof-
socialsciences/ [Accessed 14 March 2014].
Lutz, F.W. (1986) Ethnography: the holistic approach to understand-
ing schooling, in M. Hammersley (ed.) Controversies in Classroom 
Research. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Lutz, F.W. (1993) Ethnography: the holistic approach to understand-
ing schooling, in M. Hammersley (ed.) Controversies in Classroom 
Research (2nd edn). Buckingham: Open University Press.
Maimon, E. and Peritz, J. (2009) A Writer’s Resource: MLA Update. 
Buckingham: Open University Press.
Marples, D.L. (1967) Studies of managers: a fresh start, Journal of 
Management Studies, 4: 282–99.
Marwick, A. (2001) The New Nature of History (5th edn). Basingstoke: 
Palgrave.
May, T. (2011) Social Research: Issues, Methods and Process (4th edn). 
Maidenhead: Open University Press.
McCulloch, G. and Richardson, W. (2000) Historical Research in 
Educational Settings. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Medawar, P.B. (1972) The hope of progress, New Scientist, June.
Miles, M.B. and Huberman, A.M. (1994) Qualitative Data Analysis (2nd 
edn). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Miles, M.B. and Huberman, A.M. (2014) Qualitative Data Analysis (3rd 
edn). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Minocha, S. and Petros, M. (2012) Handbook of social media for research-
ers and supervisors: digital technologies for research dialogues 
[Online]. Available at http://www.vitae.ac.uk/CMS/files/upload/Vitae_ 
Innovate_Open_University_Social_Media_Handbook_2012.pdf 
[Accessed 14 March 2014].
Morrison, M. (2007) Using diaries in research, in A.R.J. Briggs and M. 
Coleman (eds) Research Methods in Educational Leadership and 
Management (2nd edn). London: Sage.
Morrison, M. and Burgess, R.G. (1993) Chapatis and chips: encounter-
ing food use in primary school settings. Paper prepared at an inter-
national conference on Children’s Food and Drink: Today’s Market 
and Tomorrow’s Opportunities, Chipping Campden Food and Drink 
Association, Chipping Campden, Gloucester, 10 November.
Moser, C.A. and Kalton, G. (1971) Survey Methods in Social Investigation 
(2nd edn). London: Heinemann.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

References
291
Moyles, J. (2002) Observation as a research tool, in M. Coleman and 
A.R.J. Briggs (eds) Research Methods in Educational Leadership 
and Management London: Sage.
Murray, N. and Hughes, G. (2008) Writing Up Your University 
Assignments and Research Projects. Maidenhead: Open University 
Press.
Murray, R. (2011) How to Write a Thesis (3rd edn). Maidenhead: Open 
University Press.
Murray, R. and Moore, S. (2006) A Handbook of Academic Writing: A 
Fresh Approach. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
National Centre for Social Research, Sage, Oxford Internet Institute 
(2013) Blurring the boundaries – New social media, new social sci-
ence. Available at http://www.methodspace.com/ [Accessed 14 March 
2014].
National Health Service National Patient Safety Agency (undated) 
[Online]. Available at http://www.npsa.nhs.uk/ [Accessed 6 January 
2014].
Neville, C. (2010) The Complete Guide to Referencing and Avoiding 
Plagiarism (2nd edn). Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Neyland, D. (2007) Organizational Ethnography. London: Sage.
Nisbet, J.D. and Ross, L. (1980) Human Inference: Strategies and 
Shortcomings of Social Judgment. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Nisbet, J.D. and Watt, J. (1978) Case Study, Rediguide 26. Nottingham: 
University of Nottingham School of Education.
Noakes, L. and Wincup, E. (2004) Using documentary evidence in 
qualitative research, in Criminological Research: Understanding 
Qualitative Methods (pp. 106–20). London: Sage.
Nyberg, L., Backman, L., Erngrund, K., Olofsson, U. and Nilsson, L. 
(1996) Age differences in episodic memory, semantic memory, and 
priming: relationships to demographic, intellectual and biological 
factors, Journals of Gerontology: Psychological Science, 51B: 234–40.
O’Dochartaigh, N. (2007) How to Do Your Literature Search and Find 
Research Information Online (2nd edn). London: Sage.
Oliver, P. (2003) The Student’s Guide to Research Ethics. Maidenhead: 
Open University Press.
Oliver, P. (2010) The Student’s Guide to Research Ethics (2nd edn). 
Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Oliver, P. (2014) Writing your Thesis (3rd edn). London: Sage.
Opie, C. (ed.) (2004) Doing Educational Research: A Guide for First-
time Researchers. London: Sage.
Oppenheim, A.N. (1992) Questionnaire Design, Interviewing and 
Attitude Measurement. London: Continuum.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

References
292
Oppenheim, A.N. (2000) Questionnaire Design, Interviewing and 
Attitude Measurement (2nd edn). London: Bloomsbury Academic.
Orna, E. with Stevens, G. (1995) Managing Information for Research. 
Buckingham: Open University Press.
Orna, E. and Stevens, G. (2009) Managing Information for Research: 
Practical Help in Researching, Writing and Designing Dissertations 
(2nd edn). Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Oxtoby, R. (1979) Problems facing heads of department, Journal of 
Further and Higher Education, 3 (1): 46–59.
Pallant, J. (2013) SPSS Survival Manual: A Step by Step Guide to Data 
Analysis Using IBM SPSS (5th edn). Maidenhead: Open University 
Press.
Patel, S (2011) 10 ways researchers can use Twitter [Online]. Available at  
http://www.networkedresearcher.co.uk/2011/08/03/10-ways-
researchers-can-use-twitter/ [Accessed 14 March 2014].
Pears, R. and Shields, G. (2013) Cite Them Right: The Essential 
Referencing Guide (9th edn). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Pennink (2013) The UK Survey of Academics: how academics (re)
search [Online]. Available at http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/
query/2013/06/25/the-uk-Survey-of-academics-how-academics-
research/ [Accessed 14 March 2014].
Phillips, E.M. and Pugh, D.S. (2000) How to Get a PhD: A Handbook 
for Students and their Supervisors (3rd edn). Buckingham: Open 
University Press.
Polit, D.F. and Hungler, B.P. (1999) Nursing Research: Principles and 
Methods (6th edn). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Polit, D.F. and Hungler, B.P. (2004) Nursing Research: Principles and 
Methods (7th edn). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Poynter, R. (2010) The Handbook of Online and Social Media Research. 
Chichester: Wiley.
Punch, K.F. (2005) Introduction to Social Research: Quantitative and 
Qualitative Approaches (2nd edn). London: Sage.
Punch, K.F. (2014) Introduction to Social Research: Quantitative and 
Qualitative Approaches (3rd edn). London: Sage.
Quinnell, S.-L. (2011) Academic tweeting: your suggestions and 
tips [Online]. Available at http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocials-
ciences/2011/09/30/academic-tweeting-your-suggestions-and-tips-
collected/ [Accessed 14 March 2014].
Reason, P. and Bradbury, H. (eds) (2001) Handbook of Action Research: 
Participative Inquiry and Practice. London: Sage.
Richardson, J.T.E. and King, E. (1998) Adult students in higher educa-
tion: burden or boon?, Journal of Higher Education, 69: 65–88.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

References
293
Richardson, J.T.E. and Woodley, A. (2003) Another look at the role of 
age, gender and subject as predictors of academic attainment in 
higher education, Studies in Higher Education, 28 (4): 476–93.
Ridley, D. (2012) The Literature Review: A Step-by-Step Guide for 
Students (2nd edn). London: Sage.
Roget, P.M. (2000) Roget’s Thesaurus of English Words and Phrases. 
First published in 1982 by P.M. Roget; 2000 edition revised by Betty 
Kirkpatrick. London: Penguin Books.
Rose, D. and Sullivan, O. (1996) Introducing Data Analysis for Social 
Scientists (2nd edn). Buckingham: Open University Press.
Rugg, G. (2007) Using Statistics: A Gentle Introduction. Maidenhead: 
Open University Press.
Rugg, G. and Petre, M. (2006) A Gentle Guide to Research Methods. 
Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Rumsey, S. (2008) How to Find Information: A Guide for Researchers 
(2nd edn). Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Santafe, I. (2013) Diary study guide: how to get the best results from 
diary study research [Online]. Available at http://www.webcred-
ible.co.uk/user-friendly-resources/web-usability/diary-study-guide.
shtml.
Sapsford, R. (2006) Survey Research (2nd edn). London: Sage.
Sapsford, R.J. and Abbott, P. (1996) Ethics, politics and research, in R. 
Sapsford and V. Jupp (eds) Data Collection and Analysis. London: Sage.
Sapsford, R.J. and Abbott, P. (2006) Ethics, politics and research, in R. 
Sapsford and V. Jupp (eds) Data Collection and Analysis (2nd edn). 
London: Sage.
Sapsford, R. and Jupp, V. (eds) (1996) Data Collection and Analysis. 
London: Sage.
Sapsford, R. and Jupp, V. (eds) (2006) Data Collection and Analysis (2nd 
edn). London: Sage.
Scaife, J. (2004) Reliability, validity and credibility, in C. Opie (ed.) 
Doing Educational Research: A Guide for First-time Researchers. 
London: Sage.
Schaie, K.W. (1996) Intellectual Development in Adulthood: The Seattle 
Longitudinal Study. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Snee, H. (undated) What is blog analysis (video) [Online]. Available at  
http://www.methods.manchester.ac.uk/methods/blog-analysis/
index.shtml [Accessed 14 March 2014].
Spradley, J.P. (1980) Participant Observation. New York: Holt, Rinehart 
& Winston.
Stanford, M. (1994) A Companion to the Study of History. Oxford: 
Blackwell. [Online] Available at
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

References
294
StartBlolggingOnline.com (2013) How to start a blog – step-by-
step guide [Online]. Available at http://startbloggingonline.com/ 
[Accessed 5 October 2013].
Stemler, S. (2001) An overview of content analysis. Available at http://
pareonline.net/getvn.asp?v=7&n=17 [Accessed 6 March 2014].
Strauss, A.L. (1987) Qualitative Analysis for Social Scientists. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sundberg, J. (2013) How to use Facebook for professional networking: 
10 useful tips [Online]. Available at http://theundercoverrecruiter.
com/how-use-facebook-professional-networking-10-useful-tips/ 
[Accessed 6 January 2014].
Sutherland, V. and Cooper, C.L. (2003) De-stressing Doctors: A Self-
management Guide. London: Butterworth Heinemann.
Ten Have, P. (2007) Doing Conversation Analysis (2nd edn). London: 
Sage.
The Times (2009) News article, 27 May.
Thomas, M. (2012) Social Media Made Simple: How to Avoid Social 
Media Suicide. Berkshire: AppleTree Publishing.
Thurstone, L.L. and Chave, E.J. (1929) The Measurement of Attitudes. 
Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Tosh, J. (2010) The Pursuit of History (5th edn). Harlow: Longman.
University of Exeter (2013) Social media guidelines [Online]. Available at 
http://www.exeter.ac.uk/staff/web/socialmedia/linkedin/ [Accessed  
15 September 2013].
Verhaeghen, P. and Salthouse, T.A. (1997) Meta-analyses of age–cog-
nition relations in adulthood: estimates of linear and nonlinear age 
effects and structural models, Psychological Bulletin, 122: 231–49.
Verma, G.K. and Beard, R.M. (1981) What is Educational Research? 
Perspectives on Techniques of Research. Aldershot: Gower.
Visual.ly (2012) Reaching 50 million users [Online]. Available at http://
visual.ly/reaching-50-million-users [Accessed 17 October 2013].
Walsh, M. and Wigens, L. (2003) Introduction to Research. Cheltenham: 
Nelson Thornes.
Wikipedia (undated) Crowdsourcing [Online]. Available at http://
en.www.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crowdsourcing [Accessed 23 October 
2013].
Williams, G.L. (1994) Observing and recording meetings, in N. Bennett, 
R. Glatter and R. Levac´icˇ (eds) Improving Educational Management 
through Research and Consultancy. London: Paul Chapman.
Wolcott, H.F. (1992) Posturing in qualitative inquiry, in M.D. LeCompte, 
W.L. Millroy and J. Preissle (eds) The Handbook of Qualitative 
Research in Education. New York: Academic Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

References
295
Wolcott, H.F. (2001) Writing Up Qualitative Research (2nd edn). London: 
Sage.
Wolcott, H.F. (2009) Writing Up Qualitative Research (3rd edn). London: 
Sage.
Woodley, A. (1981) Age bias, in D. Warren Piper (ed.) Is Higher Education 
Fair? Guildford: SRHE.
Woodley, A. (1984) The older the better? A study of mature student per-
formance in British universities, Research in Education, 32: 35–50.
Woodley, A. (1985) Taking account of mature students, in D. Jacques 
and J. Richardson (eds) The Future of Higher Education. Guildford: 
SRHE and NFER-Nelson.
Woodley, A. (1998) Review of McGivney (1996a) ‘Staying or Leaving 
the Course: Non-completion and Retention of Mature Students in 
Further and Higher Education’. Leicester: National Institute of Adult 
Continuing Education.
Woodley, A. and McIntosh, N. (1980) The Door Stood Open: An 
Evaluation of the Open University Younger Students’ Pilot Scheme. 
Barcombe: Falmer Press.
Wragg, E.C. (1980) Conducting and Analysing Interviews, Rediguide 
11. Nottingham: University of Nottingham School of Education.
Yin, R.K. (1994) Designing single- and multiple-case studies, in N. 
Bennett, R. Glatter and R. Levac´icˇ (eds) Educational Management 
through Research and Consultancy. London: Paul Chapman.
Yin, R.K. (2012) Applications of Case Study Research (3rd edn). London: 
Sage.
Yin, R.K. (2014) Case Study Research: Design and Methods (5th edn). 
London: Sage.
Youngman, M.B. (1982) Analysing Questionnaires, Rediguide 12. 
Nottingham: University of Nottingham School of Education.
Youngman, M.B. (1994) Designing and analysing interviews, in N. 
Bennett, R. Glatter and R. Levac´icˇ (eds) Improving Educational 
Management through Research and Consultancy. London: Paul 
Chapman.
Zimmerman, D.H. and Wieder, D.L. (1977) The diary-interview method, 
Urban Life, 5 (4): 479–99.
Websites referenced in the text
http://answers.yahoo.com/question/index?qid=20090912141927AArnxbc 
[Accessed 14 March 2014]
http://delicious.com/about [Accessed 14 March 2014]
https://www.dropbox.com [Accessed 14 March 2014]
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

References
296
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_deviation [Accessed 14 March 
2014]
www.endnote.com [Accessed 14 March 2014]
www.google.com [Accessed 14 March 2014]
www.mendeley.com [Accessed 14 March 2014]
http://www.methods.manchester.ac.uk/methods/blog-analysis/index.
shtml [Accessed 14 March 2014]
www.refworks.com [Accessed 14 March 2014]
http://www.webcredible.co.uk/user-friendly-resources/web-usability/
diary-study-guide.shtml [Accessed 14 March 2014]
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

297
Note: Key/Glossary terms are in bold type.
A
(the) abstract, writing the 
report  260
academic research community 
website  147
action research  10–11
ethics  11
participation  11
rigour  10–11
roles, practitioner researchers’   
10–11
alternate forms method
data collection  121
reliability  121
analysing qualitative data, 
grounded theory  18–20
analysis and discussion, writing the 
report  262
analysis of documentary 
evidence  125–40
see also data analysis/
presentation
bias  136–7
checklist  137–9
content analysis  132–3
critical analysis  134–6
databases  129
deliberate sources  129–31
document  126
external criticism  134
inadvertent sources  129–31
internal criticism  134–6
location of documents  127–31
NHS  127–8
primary sources  129–31
problem-oriented approach  127
secondary sources  129
selection of documents  131–3
source-oriented approach  126–7
unwitting evidence  131
witting evidence  131
anonymity
ethics  51–8
online information  52–5
appendices, writing the 
report  263–4
approach, choosing an  23
arithmetic mean, data analysis/
presentation  233–6
asthma treatment diary  202–3
B
backing-up
information management  76
literature searching  94
bar charts, data analysis/
presentation  232–3, 236–7, 
245–6
behaviour recording
Flanders system  215–16
observation  215–18
bias
analysis of documentary 
evidence  136–7
interviews  186–7
observation  211
participant observation  212–13
blogs  146–7, 196, 205–6
checklist  206–8
books, referencing  71–2, 73
British Library’s public catalogue, 
literature searching  95
C
Caldicott Committee review, patient-
identifiable information  53
Call Recorder, interviews  186
case studies, diaries  200–4
Index
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Index
298
case study  11–14
critics  12–14
generalization  12–13
problems/disadvantages  12–14
relatability  13
survey  12
category questions, data analysis/
presentation  233
causality, experiments  15–17
census, survey  14–15
central tendency measures, data 
analysis/presentation  233–9
checklists
analysis of documentary 
evidence  137–9
blogs  206–8
critical incidents  206–8
data analysis/presentation  251–3
diaries  206–8
ethics  60–2
groundwork  24
information management  82–5
integrity  60–2
internet searching  99–102
interpreting the evidence  251–3
interviews  189–92
literature reviews  113–15
literature searching  99–102
logs  206–8
note-taking  82–5
observation  221–3
plagiarism  82–5
planning the project  41–4
questionnaires  170–5
reading  82–5
referencing  82–5
reporting the findings  251–3
social media  153–4
writing the report  269–72
citing authors see referencing
codes of practice
ethics  47–8, 55–8
integrity  55–8
intellectual property  59–60
personal  55–8
supervision/supervisors  38
coding, data analysis/
presentation  239–42
conceptual (or theoretical) 
frameworks, literature 
reviews  106–8
confidentiality
ethics  51–8
online information  52–5
Consortium of University 
Research Libraries Online 
Public Access Catalogue 
(COPAC)
literature searching  88, 94
referencing  74–5
content analysis
analysis of documentary 
evidence  132–3
interviews  184
observation  218–19
COPAC see Consortium of 
University Research 
Libraries Online Public 
Access Catalogue
copyright
see also intellectual property; 
plagiarism
literature searching  98–9
correlation coefficients, data 
analysis/presentation  249–50
councils, research, ethics  54
critical analysis, analysis of 
documentary evidence  134–6
critical incidents
checklist  206–8
diaries  196–7, 203–4
critical reviews
Gilbert Fan review  109–10, 112
literature reviews  105–6, 109–13
reviewing the reviews  112–13
Richardson and Woodley 
review  110–12
cross-referencing/indexing, 
information management  77–82
crowdsourcing  148–9
D
data analysis/presentation  122–4, 
229–55
see also analysis of documentary 
evidence
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Index
299
arithmetic mean  233–6
bar charts  232–3, 236–7, 245–6
category questions  233
central tendency measures  233–9
checklist  251–3
coding  239–42
correlation coefficients  249–50
generalization  228
grids  242–3
IBM SPSS Statistics 
Software  122–3
interquartile range  234–5
list questions  230–3
median  234
mode  234
open questions  241
ordinal scale  241
pie charts  238
quantity questions  233
questionnaires  170
range  234
scales  243–50
standard deviation  235
SurveyMonkey  230
verbal questions  250
data collection  119–24
see also diaries
constraints  120
narrative inquiry/stories  22
reliability  120–2
split-half method  121
triangulation  120
validity  120–2
writing the report  261
Data Protection Act  53, 54
databases
analysis of documentary 
evidence  129
referencing  74–6
DBS see Disclosure and Barring 
Service
deliberate sources, analysis of 
documentary evidence  129–31
Delicious software, information 
management  79
diaries  196–209
see also data collection
asthma treatment diary  202–3
case studies  200–4
checklist  206–8
critical incidents  196–7, 203–4
diary-interview method  198–9
ethics  204–5
general practitioners’ time 
log  201–2
heads of department critical 
incidents log  203–4
heads of department problem-
portfolio approach  204
piloting returns forms/
instructions  199–200
primary pupils’ food diary   
200–1
problem-portfolio approach  204
representativeness  198
research diaries  40–1, 54
supply teachers’ diary and time 
log  201
diary-interview method  198–9
Disclosure and Barring Service 
(DBS), experiments  16
document, analysis of documentary 
evidence  126
documentary evidence, analysis 
see analysis of documentary 
evidence
drafts
revision  265–7
writing the report  259, 265–7
Dropbox software, information 
management  79
E
Economic and Social Research 
Council (ESRC), ethics  54
EndNote bibliographic software  74
information management  79–80
ESRC see Economic and Social 
Research Council
ethics  46–64
action research  11
anonymity  51–8
checklist  60–2
codes of practice  47–8, 55–8
confidentiality  51–8
diaries  204–5
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Index
300
ethics  (continued)
Economic and Social Research 
Council (ESRC) 54
experiments  16–17
informed consent  48–9
‘inside’ research  55–8
integrity  55–8
intellectual property  59–60
interviews  178–9
personal codes of practice  55–8
principles  49
promises  48, 51–2, 56, 58
protocols  48
research contracts  47–9
research councils  54
research diaries  54
ethics committees  49–51
gatekeeping role  49–50
response times  50–1
ethnographic research style  17–18
ethnography  17
evaluating research reports, writing 
the report  267–8
evaluating sources, literature 
searching  97–8
EverNote (note-taking software)
information management  67
topic selection  31
experimental style  15–17
experiments  15–17
causality  15–17
Disclosure and Barring Service 
(DBS)  16
ethics  16–17
external criticism, analysis of 
documentary evidence  134
F
Facebook, social networking   
151–2
Flanders system, recording 
behaviour  215–16
focus groups  182–3
focused interviews  182
frameworks
literature reviews  106–8
theoretical (or conceptual) 
frameworks  106–8
Freedom of Information Act  53
G
general practitioners’ time log  201–2
generalization
analysis, interpretation and 
presentation of data  228
case study  12–13
Gilbert Fan review, critical 
reviews  109–10, 112
Google Books, literature 
searching  93–5
Google Hangouts, interviews   
185–6
Google Keep (note-taking software), 
information management  67
Google Scholar
literature searching  92
referencing  92
Google searching
checklist  99–102
literature searching  91–2
relevance of results  54–5
techniques  91–2
topic selection  30
Google software, information 
management  67, 80–1
grids, data analysis/
presentation  242–3
grounded theory  18–20
analysing qualitative data  18–20
iterative process  19
theoretical sampling  18
groundwork, checklist  24
group interviews  182–3
guided interviews  182
H
Harvard referencing  70, 77, 78
Harvard’s Open Collections Program 
(OCP), literature searching  95
hypotheses  33–4
I
IBM SPSS Statistics Software, data 
analysis  122–3
inadvertent sources, analysis of 
documentary evidence  129–31
indexing/cross-referencing, 
information management  77–82
information management  77–82
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Index
301
see also note-taking; record-
keeping; referencing
backing-up  76
checklist  82–5
cross-referencing/indexing  77–82
Delicious software  79
Dropbox software  79
EndNote bibliographic software 
software  79–80
Google software  67, 80–1
RefWorks software  80
informed consent, ethics  48–9
‘inside’ research, ethics  55–8
integrity
checklist  60–2
codes of practice  55–8
ethics  55–8
intellectual property
see also plagiarism
codes of practice  59–60
ethics  59–60
internal criticism, analysis of 
documentary evidence  134–6
Internet Detective, literature 
searching  97–8
internet searching
see also Google searching; 
literature searching; online 
information
checklist  99–102
interpreting the evidence
see also data analysis/presentation
checklist  251–3
interquartile range, data analysis/
presentation  234–5
interviews  177–94
see also narrative inquiry/stories
advantages/disadvantages  178
bias  186–7
Call Recorder  186
checklist  189–92
content analysis  184
diary-interview method  198–9
ethics  178–9
focus groups  182–3
focused interviews  182
Google Hangouts  185–6
group interviews  182–3
guided interviews  182
guidelines  187–9
question wording  179
recording interviews  184–5, 186
schedules  179–82
Skype  185–6
structured interviews  179–81
transcriptions  184–5
unstructured interviews  181–2
J
journal articles
literature searching  95–7
plagiarism  96
referencing  72–3
K
keywords
defining  88–9
focusing  90
grouping  90
literature searching  88–90, 94
refining  90
L
library facilities, literature 
searching  91
licensing restrictions, literature 
searching  98–9
Likert scales, questionnaires  163
LinkedIn
social networking  149–50
topic selection  30–1
list questions, data analysis/
presentation  230–3
literature reviews  104–16
checklist  113–15
critical reviews  105–6, 109–13
defining  105
frameworks  106–8
Gilbert Fan review  109–10, 112
importance  105
models  107
reviewing the reviews  112–13
Richardson and Woodley 
review  110–12
theoretical (or conceptual) 
frameworks  106–8
theory  106–8
writing the report  260–1
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Index
302
literature searching  87–103
backing-up  94
British Library’s public 
catalogue  95
checklist  99–102
Consortium of University 
Research Libraries Online 
Public Access Catalogue 
(COPAC)  88, 94
copyright  98–9
digital format/print format  90
evaluating sources  97–8
Google Books  93–5
Google Scholar  92
Google searching  91–2
Harvard’s Open Collections 
Program (OCP) 95
Internet Detective  97–8
journal articles  95–7
keywords  88–90, 94
library facilities  91
licensing restrictions  98–9
Open Collections Program (OCP)  95
parameters  88–9
referencing  92, 94, 98
SCONUL (Society of College, 
National and University 
Libraries)  94
logs  196
checklist  206–8
M
median, data analysis/presentation   
234
mode, data analysis/
presentation  234
models, literature reviews  107
N
narrative inquiry/stories  20–3
context issues  22–3
data collection  22
NHS, analysis of documentary 
evidence  127–8
note-taking  67–70
see also record-keeping; referencing
checklist  82–5
plagiarism  67–9
note-taking software
information management  67
topic selection  31
O
objectives  33–4
observation  210–24
bias  211
checklist  221–3
content analysis  218–19
observation schedules  214–15
participant observation  212–14
preparation  215
recording behaviour  215–18
reviewing  220
structured observation  214–15
subjectivity  211
unstructured observation  212
observation schedules  214–15
OCP see Open Collections Program
OneNote (note-taking software)
information management  67
topic selection  31
online information
anonymity  52–5
Caldicott Committee review  53
confidentiality  52–5
patient-identifiable information  53
plagiarism  67–9
referencing  73–4
Open Collections Program (OCP), 
literature searching  95
open questions, data analysis/
presentation  241
operationalizable, questionnaires   
161
ordinal scale, data analysis/
presentation  241
P
parameters
defining  88–9
literature searching  88–9
participant observation  198–9
participant observation  212–14
bias  212–13
criticisms  212–13
participation, action research  11
patient-identifiable information, 
Caldicott Committee review  53
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Index
303
personal codes of practice, 
ethics  55–8
pie charts, data analysis/
presentation  238
piloting
questionnaires  167–8
returns forms/
instructions  199–200
plagiarism  67–9
see also intellectual property
checklist  82–5
guarding against  67–9, 96
journal articles  96
note-taking  67–9
online information  67–9
publications  86
writing the report  267
planning the project  28–44
checklist  41–4
hypotheses  33–4
objectives  33–4
project outlines  34–5
purpose of the study  32–3
research diaries  40–1
research experience  40
researchable questions  33–4
supervision/supervisors   
36–40
timetables  36
timing  35–6
topic selection  29–32
working titles  34–5
presentation, writing the 
report  264–5
presenting data see data analysis/
presentation
primary pupils’ food diary  200–1
primary sources, analysis of 
documentary evidence  129–31
problem-oriented approach, 
analysis of documentary 
evidence  127
problem-portfolio approach, 
diaries  204
ProCite bibliographic software  74
project outlines  34–5
promises, ethics  48, 51–2, 56, 58
protocols, ethics  48
purpose of the study  32–3
Q
qualitative  9
qualitative data, analysing, 
grounded theory  18–20
quantitative  9
quantity questions, data analysis/
presentation  233
question wording
interviews  179
questionnaires  160–1
questionnaires  156–76
ambiguity  160–1
appearance  165–6
assumptions  161
checklist  170–5
data analysis  170
distributing  168
double questions  162–3
hypothetical questions  164
imprecision  160–1
knowledge  162
layout  165–6
leading questions  163–4
Likert scales  163
memory  161–2
non-response  169–70
offensive questions  164–5
operationalizable  161
piloting  167–8
preparation  158
presuming questions  164
question types  158–60
question wording  160–1
returning  168
rights and responsibilities  169
rights of respondents  169
sampling  166–7
sensitive issues  164–5
SurveyMonkey  157–8, 167
questions, researchable see 
researchable questions
quotations, writing the report  264
R
range, data analysis/
presentation  234
reading  66–7
checklist  82–5
record-keeping  66–7
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Index
304
record-keeping
see also note-taking; referencing
importance  66–7, 69–70
reading  66–7
research diaries  40–1
supervisory tutorials  39
recording behaviour
Flanders system  215–16
observation  215–18
recording interviews  184–5, 186
Reference Manager bibliographic 
software  74
references list, writing the 
report  263
referencing  70–82
see also note-taking; 
record-keeping
books  71–2, 73
checklist  82–5
Consortium of University 
Research Libraries Online 
Public Access Catalogue 
(COPAC) 74–5
creating references  74–6
databases  74–6
editing references  74–6
Google Scholar  92
Harvard referencing  70, 77, 78
journal articles  72–3
literature searching  92, 94, 98
online information  73–4
software  70, 74–6, 79–81
storing references  74–6
RefWorks software, information 
management  80
relatability, case study  13
reliability
alternate forms method  121
data collection  120–2
split-half method  121
test-retest  121
report writing see writing the report
reporting the findings
see also data analysis/presentation
checklist  251–3
representativeness, diaries  198
research contracts, ethics  47–9
research councils, ethics  54
research diaries  40–1
ethics  54
record-keeping  40–1
writing as you go along  40–1
research experience, supervision/
supervisors  40
researchable questions  33–4
reviewing, observation  220
reviewing the reviews, literature 
reviews  112–13
revision
drafts  265–7
writing the report  265–7
Richardson and Woodley review, 
critical reviews  110–12
rigour, action research  10–11
roles, practitioner researchers’, 
action research  10–11
S
sampling
questionnaires  166–7
survey  14–15
scales, data analysis/
presentation  243–50
SCONUL (Society of College, 
National and University 
Libraries), literature 
searching  94
secondary sources, analysis of 
documentary evidence  129
selection of documents, analysis of 
documentary evidence  131–3
Skype, interviews  185–6
social media  141–55
academic research community 
website  147
blogs  146–7
checklist  153–4
crowdsourcing  148–9
defining  142
digital strategy  143
research process  143–5
social networking  149–53
social strategy  143
tools  144–5
value  142–3
Wikipedia  148
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Index
305
social networking  149–53
Facebook  151–2
LinkedIn  149–50
Twitter  150–1
YouTube  152–3
software
Delicious  79
Dropbox  79
EndNote bibliographic 
software  74, 79–80
EverNote (note-taking software) 
31, 67
Google  80
Google Keep (note-taking 
software) 67
IBM SPSS Statistics 
Software  122–3
note-taking  31, 67
OneNote (note-taking software) 
31, 67
ProCite bibliographic software  74
Reference Manager bibliographic 
software  74
referencing  70, 74–6, 79–81
RefWorks  80
SPSS Statistics Software  122–3
source-oriented approach, 
analysis of documentary 
evidence  126–7
split-half method
data collection  121
reliability  121
SPSS Statistics Software, data 
analysis  122–3
standard deviation, data analysis/
presentation  235
statement of results, writing the 
report  261–2
stories see narrative inquiry/
stories
structured interviews  179–81
structured observation  214–15
student–supervisor 
relationships  37–40
styles of research  9–10
ethnographic research style   
17–18
experimental style  15–17
summary and conclusions, writing 
the report  262–3
supervision/supervisors  36–40
change of supervisor  38–9
codes of practice  38
record-keeping  39
research experience  40
student–supervisor 
relationships  37–40
supervisory tutorials, 
record-keeping  39
supply teachers’ diary and time 
log  201
survey  14–15
case study  12
census  14–15
defining  14
range of areas  14–15
sampling  14–15
SurveyMonkey
data analysis/presentation  230
questionnaires  157–8, 167
T
test-retest
data collection  121
reliability  121
theoretical (or conceptual) 
frameworks, literature 
reviews  106–8
theoretical sampling  18
theory, literature reviews   
106–8
timetables  36
timing  35–6
topic selection  29–32
Google searching  30
LinkedIn  30–1
note-taking software  31
preparation  29–30
priorities  32
Twitter  30
transcriptions, interview  184–5
triangulation, data collection  120
Twitter
research uses  150–1
social networking  150–1
topic selection  30
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Index
306
U
unstructured interviews  181–2
unstructured observation  212
unwitting evidence, analysis of 
documentary evidence  131
V
validity, data collection  120–2
verbal questions, data analysis/
presentation  250
W
Wikipedia, crowdsourcing  148
witting evidence, analysis of 
documentary evidence  131
working titles  34–5
writing as you go along
research diaries  40–1
writing the report  257
writing the report  256–73
(the) abstract  260
acknowledgements  259
aims and purpose of the study  260
analysis and discussion  262
appendices  263–4
checklist  269–72
contents page  259
data collection  261
drafts  259, 265–7
evaluating research reports  267–8
final writing task  257–9
length  264
literature reviews  260–1
plagiarism  267
presentation  264–5
quotations  264
references list  263
revision  265–7
statement of results  261–2
structuring the report  259–65
summary and conclusions  262–3
systems and plans  257–9
techniques  257–9
title page  259
writing as you go along  257
Y
YouTube, social networking  152–3
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

 
 
WRITING FOR ACADEMIC JOURNALS 
 
Third Edition 
 
Rowena Murray 
 
9780335263028 (Paperback) 
September 2013 
 
eBook also available 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This book unravels the process of writing academic papers. It tells readers what good 
papers look like and how they can be written.  
Busy academics must develop productive writing practices quickly. No one has time for trial 
and error. To pass external tests of research output we must write to a high standard while 
juggling other professional tasks. This may mean changing our writing behaviours.  
 
 
Key features: 
 
a  New material on the politics of publishing 
a  New material on online writing groups and the use of social media 
a  A new concluding chapter on next steps in reading, writing and researching including 
use of blogging and tweeting to increase awareness of journal articles 
     
 
 
 
                          
                     
 www.openup.co.uk                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

www.openup.co.uk 
 
TEACHING TO AVOID PLAGIARISM 
HOW TO PROMOTE GOOD SOURCE USE 
Diane Pecorari 
 
9780335245932 – Paperback 
August 2013 
eBook also available 
 
 
Plagiarism is a serious problem in higher education, and one that the 
majority of university teachers have encountered. This book provides the 
skills and resources that university teachers and learning and development 
support staff need in order to tackle it.  
As a complex issue that requires thoughtful and sensitive handling, 
plagiarism simply cannot be addressed by warnings; detection software 
and punishment alone. Teaching to Avoid Plagiarism focuses on prevention 
rather than punishment and promotes a proactive, rather than reactive, 
approach to dealing with the issue.  
Topics covered in this book include: 
a  The causes of plagiarism 
a  How universities currently deal with plagiarism 
a  How teachers can support students in effective source use 
a  The role of technology 
a  Issues for second language writers and international students 
Drawing on her teaching experience as well as her academic research, 
Diane Pecorari offers a unique insight into this pervasive problem as well as 
practical advice on how to promote good source use to students and help 
them to avoid plagiarism. With a series of activities to help readers solidify 
their grasp of the approaches advised in the book, Teaching to Avoid 
Plagiarism is an essential guide for anyone in a student-facing role who 
wants to handle plagiarism more effectively.  
 
 
 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Cover design Hybert Design • www.hybertdesign.com
Thoroughly updated but retaining its well-loved style, this 6th edition provides:  
•  A brand new chapter describing the benefits of using social media in research, 
including how to use blogs, sharing ideas on research community sites, 
crowdsourcing, LinkedIn, Twitter and Facebook 
•  Tips on using online tools such as Delicious, Mendeley, Dropbox, EndNote and 
RefWorks to manage and organize your research
•  Guidance on searching efficiently and effectively online using Google Scholar, 
Google Books and library databases and on correctly citing online sources
•  Advice on creating online surveys for your research project, plus new material on 
using Skype and Google Hangouts for online interviewing.
•  To support your learning, each chapter contains introductory key points, “Dead End” 
boxes to warn of pitfalls, “Success” checklists and further reading sections.
This practical, no-nonsense guide is vital reading for all those embarking on 
undergraduate or postgraduate study in any discipline, and for professionals in such 
fields as social science, education and health.
Judith Bell’s career in education began as a university lecturer, head of department 
and then vice principal in Further Education. After positions at the Open University as a 
senior counsellor and course team writer, she became one of Her Majesty’s Inspectors 
of Schools, specializing in continuing education. In 1997, she was awarded both the MBE 
for services to educational research and the degree of D.Univ by the Open University for 
services to adult education. 
stephen Waters has 35 years’ experience in education, as a secondary teacher, head 
of department, Assistant Head Teacher and a Secondary English Consultant with a local 
authority. He holds an Advanced Diploma in Educational Management and an MA in 
Education from the Open University, both of which required him to conduct a range of 
research case studies. Stephen is currently an associate trainer and social digital coach 
with the Digital Youth Academy, connecting the “born digital” generation to the business 
world via apprenticeships in using social media in business.
Step-by-Step advice on completing 
an outStanding reSearch project 
This is the market-leading book for anyone doing a research project for 
the first time. Clear, concise and extremely readable, this bestselling 
resource provides a practical, step-by-step guide from initial concept 
through to completion of your final written research report.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

