THE 
DOMAIN NAME 
INDUSTRY 
BRIEF
VOLUME 17 – ISSUE 4 
NOVEMBER 2020 

2
.com
.tk
.cn
.de
.net
.uk
.org
.nl
.ru
.icu
150.3M
27.5M
24.7M
16.6M
10.2M
13.4M
10.8M
6.0M
5.7M
5.3M
TOP 10 LARGEST TLDS BY NUMBER 
OF REPORTED DOMAIN NAMES
Source: ZookNIC, Q3 2020; Verisign, Q3 2020; Centralized Zone Data Service, Q3 2020 
THE VERISIGN DOMAIN NAME INDUSTRY BRIEF
As a global provider of domain name registry services and internet infrastructure, Verisign 
reviews the state of the domain name industry quarterly through a variety of statistical 
and analytical research. Verisign provides this brief to highlight important trends in domain 
name registrations, including key performance indicators and growth opportunities, to 
industry analysts, media and businesses.
THE DOMAIN NAME INDUSTRY BRIEF / VOLUME 17, ISSUE 4
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The third quarter of 2020 closed with 370.7 million domain name registrations across all top-level 
domains (TLDs), an increase of 0.6 million domain name registrations, or 0.2 percent, compared 
to the second quarter of 2020.1,2 Domain name registrations have grown by 10.8 million, or 3.0 
percent, year over year.1,2
Total country-code TLD (ccTLD) domain name registrations were 160.6 million at the end of 
the third quarter of 2020, an increase of 0.5 million domain name registrations, or 0.3 percent, 
compared to the second quarter of 2020.1,2 ccTLDs decreased by 1.2 million domain name 
registrations, or 0.7 percent, year over year.1,2
The .com and .net TLDs had a combined total of 163.7 million domain name registrations in the 
domain name base3 at the end of the third quarter of 2020, an increase of 1.7 million domain name 
registrations, or 1.0 percent, compared to the second quarter of 2020. The .com and .net TLDs had 
a combined increase of 6.3 million domain name registrations, or 4.0 percent, year over year. As of 
Sept. 30, 2020, the .com domain name base totaled 150.3 million domain name registrations, and 
the .net domain name base totaled 13.4 million domain name registrations. 
New .com and .net domain name registrations totaled 10.9 million at the end of the third quarter of 
2020, compared to 9.9 million domain name registrations at the end of the third quarter of 2019.
Total new gTLD (ngTLD) domain name registrations were approximately 30.2 million at the 
end of the third quarter of 2020, a decrease of 1.5 million domain name registrations, or 4.7 
percent, compared to the second quarter of 2020. ngTLDs increased by 6.2 million domain name 
registrations, or 25.8 percent, year over year. 
As of Sept. 30, 2020, the largest TLDs by number of reported domain 
names were .com, .tk, .cn, .de, .net, .uk, .org, .nl, .ru and .icu.1,2,4

3
LARGEST ccTLDS BY NUMBER OF REPORTED DOMAIN NAMES
Source: ZookNIC, Q3 2020 
For further information on the Domain Name Industry Brief methodology, please refer to the last page of this brief.
Total ccTLD domain name registrations were 160.6 million at the end of the third quarter of 2020, an increase 
of 0.5 million domain name registrations, or 0.3 percent, compared to the second quarter of 2020.1,2 ccTLDs 
decreased by 1.2 million domain name registrations, or 0.7 percent, year over year.1,2 Excluding .tk, ccTLD 
domain name registrations increased by 0.5 million in the third quarter of 2020, or 0.4 percent, compared to 
the second quarter of 2020. ccTLDs, excluding .tk, decreased by 3.6 million domain name registrations, or 2.6 
percent, year over year. 
The top 10 ccTLDs, as of Sept. 30, 2020, were .tk, .cn, .de, .uk, .nl, .ru, .br, .eu, .fr and .it.1,2 As of Sept. 30, 2020, 
there were 307 global ccTLD extensions delegated in the root zone, including IDNs, with the top 10 ccTLDs 
comprising 66.2 percent of all ccTLD domain name registrations.1,2
.tk
.cn
.de
.uk
.nl
.ru
.br
.eu
.fr
.it
27.5M
24.7M
16.6M
10.8M
4.5M
6.0M
5.7M
3.6M
3.6M
3.3M
THE DOMAIN NAME INDUSTRY BRIEF / VOLUME 17, ISSUE 4

4
NEW gTLDs AS PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL TLDs 
Source: ZookNIC, Q3 2020; Verisign, Q3 2020; and Centralized Zone Data Service, Q3 2020 
Total ngTLD domain name registrations were 30.2 million at the end of the third 
quarter of 2020, a decrease of 1.5 million domain name registrations, or 4.7 percent, 
compared to the second quarter of 2020. ngTLDs increased by 6.2 million domain 
name registrations, or 25.8 percent, year over year. The top 10 ngTLDs represented 
61.6 percent of all ngTLD domain name registrations. The following chart shows ngTLD 
domain name registrations as a percentage of overall TLD domain name registrations, of 
which they represent 8.1 percent, as well as the top 10 ngTLDs as a percentage of all 
ngTLD domain name registrations for the third quarter of 2020. 
GEOGRAPHICAL ngTLDs AS PERCENTAGE OF 
TOTAL CORRESPONDING GEOGRAPHICAL TLDs 
Source: ZookNIC, Q3 2020 and Centralized Zone Data Service, Q3 2020
As of Sept. 30, 2020, there were 47 ngTLDs delegated that meet the following 
criteria: 1) has a geographical focus and 2) has more than 1,000 domain name 
registrations since entering general availability (GA). The chart on the left 
summarizes the domain name registrations as of Sept. 30, 2020, for the listed 
ccTLDs and the corresponding geographical ngTLDs within the same geographic 
region. In addition, the chart on the right highlights the top 10 geographical 
ngTLDs as a percentage of the total geographical TLDs. 
91.9%
340.5 million
370.7 million
Total TLDs
Less Total ngTLDs
.app 2.3%
.shop 2.3%
30.2 million
8.1%
ngTLDs
.wang 4.0%
.site 5.2%
.top 8.1%
.online 5.2%
.club 3.8%
.vip 3.5%
.icu
17.7%
.xyz
9.4%
Other
38.4%
1.3%
98.7%
61.6 million
62.3 million
Total Geo TLDs
Less ngTLDs (ccTLDs)
ngTLDs
.de .uk .nl .ru .fr .au .ca .es
.be .us .jp .tw .at .za .mx .tr
.africa 3.3%
.berlin 6.2%
.koeln 3.5%
.paris 2.6%
.nyc
8.4%
.tokyo
23.3%
.bayern 4.0%
.amsterdam 3.1%
.hamburg 2.7%
Other
36.4%
.london 6.7%
0.8 million
THE DOMAIN NAME INDUSTRY BRIEF / VOLUME 17, ISSUE 4

5
NEW ON THE VERISIGN BLOG / July - September 2020
THE DOMAIN NAME INDUSTRY BRIEF / VOLUME 17, ISSUE 4
Combatting Illegal Online Opioid Sales in 
the COVID-19 Era
A pilot program launched in spring 2020 provided 
a framework for collaboration between Verisign, the 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and National 
Telecommunications and Information Administration 
(NTIA).
DNS: An Essential Component of Cloud 
Computing
The evolution of the internet is anchored in the 
phenomenon of new technologies replacing their older 
counterparts. But technology evolution can be just as 
much about building upon what is already in place, as 
it is about tearing down past innovations. Indeed, the 
emergence of cloud computing has been powered by 
extending an unlikely underlying component: the more 
than 30-year-old global Domain Name System (DNS).
Chromium’s Impact on Root DNS Traffic
Chromium is an open-source software project that forms 
the foundation for Google’s Chrome web browser, 
among other browser products. Verisign technologists 
explore how one of Chromium’s features, intended to 
identify whether a network is attempting to “hijack” non-
existence domain results, impacts root DNS traffic. Their 
analysis reveals that Chromium probe queries currently 
account for nearly half of all DNS root server traffic.
Maximizing Qname Minimization: A New 
Chapter in DNS Protocol Evolution
Qname minimization is a simple but innovative step in 
the evolution of DNS protocol implementation. It’s a 
fundamental way to reduce the sensitivity of DNS data 
exchanged between resolvers and root and top-level 
domain (TLD) servers, as well as any other name servers 
prior to the final one in the chain.

6
Verisign is deeply committed to protecting our critical internet infrastructure from 
potential cybersecurity threats, and to keeping up to date on the changing cyber 
landscape. 
Over the years, cybercriminals have grown more sophisticated, adapting to changing 
business practices and diversifying their approaches in non-traditional ways. We have 
seen security threats continue to evolve in 2020, as many businesses have shifted 
to a work from home posture due to the COVID-19 pandemic. For example, the 
phenomenon of “Zoom-bombing” video meetings and online learning sessions had not 
been a widespread issue until, suddenly, it became one. 
As more people began accessing company applications and files over their home 
networks, IT departments implemented new tools and set new policies to find the 
right balance between protecting company assets and sensitive information, and 
enabling employees to be just as productive at home as they would be in the office. 
Even the exponential jump in the use of home-networked printers that might or 
might not be properly secured represented a new security consideration for some 
corporate IT teams. 
An increase in phishing scams accompanied this shift in working patterns. About 
a month after much of the global workforce began working from home in greater 
numbers, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) reported about a 300 percent to 
400 percent spike in cybersecurity complaints received by its Internet Crime Complaint 
Center (IC3) each day. According to the International Criminal Police Organization 
(Interpol), “[o]f global cyber-scams, 59% are coming in the form of spear phishing.” 
These phishing campaigns targeted an array of sectors, such as healthcare and 
government agencies, by imitating health experts or COVID-related charities.
Proactive steps can help businesses improve their cybersecurity hygiene and guard 
against phishing scams. One of these steps is for companies to focus part of their 
efforts on educating employees on how to detect and avoid malicious websites in 
phishing emails. Companies can start by building employee understanding of how 
to identify the destination domain of a URL (Uniform Resource Locator – commonly 
referring to as “links”) embedded in an email that may be malicious. URLs can be 
complex and confusing and cybercriminals, who are well aware of that complexity, 
often use deceptive tactics within the URLs to mask the malicious destination domain. 
Companies can take proactive steps to inform their employees of these deceptive 
tactics and help them avoid malicious websites. Some of the most common tactics are 
described in Table 1 below.
THE DOMAIN NAME INDUSTRY BRIEF / VOLUME 17, ISSUE 4
CYBERSECURITY CONSIDERATIONS IN THE WORK-FROM-HOME ERA
ARTICLE
By Yong Kim, Vice President, Cyber Strategy and Research
Tactic
What is it?
Combosquatting
Adding words such as “secure,” “login” or “account” to a familiar 
domain name to trick users into thinking it is affiliated with the 
known domain name.
Typosquatting
Using domain names that resemble a familiar name but 
incorporate common typographical mistakes, such as reversing 
letters or leaving out or adding a character.
Levelsquatting
Using familiar names/domain names as part of a subdomain 
within a URL, making it difficult to discover the real destination 
domain.
Homograph 
attacks
Using homograph, or lookalike, domain names, such as 
substituting the uppercase “I” or number “1” where a lowercase 
“L” should have been used, or using “é” instead of an “e.”

7
THE DOMAIN NAME INDUSTRY BRIEF / VOLUME 17, ISSUE 4
Teaching users to find and understand the domain portion of the URL can have 
lasting and positive effects on an organization’s ability to avoid phishing links. By 
providing employees (and their families) with this basic information, companies 
can better protect themselves against cybersecurity issues such as compromised 
networks, financial losses and data breaches. 
To learn more about what you can do to protect yourself and your business against 
possible cyber threats, check out the STOP. THINK. CONNECT. campaign online 
at https://www.stopthinkconnect.org. STOP. THINK. CONNECT. is a global online 
safety awareness campaign led by the National Cyber Security Alliance and in 
partnership with the Anti-Phishing Working Group to help all digital citizens stay safer 
and more secure online.
CYBERSECURITY CONSIDERATIONS IN THE WORK-FROM-HOME ERA (Cont.)
Tactic
What is it?
Misplaced 
domains
Planting familiar domain names within the URL as a way of adding 
a familiar domain name into a complex-looking URL. The familiar 
domain name could be found in a path (after a “/”), as part of the 
additional parameters (after a “?”), as an anchor/fragment identifier 
(after a “#”) or in the HTTP credentials (before “@”).
URL-encoded 
characters
Placing URL-encoded characters (%[code]), which are sometimes 
used in URL parameters, into the domain name itself.
Table 1. Common tactics used by cybercriminals to mask the destination domain. 
ARTICLE

ABOUT VERISIGN
Verisign, a global provider of domain name registry services and internet 
infrastructure, enables internet navigation for many of the world’s most recognized 
domain names. Verisign enables the security, stability, and resiliency of key internet 
infrastructure and services, including providing root zone maintainer services, 
operating two of the 13 global internet root servers, and providing registration 
services and authoritative resolution for the .com and .net top-level domains, which 
support the majority of global e-commerce. To learn more about what it means to be 
Powered by Verisign, please visit Verisign.com.
LEARN MORE
To view the average daily number of queries Verisign processes, please go to the 
“What We Do” section at Verisign.com.5 To access the archives for the Domain Name 
Industry Brief, please go to Verisign.com/DNIBArchives. Email your comments or 
questions to DomainBrief@verisign.com. 
METHODOLOGY
The data presented in this brief, including quarter-over-quarter and year-over-year 
metrics, reflects information available to Verisign at the time of this brief and may 
incorporate changes and adjustments to previously reported periods based on 
additional information received since the date of such prior reports, so as to more 
accurately reflect the growth rate of domain name registrations. In addition, the data 
available for this brief may not include data for all of the 307 ccTLD extensions that 
are delegated to the root zone and includes only the data available at the time of the 
preparation of this brief. 
For gTLD and ccTLD data cited with ZookNIC as a source, the ZookNIC analysis 
uses a comparison of domain name root zone file changes supplemented with Whois 
data on a statistical sample of domain names, which lists the registrar responsible for 
a particular domain name, and the location of the registrant. The data has a margin of 
error based on the sample size and market size. The ccTLD data is based on analysis of 
root zone files. For more information, see ZookNIC.com.
1 The figure(s) includes domain names in the .tk ccTLD. .tk is a free ccTLD that provides free domain names to individuals and businesses. Revenue is generated by monetizing expired domain names. Domain names no longer in use by the registrant or expired are taken back by the registry and the residual traffic is sold 
to advertising networks. As such, there are no deleted .tk domain names. https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20131216006048/en/Freenom-Closes-3M-Series-Funding#.UxeUGNJDv9s. 
2 The generic top-level domain (gTLD) and ccTLD data cited in this brief: (i) includes ccTLD Internationalized Domain Names (IDNs), (ii) is an estimate as of the time this brief was developed and (iii) is subject to change as more complete data is received. Some numbers in this brief may reflect standard rounding. 
3 The domain name base is the active zone plus the number of domain names that are registered but not configured for use in the respective TLD zone file plus the number of domain names that are in a client or server hold status. The .com and .net domain name registration figures are as reported in Verisign’s most 
recent SEC filings. 
4 Line break indicates that the .com line has been shortened for display considerations.
5 The “What We Do” section is located on Verisign.com under the “About Verisign” tab and under the sub-tab “Overview.”
Verisign.com
© 2020 VeriSign, Inc. All rights reserved. VERISIGN, the VERISIGN logo, and other trademarks, service marks, and designs are registered or unregistered trademarks of VeriSign, Inc. and its subsidiaries in the United States and in foreign countries. 
All other trademarks are property of their respective owners.
Verisign Public	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 	
 202011

