Dominating ShareCash!  
ShareCash is a site much like Uploading.com as it allows you to upload files and then  
pays you as you get others to download your files. The difference between ShareCash  
and other sites is that ShareCash will pay A LOT more. ShareCash pays 300 to 600  dol-
lars for every 1,000 downloads, where Uploading.com pays around 5 dollars for every  
1,000 downloads. What I am going to show you right now is how you can grab a hold of  
ShareCash and make AT LEAST 50 dollars a day from it!  
So first if you have not yet done so, Click here http://sharecash.com and sign up for an 
account. There is no fee to sign up and it takes a few minutes to do so. 
Now you should familiarize yourself with the site so take a good 5 minutes or so to look  
around. Note the Upload button on the side, that is where you will go to Upload your files.  
THE METHODS!  
Now I have spent some serious time developing these methods and making them work.  
Some are quick and easy and will bring some good cash while others will take more time,  
but will bring unbelievable cash!  
Method 1: Youtube  
This is an easy way to get started. People will download anything from youtube. So to get  
started make sure you have an account with youtube. Next go over to daily motion and  
find a good strip tease video where the girl gets naked at some point in the video.  
Download the video from daily motion using www.keepvid.com and fire up windows movie  
maker. The idea is that we want to post the video up to the point where it becomes  
obvious that the girl is about to show off some skin (boobs or bottom half) and then we cut  
the video right there. Now what your going to do is upload the cut portion to youtube.  
Since there is no actual nudity in this video (since you cut it out) youtube will not take the  
video down. Upload the entire video to sharecash and put the link in the description box  
next to your video. Give the video a long sexy name and watch as people download the  
entire video from your link in order to see the girl naked! Tons of people search for girls on  
Youtube so your videos will get plenty of views very fast.  
Method 2: Orkut and Myspace method  
Signup to yahoo and myspace account. Make around 300-400 friends on them. It will take little  
bit of time but you can do it easily if you spend around 1 hour daily on that and add around 50  
persons a day. Its not so easy but its not even so hard. I got around 500 friends within two  
weeks.   
Most important thing: Concentrate only of UK, US and Canada people because sharecash only  
pays for these countries signups. It would be much easier for you if you join US and UK  
communities. If you are comfortable then try to make your profile by a girl’s name. Mostly people  
add a girl more commonly than a guy.  
After creating a ID with 400-500 friends. Add your uploaded pic in your profile or update status.  
For example:  
Create a notepad file. Clock it with your sharecash link and add in your profile. Encourage  
peoples to download your file by saying that this is your phone number, coolest or sexiest pic of  
-- Converted from Word to PDF for free by Fast PDF -- www.fastpdf.com --

 
 
 
yours, or be wilder like this is my nude cam show download it. There will be many hornies there  
to download your stuff.  
 
Update your profile daily and keep on adding more US and UK friends.   
 
 
 
 
Method 3: Forums are your friend!  
Ahh yes forums my favorite place to get downloads from. So what we're gonna do for this  
method is find any porn forum and copy a few porn passwords that people post up. If you  
just look around at a few places like http://forum.dumpstersluts.com/ you'll find a few  
passwords. Now go ahead and copy those passwords into a text document and archive it  
with winrar. Here's where we're going to do things a little differently. Most people will go  
and outright post these files on the forums with your download link. Now this will bring in a  
few bucks, but when the passwords run out or someone sees a few postings about how  
they already use these passwords, your thread is pretty much dead. Instead your going to  
sign up to as many porn forums as you can and place your download link in your signatur  
with anchor text such as "Free GangBros Passwords." Then just post all over the place  
saying things like "Wow nice video" or "Thanks for the videos" stuff like that so people will  
see your name and signature. If the forum will not allow your download link in the  
signature just make a free blogger blog with the download link on there and have your  
signature redirect them there with the same achor text. You will see huge traffic with this  
method, trust me everyone wants free porn passwords!  
Method 4: Roms and Emulators  
 
 
This is my biggest money maker by far, and its actually pretty easy to set up. The only  
reason that this is the most advanced method is because it requires a few things such as  
a website, hosting and some experience in creating a website and making it look decent.  
If you can make this method happen you will see a huge amount of downloads come  
through. What you do is search for nintendo ds roms and emulators in google. Now when  
you find a good site just download as many as you can. I use a few sites to download ds  
roms, but starting up I just went to mininova and downloaded a huge file with like 100+ ds  
roms. This got my site off the ground much faster and took the hassle out of downloading  
a 100 or so files seperately. Just upload all the files to sharecash seperately and post  
them on your new website. If you keep your site updated with new releases you can get a  
couple thousand downloads in a day easy. If you submit your site to any of the top 100  
Rom lists you can get some awesome traffic that way. Altermatively you can submit to  
digg and reddit claiming that you've found the best DS Rom site on the web. Just  
remember to put a disclaimer on your site stating that all roms downloaded need to be  
deleted within 24 hours unless the legal copy is owned. That statement will keep your rom  
site legal so dont forget it!  
 
Method 5: Digital Comics  
Digital Comics are very popular on the web currently, and no one is using sharecash to  
promote online comics. There are a few things you can do here. For one you can visit  
http://www.lorencollins.net/freecomic/ and download a few comics and then post them on  
a blogger blog. Of course digg traffic works well here since comics usually cost money to  
-- Converted from Word to PDF for free by Fast PDF -- www.fastpdf.com --

 
 
 
download online. Another way to explode this is to use a site called 4chan.org. Now what  
you do is visit the comic section pick a comic book you downloaded and post the front  
cover and then next to that post the download link. A small description will help with this  
and get a couple people commenting on it. Again everyone loves free comics and 4chan is  
a great place to get your comics downloaded.  
Method 6: Exploit Lazyness  
 
 
This is probably my favorite method just because its actually very creative. What you need  
to do is go to any manual traffic exchange (look on google you'll find a ton) and sign up to  
a few. Upload a large picture or any small program that is about 1 to 2 megs in size and  
name it "Traffic Exchange Bot." Make a quick blogger blog and delete everything from the  
page except for the post and title. Make The title large and the body easy to read. State  
that you have a free traffic exchange bot that they can have to use for the traffic exchange  
they are on. You can customize the page and make one for each traffic exchange you  
use. People will download the file hoping for a bot, even if you dont have a bot for them to  
download once they download the file and see that its not a bot they will more than likely  
just move on with their traffic exchanging while you just got a download out of it! Make  
sure you .rar the file that you upload so it appears believable. You can participate in the  
exchange to get credits or just buy some, either way you will get conversions easily since  
everyone hates having to do manual traffic exchanges.  
 
Method 7: Current Blackhat Niche Method: Michael Jackson  
of  
course!  
Download a dramatic looking picture of Michael Jackson (A close up of his face or  
whatever) and edit the photo by placing a caption of a quote and his life span (1958-2009  
or whatever). Throw up a blogger blog saying everyone should pray for Michael Jackson  
and download this picture and put it as their background for their computer. There are way 
to many nuts out there for this not to work! Put a link to it on digg and reddit with a title  
saying something like "Support Michael Jackson's family, download this picture and place  
it as your background. Pictures honoring the king of pop" Just remember to make your title  
as long as possible and you'll be fine!  
 
Method8: Take help of websites or blogs  
 
It was the simplest method and yet most reliable method. If you have a good website which got  
around 1K-2K visitors per day then create a simple banner and clock it with your sharecash  
URL. Try to give free ebooks related to your niche. Peoples just love free stuffs. For getting free  
ebook or something you can simply search on google, rewrite the whole content and then go. If  
you want to be bully then simply copy paste that method and give it for free. Ask your friends to  
place your free stuff clocked banner of URL to place on their websites or blogs.  
 
 
Method9: Make your website or blog especially for sharecash  
-- Converted from Word to PDF for free by Fast PDF -- www.fastpdf.com --

People just love free stuffs. When you are start getting some decent money from sharecash,  
just invest in buying a domain and hosting and make website dedicated to downloading free  
stuffs. SEO it regularly or to improve traffic always do yahoo answers posting along with link  
back to your website. Just don’t spam them otherwise you will be punished.   
Conclusion  
That's all for Sharecash Domination I hope you enjoyed this report, now get out there and  
make it happen! With these methods it'll be hard to not make $50+ a day unless you just  
dont take action! So nows the time to take action! 
-- Converted from Word to PDF for free by Fast PDF -- www.fastpdf.com --
So first if you have not yet done so, Click here http://sharecash.com and sign up 
for an account.

